American Hero
The American Stock Exchange outperformed the Dow industrial average and other major market indexes in the first half of the year.
It broke its all-time high 20 times in the period, peaking at 440.95 on June 5.
New equity listings doubled to 52 from a year earlier, while the average daily volume of 17.3 million shares traded was three million above last year's record pace.


WHERE TO FIND IT
AS anyone in the market for animal habitats knows, there is no shortage of bird cages, dog beds and birdhouses.
The hard part is finding something unusual.
Al Fenech, a former fire fighter in San Francisco, began making decorative bird cages more than 15 years ago, when he couldn't find a cage he liked for his parakeet.
These days, he designs cages for all types of birds.
And his parakeet roosts in a six-foot-tall brass and copper cage.
"He's got a real eagle complex," Mr.
Fenech said.


Government Conceals Campaign Fund Tracks; No Public Financing
To the Editor:
In "Campaign Finance Reform: Alive" (editorial, June 19), you trumpet the accomplishments of the reform bill in reducing the incumbent advantage and restoring sanity to the campaign process.
You document the progress we made.
However, you miss the mark in your criticism of the changes demanded by me and my Republican colleagues in the original Democratic bill.


Executive Changes
GITANO GROUP New York, named C. William Crain vice chairman and chief operating officer.
HITACHI AMERICA LTD., Tarrytown, N.Y., a unit of Hitachi Ltd. of Japan, appointed Koichi Ueno president.


Totally Self-Sufficient Plants? No, but These Almost Qualify
PITY the poor houseplants in the custody of neglectful owners.
Not enough to eat or to drink.
Stuffed into undersized pots.
Kept in the dark, like mushrooms.
They're like soil-bound hostages yearning to be free -- or at least moved to better light.
Even with a gruesome trail of deceased greenery on windowsills, patios or coffee tables, people may still crave a little flora in their lives, if only to maintain a tenuous connection to nature.
The trick is to hobnob only with plants that thrive on minimal neglect and moderate care.


NEW YORK'S BOARD EXTENDING SEARCH FOR A CHANCELLOR
After a day of closed-door interviews with two of the three final candidates for Schools Chancellor, the New York City Board of Education said last night that it was reopening the search process in order to interview additional candidates.
Carol A. Gresser, the board president, said that the three finalists -- Dr.
Bernard R. Gifford, Waldemar Rojas and Gerald N. Tirozzi -- remained in contention but that the board felt it would "like to open up the process and have more people interviewed."


Albany Extends Rent Stabilization Law for a Day
For the third time in two weeks, the New York State Legislature extended rent stabilization laws for New York City without changing them Wednesday night, this time for only one day.
But although the measure was designed to buy time to reach a final agreement on changing the laws, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative aides provided differing accounts of whether an agreement was near.


Corrections
A diagram on the Health page on June 23 with an article about the PSA test for prostate cancer misidentified the units used in readings of prostate-specific antigen.
They are in nanograms per milliliter of blood, not per centiliter.


New York's Natural Gas-Powered Fleet to Grow by 240
Hoping to tempt other fleet operators to follow suit, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that 30 percent of the non-emergency cars, vans and small trucks that the city buys in the next year will be built to run on natural gas.
Lucius J. Riccio, the commissioner of transportation, said the reason was that New York was choking on automobile emissions.


INSIDE
U.N. to Cut Food to Bosnia
The United Nations will reduce food rations to 1.8 million people in Bosnia for 10 weeks because of a lack of donations and security.
Page A3.
New U.S.
Ideas for Mideast
The United States suggested that the Israelis and the Arabs focus peace talks on government functions the Palestinians could control.
Page A8.
Clinton Swayed on A-Tests
In deciding not to seek immediate approval on nuclear tests, President Clinton appears to have been swayed by the Energy Department.
Page A8. 3 States Investigate Killings
Three states pooled information on the murders of dozens of women in the investigation of a Long Island landscaper.
Page B1. 9th Arrest in Bomb Plot
A Philadelphia man was arrested as the ninth suspect charged in the New York bombing and assassination conspiracy.
Page B3.


Spanky McFarland, 64, Actor In the 'Our Gang' Comedies
George (Spanky) McFarland, the chubby short-pants schemer behind much of the hanky-panky in the "Our Gang" comedies in the 1930's, died yesterday at Baylor Medical Center of Grapevine in Grapevine, Tex.
He was 64 years old and lived in Keller, Tex.
He died less than an hour after he arrived at the emergency room, said Loretta Saunders, a nursing supervisor.
The cause of death had not been determined, she said.


Events: Crafts, Gardens, Park Walks
Four Days of Crafts  Lincoln Center, Columbus Avenue at 64th Street; (212) 677-4627.
The American Crafts Festival will be held Saturday and Sunday and again on July 10 and 11, with more than 400 artists displaying their crafts, plus entertainment and food stalls.
The second weekend will feature demonstrations of glass etching, knitting and techniques for making ceramic musical instruments.
Hours will be noon to 8 P.M.
No charge for admission.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A Federal judge has ordered a study of the North American free trade agreement's effects on the environment.
The ruling could seriously hurt the treaty's chances, and the Clinton Administration said immediately that it would appeal.  [ D1. ]
Japanese purchases of American-made auto parts are rising, but this is not reducing the flow of auto parts Japan keeps shipping to the United States.
The experience suggests that setting numerical goals may not necessarily open doors in Japan.  [ D1. ]


A-Plants Warned to Be Wary of Truck Bombs
After a decade of debate, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission decided yesterday that civilian power plants should prepare for truck-bomb attacks.
A main reason was the World Trade Center explosion in February.
The chairman of the commission, Ivan Selin, said in a telephone interview that for years the commission had believed that no one could assemble a truck bomb undetected but that the World Trade Center explosion had proved that wrong.
And, he said, "the assumption was always that it was not in a terrorist's interest to cause a major explosion" but that assumption now seemed unjustified.


A Correction: Midtown Stores


On Wheels: America at 10 M.P.H.; Miles Unfold, and Home Is a Far Country
Novelists will say that one reason their work is so agonizing is that no one out there is waiting for what they do; they have to create their own welcome in the world.
A cross-country bicyclist feels much the same way.


Martha Graham's Company Prepares for Her Centenary
The Martha Graham Dance Company will celebrate the 100th anniversary of Graham's birth (May 11, 1894) with new dances, new national and local projects and new corporate support.
There will be no newly discovered dances from Graham, who died in 1991.
But Ron Protas, the artistic director, said in an interview that the company would turn to some very different choreographers for the new works that are the lifeblood of a dance troupe.
The first of these choreographers is Twyla Tharp, whose dance, set to klezmer music, is to be performed during the company's two-week fall season at City Center, which opens on Oct. 5.
Ms.
Tharp is donating the work, production expenses for which will be paid by the Chase Manhattan Bank, a continuing supporter of the company.


L.H. Hempelmann, 79; Led Los Alamos Study
Dr.
Louis Henry Hempelmann Jr., an authority on radiation biology who directed studies on the effects of radiation exposure at the Government's nuclear weapons laboratory in Los Alamos, N.M., died early yesterday at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester, N.Y.
He was 79 and lived in Rochester.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said Robert Loeb, a hospital spokesman.


Once Again, Holly Hunter's Star Is Rising, but Higher Than Before
Six years ago, Holly Hunter was on the edge of stardom.
As the neurotic television-news producer in the successful comedy "Broadcast News," Ms.
Hunter not only starred in this film but virtually walked off with it as well.
But then Ms.
Hunter made several disappointing movies.
A serious as well as an offbeat actress, which is rarely a formula for success among women in Hollywood, Ms.
Hunter saw her career stall and never quite gather the momentum that the town expected.


For Nets: A Coach And a Rex
The Nets added a much-needed shooting guard tonight, but more importantly, they retained a coach.
Minutes after the snake-bit team drafted Kansas's Rex Walters with the 16th pick in the first round of the National Basketball Association, Coach Chuck Daly said he would not be leaving to accept a broadcasting job with NBC, a rumor that had been gaining strength for the last couple of weeks.


Raiders Set to Sign Majkowski
DON MAJKOWSKI is close to signing with the Los Angeles Raiders and a deal could be completed by the end of the week.
While Majkowski's agent, BOB WOOLF, said several other teams are interested in the free agent who spent his first six seasons with the Green Bay Packers, the Raiders are at the top of the quarterback's list.


Review/Music; '93 Bach Festival Concludes
For the last 13 summers, the members of the Bach Aria Group have presided over an annual festival and institute in which young instrumentalists and singers immerse themselves in the music of Bach and his contemporaries and give a series of public concerts in which themes are explored and connections sought.
The festival is a curious hybrid.
At a time when period instruments are the norm for Baroque performance, the Bach Aria Group continues to perform and teach the music mostly on modern ones.
And the festival's philosophy of performance style is clearly informed by modern concepts of stylistic propriety, tempered by the notion that an interpreter's job is to make the music affecting, not to follow rules slavishly.


COMPANY NEWS
COOPER INDUSTRIES, Houston, a manufacturer of electrical products, power equipment, hardware and automotive products, has acquired the Hawker Fusegear Group of BTR P.L.C., London.
Terms were not disclosed.
COPPERWELD CORP., Pittsburgh, has agreed to buy the Miami Industries division of Armco Inc., Parsippany, N.J., for an undisclosed sum.


9th Held in Bomb Plot as Tie Is Made to a 1991 Murder
A ninth suspect was arrested yesterday in the plot to bomb targets throughout New York City.
At the same time, law-enforcement officials said one of the original suspects, Clement Rodney Hampton-El, has been considered a prime suspect in a 1991 murder in Brooklyn that has become a focal point for investigators trying to unravel the two recent terrorist cases in New York.
The new suspect, Earl Gant, a 27-year-old Philadelphia man who had discussed supplying explosives for the foiled plot, was arrested at his home in West Philadelphia about 4 P.M., the F.B.I. said.
Mr.
Gant, also known as Abdul Rashid and Abdul Jalil, was charged with conspiracy to transport explosives in interstate commerce.
F.B.I. agents were still searching his home last night.


'Trophies' of the Dead Reveal The Secret Life of a Suspect
From each prostitute that Joel Rifkin told the police that he patronized, killed and dumped, he would keep some token.
Stashed in his bedroom, state police found these mementos: panties and bras, driver's licenses, monogrammed and costume jewelry, a library card.
Long after the bodies, dropped like industrial waste in fields of debris or packed into 55 gallon drums, had turned to skeletons, their belongings would illuminate the secret life of the aimless, unmarried landscaper who confessed to killing 17 women.


All-Star Tickets in Demand
Baltimore's first All-Star game in more than 30 years has baseball fans paying prices that are making scalpers blush.
One broker says fans are paying up to $1,500 a seat for the July 13 game.
Part of the attraction is the Orioles' new ball park -- Camden Yards.
"It's supposedly a state-of-the-art stadium," said BRIAN HARLIG, a partner of Golden Time Tickets, a Los Angeles ticket broker.
"People are curious to see it."


U.S. Plan Focuses on Some Self Rule for Palestinians
In its boldest intervention in 20 months of Middle East peace negotiations, the United States has suggested that the Israelis and the Palestinians move away from discussions of territorial jurisdiction in the occupied territories and instead focus on government functions the Palestinians could control, including health, education and police activities.
Openly admitting that direct negotiations in Washington are insufficient to make progress toward peace, the State Department also announced today that the United States will send senior delegations to the Middle East to try to persuade leaders there to break the deadlock.


New Chief for Westinghouse
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation, still struggling to recover from its disastrous foray into financial services in the 1980's, yesterday chose an outsider, Michael H. Jordan, as chairman and chief executive.
In doing so, the board of directors passed over an insider, Gary M. Clark, who had been acting chief executive since Paul E. Lego resigned under pressure from institutional investors in January.
Mr.
Clark will stay on as president and as a member of the board.


CELLS OF DINOSAUR APPARENTLY FOUND
A Montana paleontologist and his colleagues believe they have found red blood cells in the fossilized leg bone of a Tyrannosaurus rex and say they have high hopes of extracting DNA from the dinosaur's cells.
The discovery of the putative dinosaur blood cells has not yet been submitted to a scientific journal or independently confirmed but was reported two weeks ago by the National Science Foundation, which has financed the exploratory project.
Jack Horner, a paleontologist at Montana State University who directed the investigation, said in an interview yesterday that his group hoped to find matches between gene fragments left in the preserved blood cells with comparable DNA segments from modern crocodiles or birds.


In Narrow Trading, Dow Slips 2.77 Points Lower
Stocks were mixed, as almost all market indicators showed only marginal changes.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 2.77 points to finish at 3,516.08, while the Nasdaq composite gained 2.88 points to close at 703.95.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy; 284.7 million shares exchanged hands, up from 276.3 million on Tuesday.
A total of 1,125 issues posted advances in price, compared with 830 showing declines.


U.N. Relief Agency to Cut Food Rations to Bosnia
The United Nations' main refugee relief agency will reduce food rations to 1.8 million people in this war-tormented country for the next 10 weeks because of security problems and a lack of donations, a United Nations spokesman said here today.
"United Nations-distributed food rations for more than 1.4 million people in Bosnia and Herzegovina are being cut in half and food aid for the 380,000 residents of besieged Sarajevo reduced by 20 percent due to shortages in food supplies and lack of money," said Peter Kessler, the spokesman for the Bosnian operations of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


3 Riders See Cabby Slain By Gunman
Three young tourists from Australia huddled in a midtown Manhattan hotel last night, too terrified to describe publicly their first impressions of the United States: A terrifying hour in which they witnessed an attempted robbery and then a fatal shooting after they had gotten into a taxi at Kennedy International Airport and had gone only a mile.
The tourists, two women and a man in their 20's, were passengers in a taxi whose driver was fatally shot on Monday night after an attempted holdup shortly after he had finished changing a tire on the Van Wyck Expressway.


Talk Was Cheap in the Mercer Fight
There was so much talking between Ray Mercer and Jesse Ferguson in their Feb. 6 bout at Madison Square Garden that George Foreman, Larry Merchant and Jim Lampley, the HBO announcers, began to joke about the jawing.
Foreman, Merchant and Lampley were commenting on the fight in a warmup that was not for general broadcast.
At one point, after Mercer had again spoken to Ferguson during a clinch, Foreman quipped, "I think he just made him an offer to quit."


TV's Sickos, Shooters -- and Kids
Television is, in some respects, the equivalent of the window upon whose sill the city dweller props a pillow, folds his arms, leans out and watches the passing scene.
But often TV shows a skewed world, populated disproportionately by serial killers, mob hit men and done-wrong women with hot tempers and even hotter guns. (Amy Fisher, a.k.a. the Long Island Lolita, was recently catnip to not one but three networks.) And its audience is all too likely to include children for whom aggression on the screen may make real aggression acceptable.
Many parents think so, and many studies support their fears.
In 1982, for instance, a report by the National Institute of Mental Health stated, "After 10 years of research, the consensus among most of the research community is that violence on television does lead to aggressive behavior by children and teen-agers who watch the programs."


As Mandela Arrives, Elections Fund Starts $10 Million Corporate Drive
A corporate effort to raise at least $10 million to help South Africa hold democratic elections next year was announced yesterday, hours before Nelson Mandela arrived in New York to begin a two-week tour of the United States.
The South Africa Free Elections Fund was organized by Theodore C. Sorensen, a senior partner in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, with encouragement from Mr.
Mandela.
The anti-apartheid leader was to meet with the fund's board.


Issues of Corporate Securities Hit a Record
The lowest interest rates in 20 years fueled corporate America's drive to raise cash in the public marketplace in the first six months of this year, and a record amount of securities was issued.
In turn, investment firms raked in record fees.
Corporations issued $530 billion in debt and equity securities in the six-month period that ended yesterday, up some 19 percent from the previous record of $445 billion that hit the market in the first two quarters of 1992, according to the Securities Data Company, a research company.


Corrections
A map in Business Day on Monday with an article about a new Barneys New York store in midtown Manhattan rendered the location and size of the new store and some competing stores incorrectly.
A corrected map appears today on page D6.


Mr. Stein Quits
There is more to life than politics, and more to public service than being an elected official.  -- Andrew Stein, in his statement retiring from politics  It often seemed, during most of his 25 years in public life, that there really was nothing but politics for Andrew Stein.
It drove him and shaped him.
He loved the hobnobbing, the glamour, the celebrity.
A child of John Kennedy's shirt-sleeved generation of gilded politics, most of all Andrew Stein reveled in the game.


Harold A. Opotow; Dental Company Executive, 78
Harold A. Opotow, a retired executive and expert in dental materials, died on Sunday at the J.F.K.
Medical Center at Lake Worth, Fla.
He was 78 and lived in Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, his wife, Ruth, said.


2 Museums Name Directors
Two American museums -- the Dallas Museum of Art and the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, Ohio -- have announced the appointment of new directors.
Jay Gates will become the director of the Dallas Museum of Art on Aug. 1.
Mr.
Gates, the director of the Seattle Art Museum since 1987, is replacing Dr.
Richard Brettell, who resigned in December.
The Wexner Center for the Arts has named Sherri Geldin its new director.
Ms.
Geldin, the former associate director of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, is replacing Robert Stearns, who abruptly resigned as the director last July.


Last Patient Is Released In Jack in the Box Case
Clutching a teddy bear and smiling for the television cameras, 10-year-old Brianne Kiner was released from the hospital on Tuesday, nearly six months after she and 143 other people fell seriously ill from eating contaminated hamburgers at Jack in the Box restaurants.
"Her fighting spirit pulled her through," said Brianne's mother, Suzanne Kiner of Redmond, Wash.
"Our prayers have been answered."


Amazin': Mets Take 2d Straight Victory
All the losing had begun to bestow on the Mets' season a kind of weird, warped majesty.
To lose as often as they did required great effort, and the Metswere clearly gifted in their pursuit of failure.
And the centerpiece to the season of remarkable regret was the club's inability to win two consecutive games.
The streak, which might have even dwarfed Anthony Young's run of 24 straight losing decisions on the mound, went on and on, outlasting managers and general managers, surviving series after series, extending for one full month and then another and then deep into a third.


Picturesque Visions for Tourists Long Gone; On a Forgotten Slope of the Catskills, the Landscape Remains Just as Grand
Across a wide lawn, a father standing on a rock ledge held the hands of two small children and looked down.
"All of a sudden there's no more dirt," he told them.
"It's a long, long way down. This is called a cliff."
Below the cliff, spreading for 50 miles beyond the children's feet, lay a view as celebrated in its time as the Grand Canyon is today: the Hudson Valley from the Catskills.
In the 1800's the view inspired artists, attracted Presidents and spawned great resort hotels.
It helped create a new sensibility, the Hudson River school of art, and a new American industry, summer tourism.


Judge Gives Order That May Delay Trade Pact
In a move that will delay and perhaps even derail approval of a free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, a Federal judge ordered the Government today to prepare a lengthy study on the agreement's effects on the environment.
The Clinton Administration immediately said it would appeal the order.
Supporters and opponents in Congress said that unless the order was overturned the agreement's chances of approval could be seriously hurt.


SUNRISE MEDICAL TO BUY RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT MAKER
Sunrise Medical Inc., a manufacturer of wheelchairs and patient beds, said yesterday that it would buy DeVilbiss Health Care Inc., based in Somerset, Pa., which makes respiratory equipment, for $130 million.
Sunrise, based in Torrance, Calif., said it would pay $34 million in cash, $37 million in Sunrise stock and assume $59 million in debt.
DeVilbiss was acquired in a leveraged buyout in October 1990 by an investor group led by Robertson Stephens &amp; Company.


Zanvil Cohn, 66, Biologist, Dies; Studied Defense Against Infection
Dr.
Zanvil Alexander Cohn, a cell biologist and immunologist who was in the forefront of current studies of the body's defenses against infection, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66.
The cause was an aneurysm of the aorta, said a statement from Rockefeller University, where Dr.
Cohn had been the Henry G. Kunkel Professor for the last seven years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S.
BACKS LOANS FOR VIETNAM  The Clinton Administration has decided to drop its opposition to loans to Vietnam from international lending institutions as a way of acknowledging Vietnam's recent cooperation in accounting for Americans still missing in Southeast Asia and to entice it to do more, Administration officials said.
A1  A HUMBLED EUROPE AT MEETING  Eighteen months after it plotted an ambitious future including a single currency and joint foreign policy, the European Community will appear, humbled, at the summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized nations in Tokyo next week.
A6


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDRA DANILOVA, considered one of the greatest ballerinas of the 20th century, went home to Russia last month for a five-day visit, her first in 69 years.
Miss Danilova left St.
Petersburg in 1924, when she went on tour to Germany with a group of five dancers that included George Balanchine and was hired away to France by Serge Diaghilev, the impresario of Ballets Russes.
During World War II, she came to the United States and never went back to Russia.
"I was working here and had a separate life here," she said earlier this week.
"There was no reason to go, and I was busy."


Union Chief Wants Salary Cap Ended
For Charles Grantham, eliminating the salary cap and increasing employment opportunities for minorities and women were pertinent issues on the night of the National Basketball Association draft.
Grantham, director of the N.B.A.
Players Association, is pushing for the elimination of the salary cap when the current collective bargaining agreement expires after next season.
Many teams will have trouble this off season signing draft picks, making trades, and pursuing free agents because of the salary cap, a ceiling on a team's total payroll.


Waste Haulers' Union Local Rejects Pact
Members of Teamsters Local 945 reportedly rejected early this morning a tentative contract agreement reached just hours earlier with municipal and private waste haulers, beginning a garbage strike affecting 14 counties in New Jersey.
Union members plan to picket trash transfer stations and landfills affecting residential, commercial, industrial and institutional garbage pickup in more than 300 towns, The Star-Ledger of Newark reported today.


Young &amp; Rubicam Surprises Madison Avenue by Attracting a Top Creative Executive.
YOUNG &amp; RUBICAM may have problems persuading potential clients of the puissance of its creative abilities, but the giant agency shows no lack of creativity in creating positions for creative executives.
Y. &amp; R. surprised Madison Avenue yesterday by luring away a leading creative talent from Leo Burnett U.S.A. and naming him its new top creative leader.
He is Ted Bell, an 11-year veteran of the Chicago-based creative powerhouse, who has been president and chief creative officer of Burnett's American operations for the last year and a half.


In the East, the Race Is to Be Up in Arms
The Yankees, Blue Jays and Orioles are in a footrace, and not only for first place in the American League East.
The teams are in a race for starting pitching, the David Cone Sweepstakes, if you will, in honor of the pitcher whose acquisition helped wrap up the East for the Blue Jays last season.


ABORTION FOES WIN VOTE IN THE HOUSE ON FUNDS FOR POOR
After furious debate, anti-abortion forces won a significant victory today when the House voted to retain curbs on Federal financing of abortions for poor women except in cases of rape, incest or threats to the life of the woman.
Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, succeeded in keeping alive the restrictions he has successfully championed since 1977, although they are slightly weaker than those imposed since 1981.
But the ultimate fate of Mr.
Hyde's amendment is uncertain; the Clinton Administration's budget proposal had no restrictions on abortion financing, and the Senate, which will deal with the issue next, has historically been more sympathetic to abortion rights.
Arguments Are Familiar
This issue was debated seriously, if briefly, today for the first time in several years, because supporters of abortion rights had hoped that the changing political climate, including a President who supports abortion rights, would be reflected in the House.
But the 255-to-178 vote showed that the House's views on Federal financing of abortions had not changed very much.  [ Roll-call, page A16. ]


Haiti Negotiations Are Reported at a Critical Stage
Diplomats and advisers to Haiti's exiled President said yesterday that after four days of discussions, negotiations with the country's military leaders on restoring democracy had entered a critical stage.
Emerging yesterday afternoon from a long session with international mediators, Jean Casimir, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's envoy to Washington, said the United Nations official leading the talks had "presented us with a proposal which we are going to study."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.00
3.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.02
3.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.11
3.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.42
5.40
6.66
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.67
7.74
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.38
7.38
8.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.76
5.75
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Behind the Lines, It's a Hollywood Touch
The Diva finally showed up on Center Court to watch the Zen Master today, but it did not bring Andre Agassi luck.
Not since Chris Evert dated Burt Reynolds in the mid-70's has there been such a closely watched duet of tennis and Hollywood royalty.


Environment Deserves Higher Albany Priority
To the Editor:
Re "Goodbye, Adirondacks?" by John B. Oakes (Op-Ed, June 24):


U.N. Relief Agency to Cut Food Rations to Bosnia; Council Faces Decision
The chief United Nations mediator, Mr.
Stoltenberg, said today that the Security Council must decide soon how much money and human resources it is willing to devote to its effort in Bosnia.
"I am impatient," he said.
"The international community is impatient. If we can't implement our mandate, if our relief convoys are shot at and stopped, if the parties continue to behave as though they were doing us a favor by occasionally cooperating, we might as well withdraw."


Smiles of a Summer Night
Outside, the usual crowds were streaming through the Saturday night streets, and the air was as damp and heavy as a used towel.
Inside, it was cool, and the quiet was broken only by the click of computer keys and the drone of an air conditioner.
Suddenly the person at the computer stood up.
Time to turn on the television set and find out if Luciano Pavarotti was in good voice.
Mr.
Pavarotti was indeed in good voice, maybe not the tenor he was years ago but still a singer to yank the heart strings, open the tear ducts -- all that.
But even more beautiful than his sound was the sight of a city that, if only for a few hours, was apparently at peace with itself.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
BY the end of last summer, Dr.
David Hursh had noticed that his two sons, ages 8 and 12, were spending more time in front of the television set than doing just about anything else except sleep and eat.
"They were watching TV and playing video games more than 20 hours a week," said Dr.
Hursh, an assistant professor in the graduate school of education and human development at the University of Rochester.


The Shrinking African Giant
Once Nigeria was considered the anchor and bellwether of a huge continent.
Blessed with clever and energetic peoples, favored with ample oil resources, it is also Africa's most populous country, with 110 million inhabitants.
But despite size and wealth, Nigeria lingers in the doldrums, perpetually a country of the future.
This year was supposed to be different.
Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, a self-installed President since 1985, promised to hand over power in August to an elected successor.
Nigeria's armed forces had organized two political parties, one right of center, the other tipping to left.
Nigerian diplomats disseminated glossy brochures, filled with diagrams showing how a new federal system would unite the mostly Muslim north with the Christian and animist south.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE AUDITOR TELLS OF 'STONEWALLING'
The chief auditor for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has told a United States Senate subcommittee that she was "stonewalled" by Empire's chief financial officer and his staff as she tried to investigate discrepancies.
A1.
A usually quiet man, Salvatore R. Curiale, New York State's Insurance Superintendent, raises his voice as he describes trying to regulate Empire.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY


Renault, Volvo Look To Japan
The joint strategic and product planning operation announced Tuesday by Volvo and Renault as part of their tightening alliance will borrow Japanese strategies to design and build large cars more cheaply, Volvo officials said yesterday.
Taking a lesson from the Japanese, engineers will design new platforms, or wheel bases, with an eye toward more efficient and less costly production, said Soren Gyll, president and chief executive officer of A.B.
Volvo, the parent company of the Swedish auto maker, in an interview in New York.
The two companies will also save by sharing the high costs of developing such platforms. 'Expensive Stage'
"That's a very expensive stage, the first couple of years when you decide the basic platform," Mr.
Gyll said.
Having lost $610 million last year -- its worst year in history -- Volvo has been trying to wring savings from every stage of production to stay competitive in a deteriorating European auto market, he said.


U.S. Lifts Ban on Sale of Nonlethal Military Equipment to Angola
Removing the last remnants of trade restrictions on Angola, the Clinton Administration has cleared the way for sales of nonlethal military materiel to the formerly Marxist Government of Jose Eduardo dos Santos.
State Department officials described the lifting of export restrictions as part of the normalizing of economic relations with the dos Santos Government on May 19.


Market Place; Calvin Sims Southern California's Top Grocery Chain Will Explore 2 New Niches.
MORE Southern Californians do their grocery shopping at the Vons Companies than at any other supermarket chain.
Last year, 347 Vons stores generated $5.6 billion in revenues, making the chain the nation's ninth-largest retail grocer.
But Vons has seen its sales slip lately, as it has been hit hard by an economic downturn and stiff price-cutting by competitors and wholesale grocery clubs.
In the first quarter, which ended on March 28, sales at stores open more than a year declined 8.3 percent.
So, Vons is looking for new ways to grow.


Europe's Humbled 12 Face Group of 7
Eighteen months after it plotted an ambitious future including a single currency and joint foreign policy, the European Community will slouch to the summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized nations in Tokyo next week.
Humbled by a worsening recession and patent diplomatic ineptitude in the former Yugoslavia, the 12-nation bloc's economic and strategic pretensions have evaporated.
Their disappearance has been symbolized by that of Jacques Delors, the once omnipresent President of the community's executive.
He has now withdrawn from the limelight and will appear at the Tokyo meeting -- where the European Community has a full seat at the table -- as the head of a group of countries too divided to be effective.


Ryder Plans Spinoff of Its Aviation Division
Ryder System Inc. said yesterday that it planned to spin off its aviation-related division to shareholders as a separate public company to focus on its core transportation-service businesses.
Ryder, based in Miami, was known to be considering shedding the aviation business, which accounts for roughly a quarter of its $5.2 billion in annual revenues.
But its move to create a separate public company was unexpected.


Researchers Testing Thalidomide for Use in AIDS
Thalidomide, the sedative that has been banned in the United States since it was found to cause severe birth defects in the early 1960's, is now being explored for use in treating AIDS, tuberculosis and other disorders.
In a report being published today, researchers in New York City said that thalidomide could block the growth of H.I.V, the virus that causes AIDS, in test tubes and that in very limited tests of humans it seemed to relieve some of the severe symptoms of AIDS.


COMPANY NEWS;
The Quantum Chemical Corporation, a company that has been down on its luck, got a nice surprise for its shareholders yesterday when it announced that Hanson P.L.C., a prosperous British conglomerate, had agreed to buy it in a $3.2 billion deal whose stock portion is worth $20 a share -- 60 percent more than recent market prices.
The news lifted Quantum's shares by 52 percent, from $12.50, to $19 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Veteran Communist Crowns A Comeback in Azerbaijan
Heydar Aliyev, the former Communist boss of Azerbaijan and Politburo member in the Soviet Union, consolidated a dramatic comeback today by naming the republic's dominant warlord as his Prime Minister and head of all internal and external security forces.
After two days of negotiations with Surat Husseinov, the 34-year-old maverick military commander whose move on the capital earlier this month drove the elected President into exile, Mr.
Aliyev convened a Parliament and presented Mr.
Husseinov as head of his Government and of the military, security ministry and interior ministry.
There was only one dissenting vote.


Vikings' Nelson Retires
Veteran running back DARRIN NELSON of the Minnesota Vikings is retiring as a player.
The 11-year National Football League veteran was Minnesota's first-round draft pick in 1982.
Nelson was mainly a backup and special teams player last season.
His best season was 1987, when he led the league with a 4.9-yard rushing average.
Nelson, 34, went to the Dallas Cowboys as part of the HERSCHEL WALKER trade in 1989, but refused to play for Dallas and was shipped to San Diego.
He rejoined the Vikings after being released by the Chargers at the end of the 1990 season.(AP)


Political Ally Shifts, and A-Tests Halt
In deciding not to seek immediate Congressional approval for more nuclear tests, President Clinton appears to have been swayed by opposition from an unexpected source: the Energy Department, which runs the national laboratories that conduct the tests and have been their biggest proponents.
Given the department's change of heart and increasing skepticism in Congress, Administration officials said, the President chose to overrule the Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs of Staff rather than risk an open fight with fellow Democrats over a plan that left him uneasy.
Only weeks ago, the Pentagon and other security agencies had unanimously endorsed a plan calling for 15 more nuclear tests by 1996.


Stanley Becomes Master Of the Power Breakfast
Mike Stanley has no explanation as to why he becomes such an amazing hitter in day games.
Maybe it is the sunlight.
Maybe it is the great feeling of getting up in the morning and swinging a bat.
Well, maybe that is not it.
"I'm not a morning person," said Stanley, who is positively puzzled by his awesome afternoons.
"I don't like getting up at 9:30 in the morning to come here for games."


CHRONICLE
EDWARD J. SULLIVAN, chairman of the fine-arts department at New York University, and CLAYTON C. KIRKING, associate curator of Latin American art at the Phoenix Art Museum, gathered 150 of their friends and colleagues from around the country into the university's Grey Art Gallery on Tuesday evening and pledged love and fidelity to each another.
It was an emotional declaration, said both men, who are 43.
"We had expected it to be very informal, occurring in the middle of a party, but it turned out to be far more powerful and emotional," Dr.
Sullivan said yesterday.
"We stood before a large altarlike Louis Nevelson sculpture, and two friends, Kenneth Silver, professor of art history at N.Y.U., and Linda McAllister, curator at the art museum at Arizona State University, gave speeches about us, our friendship and love. Then we both said something. I recited lines from W. H. Auden, and Gabriel Garcia Marquez in English and Spanish. Then we went back to drinking champagne and eating salmon."


Books of The Times; Seeing Prozac as a Success Story With 'Buts'
Listening to Prozac  A Psychiatrist Explores Antidepressant Drugs and the Remaking of the Self  By Peter D. Kramer  409 pages.
Viking Press. $23.
In the first of the fascinating case histories that are the building blocks of this thoughtful study of the controversial antidepressant drug Prozac, Peter D. Kramer, a psychiatrist, describes a patient he calls Sam, a successful architect of Austrian descent with a quirky interest in pornography, which he considered the emblem of his independent spirit.
After exploring the possible causes of a deep depression Sam had fallen into, the author prescribed Prozac (known generically as fluoxetine), which was developed in the 1970's by a team of chemists at the Eli Lilly Company.


A $12.25 Million Boarder
ALEXANDRE DAIGLE is the National Hockey League's richest boarder.
Daigle, who signed a five-year deal with the Ottawa Senators for $12.25 million on Tuesday, will live with an Ottawa-area family for at least his rookie season.
"Not too many 18-year-olds are great cooks," the Senators' president and general manager, RANDY SEXTON, said.
"We want him to get good nutrition and be able to focus on training."


Correction
Yesterday's editorial criticizing the Supreme Court's decision in a North Carolina voting rights case contained a sentence whose meaning was clouded by an error.
The sentence should have said the decision threatened progress toward higher minority membership in legislative bodies, not majority membership.


Hartford May Try to Lure Patriots
A plot to bring the New England Patriots to Hartford to play in a new stadium here was revealed today by the Governor, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., and the chief plotter, Francis W. Murray of Philadelphia.
The state would build the stadium and Murray, a former minority owner of the Patriots, would provide the team.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Grover Washington Jr.  Avery Fisher Hall
Late in his concert on Friday evening, the saxophonist Grover Washington Jr. introduced a radically updated version of "Take Five," Paul Desmond's composition for Dave Brubeck.
Subtitled "Take Another Five," the piece's circular tune and odd 5/4 time was underpinned with hard rhythm-and-blues beats that Steve Wolf, the drummer in Mr.
Washington's septet, shaded into even harder hip-hop drum rolls.


Advice From Martina for Martina
Martina I and Martina II have never met, but they already disagree.
Martina Navratilova, age 36, American citizen, born in Czechoslovakia, thinks Martina Hingis, age 12, Swiss citizen, born in Czechoslovakia, is too young to be contemplating a professional career in two years.


Loss at OTB Is Reported
The State Comptroller's office said yesterday that New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation lost about $500,000 in the 1992-93 fiscal year.
If the report by the office of Comptroller H. Carl McCall is accurate, OTB would be the first legal bookmaker in the country to lose money.
But the agency insists that by delaying mandatory bonuses totaling $1.1 million to 1,698 employees it will end the year with an operating profit of about $700,000.
Hazel N. Dukes, OTB's president, acknowledged in April that the corporation was in a financial crisis


For a Grieving Mother, Freshened Tears
Maria Alonso buried her daughter in a rural New Jersey cemetery under a cloud of questions last July.
But this week, she shed fresh tears after learning that her daughter may have been one of 17 prostitutes who were victims of a serial killer.
In a dimly lighted apartment in East New York, Brooklyn, Ms.
Alonso grieved over the old wounds rubbed raw again, and over the labels that people will place on "poor dead girls" like her 33-year-old daughter, Anna Lopez.


On Anita Hill Book, The Doubts Remain
To the Editor:
David Brock, defending his book, "The Real Anita Hill" (letter, June 14), suggests he could refute "every point" made against him in The New Yorker's May 24 review.
But he has elsewhere admitted one key point in that review: I did not, as his book repeatedly states, advise Anita Hill prior to her testimony.
The book's defamatory innuendo that I helped fabricate her testimony is therefore also necessarily false.


Yeltsin Visits Greece to Sign Trade Accords


Clorox, in Bid to Streamline, Sells Frozen Foods to Heinz
A swirl of announcements by the Clorox Company about its continuing plan to streamline operations was warmly received by investors yesterday.
The company's stock rose $2, to $52.125, its highest closing price in more than a year.
The company, best known for its bleach and household products, said it was selling its frozen-food business to Ore-Ida Foods Inc., a division of the H. J. Heinz Company, and was resuming a program to buy back about $100 million of its stock, approximately 4 percent of the outstanding shares.


Warriors Think Big With Webber in Hand
Tipsy from a quick glass of champagne, Don Nelson entered the Oakland Coliseum Arena tonight to a standing ovation.
The Golden State Warriors, who have not employed a reliable big man since Robert Parish played here about a century ago, now have the rights to the Michigan man-child, Chris Webber.
In a trade that was a month in the making and that involved draft picks to the turn of the century, the Warriors now have a club Phoenix's Charles Barkley can not turn his back to.


Lucky to Be in the Bronx? Bombers Aren't So Sure
There is a peculiar hysteria that strikes New York City every time George Steinbrenner threatens to move the Yankees from the Bronx.
A low-grade panic fixates on one image: could a C (for Connecticut) or an NJ (perish the thought) ever be superimposed on the elegant and justly famous Yankees pinstripes?
To Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the image is unthinkable and has led him to champion -- as last a resort, he says -- the idea of constructing a gleaming new stadium on a railyard in midtown, even if that means moving the Bronx Bombers out of their legendary home and into Manhattan.


Gloria E. Wise, 56; Led Sit-in in the 60's At a Lunch Counter
Gloria E. Wise, who led a sit-in at a lunch counter in the South in 1960 and became a New York City social work administrator and head of a popular youth program, died on June 7 at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 56 and lived in the Bronx.
The cause was brain cancer, her family said.


A Critic Unleashed; Curiale Vents Frustration at Empire
When Salvatore R. Curiale, New York State's Insurance Superintendent, started testifying today before a United States Senate subcommittee that was greatly skeptical about his job performance, his voice was so quiet that the committee chairman asked him to move up to the microphone.
Then Mr.
Curiale's voice began to grow, with frustration, irritation and New York accent in tow.
Soon he was gesturing passionately.
And his carefully prepared eight-page statement gave way to a stream of vivid, fiery remarks that sought to fix blame for the troubles enmeshing the state's largest health insurer, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, with any number of people other than himself and the staff of the state Insurance Department.


Review/Dance; Dayton Troupe Returns to a Favorite Summer Haunt
The Dayton Contemporary Dance Company, founded in 1968 by Jeraldyne Blunden, is known nationally for its well-trained dancers and stimulating repertory.
A leading force in the busy Ohio dance scene, the troupe has gained additional renown from its association with the American Dance Festival and programs designed to educate and familiarize audiences around the world with classics of American modern dance created by black choreographers.
The company returned to the festival last week, confirming its solid status as a major American modern-dance company in a program presented at Page Auditorium at Duke University, where the festival is held each summer.
One of the company's greatest strengths is that its 16 performers act as well as they dance.
That balance was suggested on Saturday night in the choice of dances on the program, which opened with Dianne McIntyre's "Take Off From a Forced Landing," the story of a family and its dreams, and ended with Talley Beatty's streamlined "Congo Tango Palace," a dance whose urgency is as much an effect of its speed as of its buried emotions.


Wilson Is a Laughing Duck
RON WILSON, celebrating his appointment as the first coach of the Anaheim Mighty Ducks, showed he had one of the prerequisites of an expansion coach: a sense of humor.
"I'd just like to say, 'Guys, we made it to Disneyland,' " Wilson, 38, quipped, gesturing to his wife, MAUREEN, and two daughters during a news conference at the new Anaheim Arena.


Majors Negotiating TV Deal
Major league baseball, which created a joint venture with NBC and ABC for network broadcasts starting next season, is negotiating with ESPN and Prime SportsChannels for a new cable deal to succeed the current ESPN agreement.
An agreement "is probably two weeks away," said Bill Giles, the owner of the Philadelphia Phillies and a member of baseball's television committee.
"If we can't do a deal with ESPN, we might end up with Liberty."


Accounts
*
Catholic Relief Services, Baltimore, to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Baltimore, to handle its direct-response advertising, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Energy Chief Says Accounting Problems Snag Supercollider Project
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary said today that the scientists in charge of building the world's largest machine of physics, the Superconducting Supercollider, are not competent to handle the bookkeeping for the project and might have to be replaced.
She testified of her frustration with the managers of the supercollider project before the House Energy and Commerce's Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.
She said the project was badly managed and the "attitude of the leadership at the laboratory is completely unacceptable to this Administration and to me personally."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tom Ze  Summerstage Central Park
With scraggly hair and a wispy beard, scarecrow limbs and a distracted expression, Tom Ze looked like a cheerful mad professor when he performed on Sunday afternoon.
The appearance wasn't deceiving.
Mr.
Ze, a songwriter from the Brazilian state of Bahia who now lives in Sao Paulo, is one of Brazil's most idiosyncratic performers, a pop inventor who bypasses the ordinary.


Japan Formally Accused of Bias Against U.S. Contractors
Stepping up pressure on Japan over access to its markets, the Clinton Administration today formally identified Japan as a nation that discriminates against the American construction industry but said sanctions would be deferred for four months.
Today's move follows the failure of mid-June negotiations here over a proposal by the United States intended to give American construction, architectural and engineering companies a larger share of government business in Japan.


Miami to Pay Millions for Police Abuse That Left Victim in Coma
In one of the nation's largest out-of-court settlements stemming from an episode of police abuse, the City of Miami has agreed to pay $7.5 million and all the medical bills of a black man whom officers beat and then choked into a coma last year.
Because the accord, approved unanimously by the Miami City Commission late Tuesday, will pay the victim's medical bills for the rest of his life, it could eventually amount to as much as $34 million, depending on how long he survives, his family's lawyer said.


Halina Rodzinski, 88; Aided Polish Charities
Halina Rodzinski, who worked for Polish charities and wrote "Our Two Lives," a memoir about her husband, the conductor Artur Rodzinski, died on Tuesday at her summer home in Lake Placid, N.Y.
She was 88 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was chronic leukemia, said her son, Richard.


Out of the Classroom and Into the Working World
It is that time of year again, when thousands of America's brightest swarm to the office towers in New York and other cities to meet the real world.
The summer interns, associates, fellows -- and not a few gofers eager to learn a thing or two between errands -- have arrived.
There are pathways up from internships in a wide range of careers, and internships are on the resumes of many top executives.
Accordingly, these ambitious young people bubble with high hopes, though the line between dreams and delusion may prove perilously thin.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Bold Visions And a Softer Silhouette
Are fashion designers, as it is often said of artists, more creative in adversity?
It is a question to explore in Milan -- a city besieged by political and economic woes -- where the spring and summer men's wear collections were shown this week.
The answer appears to be yes for Giorgio Armani, who drastically changed his jacket silhouette, potentially wreaking havoc on the industry that copies him worldwide.
Yes, too, for Gianni Versace, who experimented with cutting techniques to produce romantic clothes with enough holes to strain tagliatelle.


With Stein's Departure, It's a Whole New Race
City Council President Andrew J. Stein's sudden departure from the campaign for Public Advocate, two weeks before the deadline for filing nominating petitions, left his six announced challengers jockeying to identify and inherit his supporters and also raised the tantalizing prospect that some undeclared candidate might yet jump into the race.
The departure also left politicians debating whether Mr.
Stein had given a candid explanation for why he was quitting politics.


Empire Blue Cross Auditor Asserts Her Inquiries Were 'Stonewalled'
The chief auditor for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield told a United States Senate subcommittee today that she was "stonewalled" by Empire's chief financial officer and his staff as she tried to investigate discrepancies between internal books and the reports the company sent to state regulators.
After a frustrating two-week inquiry this month, Maroa C. Velez, Empire's vice president for auditing, concluded that the discrepancies could not be justified, she said today.
"I was never able to get the right answers to questions," she said.
"I was given explanations that didn't make sense to me."


Convertible Zero-Coupon Bonds Fade
One of the more popular kinds of financings in the last half of the 1980's -- sales of zero-coupon bonds convertible into common stock -- are now seeming less attractive to many companies.
An example is Turner Broadcasting System, which yesterday announced a $300 million offering of 20-year senior notes through the First Boston Corporation, with proceeds to be used to retire a four-year old issue of zero-coupon convertible notes known as liquid yield option notes, or Lyons.


Flood Waters Continue to Rise Along the Mississippi


Vincent P. Carosso, Expert on Business And Professor, 71
Vincent Philip Carosso, a leading expert on American business and economic history, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 71.
New York University, where he was Kenan Professor of History emeritus, said the cause of death was lung cancer.


Clinton Will End U.S. Opposition To Vietnam Loans, Officials Say
The Clinton Administration is planning to drop its opposition to loans to Vietnam by international lending institutions, Administration officials said today.
The move would be a way of acknowledging Vietnam's recent cooperation in accounting for Americans still missing in Southeast Asia and to encourage it to do more, the officials added.


Standards for New VCR's
The world's leading consumer electronics companies have agreed to develop standards jointly for videocassette recorders that will use digital technology to provide crisper pictures, industry officials said today.
The new VCR's would be able to record high-definition television broadcasts as well as conventional signals.
It has previously been reported that Japanese consumer electronics companies have been discussing setting standards for digital VCR's.
Now, an agreement to organize a formal conference to develop the standard is expected to be announced within a few days, according to the spokesman for one company.


Court Isn't Protecting Animal Sacrifices
To the Editor:
There has been confusion about the meaning of the Supreme Court's decision in Church of the Lukumi Balalu Aye.
Contrary to what some may think, the Court did not hold animal sacrifices to be protected.
Rather, the Court held that these practices could not be prohibited by legislation that was specifically intended to target religious practices alone.


Sports of The Times; The Yankee Attraction: Baseball
IN the Yankee manager's office, someone said, "Did you hear the Orioles got Fred McGriff?" Buck Showalter's head spun, prompting an apologetic "just kidding." Showalter didn't even smile.
"McGriff wouldn't make the difference for the Orioles," the Yankee manager was saying now in his serious manner, referring to the San Diego Padres' first baseman who led the National League in homers last season.
"They'd have to give up David Segui, who could be the best first baseman in the league some day. Pitching is what people have to add."


Chief Banker For China Is Dismissed
A Government-controlled newspaper said today that the governor of China's central bank had been dismissed, and a well-connected Chinese said the announcement was being circulated among senior officials in Beijing.
Li Guixian, the governor of the People's Bank of China, is being replaced as part of a revamping of the financial sector, according to Wen Wei Po, a Beijing-backed newspaper in Hong Kong.
Several Chinese familiar with the case said that they too had learned of Mr.
Li's removal but that it was unclear what the move meant for China's economic policies.


Mild Slap at TV Violence; Congress Seems Pleased at Industry Effort, Leaving a Slim Chance for Stronger Action
Television's four commercial broadcast networks threw the smallest possible bone to their Congressional critics today, when they announced that they would slap warning announcements on violent programs.
Nevertheless, the critics cheered.
And they suggested they would back away from their threats to impose something stronger.


A Shaky Start, But Then Abbott Takes Control
Jim Abbott had thrown 10 pitches, and 9 had ventured out of the strike zone for balls.
It was only the first inning and thousands of rabid fans, some of whom were still hustling to claim their seats in Yankee Stadium, grimaced.
They desperately wanted to see the Yankees sweep Detroit.
They wanted to see strikes.
They did not want to see this.
What they saw next was the Yankee pitching coach, Tony Cloninger, and catcher Mike Stanley visiting Abbott on the mound.
The count to Travis Fryman had drifted to 1-0 and the batters who had drawn game-opening walks were on first and second when Cloninger and Stanley delivered a simple message to Abbott: trust your stuff, just throw your best pitches and believe in yourself.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Slugs, Worms and Dust
Q.
I've heard that diatomaceous earth controls slugs.
But does it harm the beneficial earthworms if mixed into their soil? -- Marie Garibaldi, Brooklyn.
A.
No, I'm happy to say.
Long ago, organic gardeners found they could control slugs, cutworms and other soil pests by surrounding plants with a layer of diatomaceous earth.
It is an abrasive dust whose razor-sharp particles derive from the fossil remains of prehistoric algae.
But while diatomaceous earth causes tiny abrasions that result in the slugs' dehydration, it appears to be completely digestible by earthworms.
It is also harmless to birds and mammals.


People
*
Stephen Lehman was named to the new position of group publishing director at Cowles Magazines, Chicago, overseeing Vegetarian Times and a division that Cowles plans to build around the magazine.
He was previously vice president and publisher at Whittle Communications, New York.


John M. Todd, 75, British Writer Of Works on Wesley and Luther
John M. Todd, a Roman Catholic publisher and scholar who wrote sympathetic studies of Martin Luther and John Wesley, died at his home in Somerset, England, on June 9.
He was 75.
In 1959, after several years as an editor at Longmans Green, Mr.
Todd and two other members of the publishing concern left to found Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, an ecumenical religious publishing house.
As Catholic editor, Mr.
Todd published Karl Rahner, Yves Congar and Henri de Lubac among European theologians as well as the Canadian Bernard Lonergan and the Indian Raymond Panikkar.


Review/Jazz; Two Saxophones, One Improvised Effect of Joy
Counterpoint is such a rare thing in jazz that the saxophonist Marty Ehrlich's show at the Knitting Factory on Saturday night, which was heavy with it, was almost shocking.
Mr.
Ehrlich and the saxophonist Stan Strickland, who lead the Marty Ehrlich Quartet, have been performing together since the early 1970's, and their improvisations together are bizarrely telepathic.
Their lines tangle up, riddled with accidental harmonies, only to dissolve into a single high, keening note that then gives way to knots of sound.
Mr.
Ehrlich, who was opening up a triple bill at the Knitting Factory, writes pieces that have mapped the vast plains opened up by Ornette Coleman; his compositions use odd, shifting meters, and everything from a chamber-music cleanliness and precision to full-bore blowing.
Mr.
Ehrlich is a lyricist who rarely expresses skepticism in his playing, never uses cliches and usually keeps his solos incandescent.


SPORTS PEOPLE: HOCKEY  HEADLINE&gt;'The Cat' Calls It Quits
EMILE (THE CAT) FRANCIS resigned as president and alternate governor of the Hartford Whalers, ending his 10-year association with the team.
Francis was general manager of the Whalers for six years.
He was fired four years ago, replaced by ED JOHNSTON and offered the job as president.
His $250,000-a-year contract had just run out.


Wuhan Journal; Women as Bodyguards: In China, It's All the Rage
With her chipmunk cheeks, graceful smile and the somewhat insistent way she declares she is 93 pounds -- not a bit less -- Peng Guimei looks about as threatening as a bowl of day-old rice.
So it comes as a bit of a surprise that Miss Peng is studying to be a bodyguard, protecting some Chinese businessman from the thieves and hoodlums who have eagerly embraced the opportunities of a market economy.


Tigers Aren't Mourning Their 9-Game Streak
Sparky Anderson's philosophy on life and baseball is simple.
Life is real.
Baseball isn't.
And after the last nine games, the philosophy of the Tigers' manager has been underlined.
The Tigers began the nine-game road trip against Baltimore, Boston and the Yankees in first place by two games in the American League East.
They completed the trip yesterday with a 7-0 loss in Yankee Stadium in third place, four games back.
During the trip, the Tigers were outscored, 72-26, and, 19-5 by the Yankees.
They lost all nine games.


Briton Says He Foiled Supergun Parts Sale to Iraq
A British business executive told a Government inquiry today how intelligence agents, with his help, thwarted the export in 1990 of barrels for what they believed was a huge artillery gun being built by Iraq.
The executive, David James, was the chairman of Eagle Trust, the parent company of a Birmingham-based concern called Walter Somers.
Mr.
James told the inquiry that soon after acquiring Walter Somers in early 1990 he became suspicious about tubing the company was making, supposedly for a petrochemical plant in Iraq.


Lyme Disease Can Disable Adults and Children
To the Editor:
I applaud you for finally giving Lyme Disease the front-page status that this disabling disease of epidemic proportions deserves ("Flaws Are Seen in Diagnosis and Control of Lyme Disease," June 15).


Three States Investigating Tale of Killing
Police investigators from three states met here today to pool their information on the murders of dozens of young women in hopes of answering this single question: Just how many did Joel Rifkin kill?
It is the question already preoccupying 50 state troopers, who are checking out Mr.
Rifkin's claims that he murdered 17 prostitutes he had picked up on the streets of Manhattan over the last three years.


Japan Chip Maker Claims U.S. Patent
A midsized Japanese semiconductor company is claiming to have a basic American patent on a new type of memory chip that is expected to become a huge seller.
The claim is being disputed, however, by the Japanese chip maker's American competitor.
The Rohm Company of Japan has announced that a court decision this month affirmed that it had a patent on a fundamental technique used to make flash memory chips.
It will seek royalties from the Intel Corporation, Toshiba and other manufacturers of such chips, said Teruaki Shimizu, an executive for investor relations at the Kyoto-based company.


Spy Who Cost Brandt His Job Testifies at Spymaster's Trial
The Communist spy whose discovery brought down Chancellor Willy Brandt in 1974 and the spymaster who sent him to Bonn met again today in an underground courtroom.
The spymaster, Gen.
Markus Wolf, is on trial for treason against the country whose Government the Chancellor headed.
"As contradictory as it may seem," the 66-year-old Gunter Guillaume told the five-judge court, "the two men I was happiest to serve were Willy Brandt and Markus Wolf."


Harcourt Tynes Jr.; Journalist, 62
Harcourt Adderley Tynes Jr., a former journalist and community volunteer in Westchester, died on Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 62 and lived in Elmsford, N.Y.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The The Paramount
For stretches of its set on Friday night, the The might almost have been an English blues band.
A chugging beat, simple chords and a hooting harmonica carried songs from the The's new album, "Dusk" (Epic).
But as the rest of the concert showed, the The has less to do with musical style than with attitude.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Saturday about Leading Edge Products Inc.referred incorrectly to its new president.
He is H. Michael Morand.


Government Conceals Campaign Fund Tracks
To the Editor:
In 1991, I was co-author of "Let's Make a Deal: An Analysis of the 1988 S. &amp; L. Deals," a report for Ralph Nader's Center for the Study of Responsive Law.
We examined the connection between Federal campaign contributions and the acquisition of hundreds of savings and loans associations that failed in 1987 and 1988; were seized by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, and then sold off in 1988 at bargain prices to wealthy and politically connected investors.


Sampras Trims Agassi as Top Four Seeded Men Advance
The occasion of his dethroning was very much a sob story: the crown prince, clown prince and much-beloved defending champion of Wimbledon bared his shaved navel for the last time today on the similarly threadbare lawn of Center Court.
Andre Agassi, who in two years has transformed himself from a grass-shy Wimbledon ingrate to this celebrated Grand Slam event's most revered celebrity, was quietly shorn today by top-ranked Pete Sampras in a five-set quarterfinal.
The 6-2, 6-2, 3-6, 3-6, 6-4 victory by Sampras lasted 2 hours 48 minutes and changed course almost as often as Agassi changed his shirt.


Troubles Deepen for Fiat and Ferruzzi, Italy's Biggest Family-Run Empires
Italy's richest family-owned business empires acknowledged deepening troubles today with their separate companies.
Fiat, the giant auto and industrial company controlled by the Agnellis, forecast a near-tripling of debt to some $7 billion by the end of the year, and the reigning heirs of the Ferruzzi family resigned from their debt-laden holding company.
The woes affecting the two dynasties came as a further illustration of Italy's problems in pulling out of a recession that has been worsened by Europe's slowdown.
In the case of Fiat, today's pronouncements about its debt showed how much the company was gambling on improvement in the European auto markets by mid-1994.
The hope is that Fiat's investments will pay off in a recovery,


Doubt Cast on Identification of Nazi Guard 'Ivan'
A report to a Federal appeals court today concluded that there was substantial doubt about the Government's longstanding assertion that John Demjanjuk, a retired Cleveland auto worker, was Ivan the Terrible, the sadistic gas chamber operator who drove thousands of Jews to their deaths in World War II.
Based on a 10-month inquiry, the report by Thomas A. Wiseman Jr., a Federal district judge in Nashville, found that Government prosecutors who stripped Mr.
Demjanjuk of his American citizenship and obtained an order to deport him failed to pursue leads contradicting the theory that he was the murderous Ivan of the Treblinka death camp.


Devils Hire Robinson to Assist Lemaire
Two days after signing one of the best defensive centers in Montreal history as their head coach, the Devils yesterday added one of the best defensemen in Canadiens' history as his assistant.
Larry Robinson, who was with six Stanley Cup winners in Montreal, joined Jacques Lemaire, the Hall of Fame Canadien hired Monday to coach New Jersey.


Economic Scene; A Report Considers the Viability of a Palestine Nation's Economy.
"I DON'T think we've invented something," said Hisham Awartani, a researcher at An Najah National University, in the West Bank occupied by Israel, and a member of a group of senior Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian economists who have just issued a report on the viability of an autonomous Palestinian economy.
"What we concluded was more or less known to all sides." But Professor Awartani is too modest.
The report, produced under the auspices of the Institute for Social and Economic Policy at Harvard University, offers a glimmer of light in the gloom of the stalled peace talks.
The willingness of these politically connected experts to talk turkey about the economics of the unborn state may be a harbinger of diplomatic advances to come.
At the very least it suggests that Palestine would be better prepared for economic autonomy than most new nations.


'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' Means Everybody
To the Editor:
As the political jockeying continues over the issue of how to acknowledge the presence of gays in the military (news article, June 23), the problem appears to be the impractical desire of some to restrict nondisclosure solely to gays themselves.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
A CEILING fan adds comfort and charm to your home and is far cheaper than air-conditioning.
So there is no reason to put off installing one if you have been planning to do so, even though summer is well under way.
The job is usually easy if you have some experience with home electrical repairs and plan to mount the fan in place of a ceiling light fixture, the usual place to put it.
When choosing a fan or a place to install one, keep in mind that for effective air circulation the blades should be at least a foot from the ceiling and two feet from walls.
For safety, the blades must be at least seven feet above the floor.


Genevieve M. Landau; Editor, 69
Genevieve Millet Landau, former editor in chief of Parents magazine and an expert in child development, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 69.
The cause was cancer, the family said.


Clinton Backs a $1 Billion Plan To Spare Trees and Aid Loggers
Acting to resolve a battle over the fate of the ancient forests in the Pacific Northwest, President Clinton has approved a plan to reduce logging on Federal lands and provide more than $1 billion to retrain loggers and help distressed timber communities.
The policy was drawn from recommendations developed by a group of scientists and was presented to the timber industry, environmentalists and members of Congress from Washington and Oregon.
It is the Clinton Administration's first important attempt to walk the fine line between economic growth and environmental protection.


No Headline
"You don't want to turn the vast wasteland into the dull wasteland. You have to tread very carefully." -- HOWARD STRINGER, president of the CBS Broadcast Group, on broadcast warnings about violence.  [ A14:3. ]


Bridge
For New York City and Long Island, 1993 Grand National Team play came to an end on Sunday.
In play at the Manhattan Club, at 27 West 72d Street, John Rengstorff, Bill Ehlers and Michael Radin, all of Manhattan, and Michael Kopera of Brooklyn, won by 48 imps against John Roberts, George Tornay, John Solodar, Alan Miller and August Boehm, all of Manhattan, and Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn.
The winners advance to the national playoffs in Washington beginning July 21.


Environmental Snag For Free-Trade Pact
A Federal judge ordered the Government yesterday to prepare a lengthy study on the environmental effects of the proposed free-trade agreement between the United States, Mexico and Canada.


Pick and Troll: Magic Trades No. 1 Choice Webber
When he was announced as the No. 1 pick tonight, Chris Webber walked proudly to the podium and put on an Orlando Magic hat.
Fifteen minutes later, the Magic traded Webber's rights to the Golden State Warriors.
It was that kind of night at the National Basketball Association draft -- intriguing and unpredictable.
Webber, Shawn Bradley (Philadelphia), Anfernee Hardaway, Jamal Mashburn (Dallas), and J. R. Rider (Minnesota), were the top five picks.


Rappers, Rumors, And Links To Assaults
In the last year or so, the after-school adolescent boisterousness and loitering has grown more pronounced around Mount Hebron Middle School and the Bellevue branch of the Montclair Library next to it, neighbors say.
Just about every afternoon before the summer recess began, students in their early teens congregated outside the library and smoked, hugged and kissed, set off firecrackers and engaged in horseplay, said a grandfather whose living room overlooks the library's main entrance.
One afternoon, he said, he even noticed two girls lift their jerseys and expose themselves in front of a group of boys.


Trade in Auto Parts Favors Japan Despite Gains by U.S.
Japanese automobile manufacturers appear to be on track toward reaching their target of doubling their 1990 purchases of American-made auto parts by 1994, according to executives and analysts on both sides of the Pacific.
But that is not reducing the flow of auto parts Japan keeps shipping to the United States.
To the chagrin of some American executives, the trade deficit with Japan in auto parts actually increased almost 10 percent last year to $10.9 billion.


COMPANY NEWS: Shaving -- The Next Generation; New Gillette Razor Has High-Tech Edge
Look, anything with elastomeric fins and grips has to be worth a few extra cents.
Those features are the key elements on the Gillette Company's latest shaver -- make that "shaving system" -- for men that was announced yesterday, the Sensor Excel.


Voters in Oregon Back Local Anti-Gay Rules
Less than a year after Oregon voters turned down the strongest measure against gay rights that was ever considered by a state, proponents of the measure have come right back with several election victories at the local level.
In a two-week election by mail whose ballots were counted Tuesday night, all of the four largely rural counties and two small towns that voted on the issue approved, by lopsided margins, a somewhat toned-down version of last fall's statewide measure, which would have deemed homosexuality "abnormal and perverse" and allowed discrimination against homosexuals.


Review/Television; A Soap Opera Based on Reality Moves to L.A.
Now beginning a second season, "The Real World," on MTV, doesn't really mean to be real.
Its official label is "reality-based soap opera." One creator, Mary-Ellis Bunin, is a veteran producer from network daytime dramas.
But the series, Thursdays at 10 P.M., with weekend repeats, does star real people -- nonactors -- gathered together for several months, their triumphs and crises followed by cameras for up to 75 hours a week, both in their communal house and on related locations.
All participants, unknown to one another before, are, of course, young (and generally attractive) adults.
Think of an extended adventure at Club Med.


Military Is Denied Most of Bonus
House and Senate negotiators agreed today to add only $326 million in new money to the Pentagon budget, instead of the $1.2 billion that the House had wanted to thrust on the Defense Department.
The Pentagon never formally requested any extra money.
It identified $750 million in costs for the United States relief operation in Somalia but said that money could be gained by reductions elsewhere.
Then the House voted to give the Pentagon $1.2 billion with no offsetting cuts.


AT HOME WITH: Dave Barry; Regular Guy On a Laugh Track
IF a television show was made about Dave Barry's actual life, much of it would consist of Mr.
Barry, a humor writer, slumped in front of his computer screen, procrastinating.
Sometimes he would get up and play his electric guitar, a Fender Stratocaster.
About four times a day, he might feel unfunny and distract himself with a peanut butter sandwich (no jelly).
And sometimes, he would admire one of the inexplicable items strewn about his office, like a plastic replica of "The Last Supper" with a clock stuck in the corner.


Radja Follows a Legacy: From Split to Rome to U.S.
The Croat soon to be a Boston Celtic was lingering in the lobby of the Olympiahalle with a Charlotte Hornets cap tilted back on his blond head.
"I've got loads of Celtics caps at home, don't worry," Dino Radja said.


Policy Is Issued On Investigating Abuse by Priests
Responding to a growing number of sexual-abuse allegations nationwide against priests, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York spelled out new procedures yesterday for investigating such cases and disciplining offenders.
To remove the secrecy that has shrouded such cases in the past, the policy informs priests, church members and the public of precisely how accusations can be reported and how they will be resolved.
The guidelines also require church officials to advise accusers that they can bring their complaints to law-enforcement officials. 'Specific Steps'
Church officials emphasized that they were publicizing and elaborating on procedures that they had already begun to follow during the last few years.
Joseph Zwilling, the archdiocese's spokesman, said that although the church had been informally following the procedures made public yesterday, "we have never spelled out the specific steps that people can refer to and hold us to."


For 5 Regents Graduates, Goals Delayed, and Reached; Academic Elite of a Poor Bronx High School, 5 Years Later, Tell of the Roads They Traveled
Five years ago, the 270 graduates of Theodore Roosevelt High School packed the auditorium of Lehman College for commencement.
Every other word sounded like "success" and "destiny" as cameras clicked and families grinned.
It was so hot that day, June 24, 1988, that some of the girls wore bikinis under their flowing white robes, anticipating a later celebration on the beach.
Among the graduates from this poor Bronx neighborhood where just finishing school was a big deal were 26 young people who received Regents diplomas, the school system's certificate of academic achievement.
They included the valedictorian, Marcia Morgan, an aspiring physician whose family came from Jamaica, and Arnold Arias, a quiet Dominican who hung out with a group of guys who called themselves The Lost Boys.


6 Chances Are Better Than 1


Bomb Scares Close Tunnel and Road
Thousands of rush-hour commuters were stalled in heavy traffic yesterday afternoon when the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel was closed for about five hours after a suspicious package was discovered in the Manhattan-bound tube.
Police bomb squad investigators found a cylindrical object 8 inches in diameter and 2 feet long in a bag wrapped in tape.
By late last night, the police had not determined whether the object was an explosive device.


TV Listings
On Fridays, television and radio news, listings and advertising now appear at the end of section D, with Home Video.
Today, pages D26-27.


A Move to Protect Women From 'Street Harassment'
Some consider it playful banter, even a form of flirtation.
But to a growing number of women, there is nothing playful about sexual comments, catcalls and whistles from strangers on the street.
Now a law professor at Northwestern University is proposing to make such "street harassment" a punishable offense.


City Opera Musicians Bar Wage Freeze
The musicians of the New York City Opera Orchestra have rejected the company's request for a wage freeze this season, the company and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians said yesterday.
The union had agreed to a wage freeze for the month of June, when the company was on tour, but negotiations for a freeze for the coming season broke down early this week.
The City Opera, which posted a deficit of $2.9 million in 1992 and is projecting a deficit of about $1 million for the fiscal year that ended on Wednesday, first asked the unions for a freeze last October.
Christopher Keene, the company's general director, said at the time that a seasonlong wage freeze would save the company about $500,000, and would make it possible for City Opera to break even in its 50th-anniversary season, which opens on July 28.


Seoul's Leader Says North Is Manipulating U.S. on Nuclear Issue
A week before President Clinton arrives here to reaffirm American solidarity with a longtime ally, President Kim Young Sam cautioned today that North Korea was manipulating its current negotiations with the United States "to buy time to finish their project" to build nuclear weapons.
In a turnaround from three months ago, when South Korean officials voiced fears the United States might be too aggressive in its dealings with the Communist Government in Pyongyang, Mr.
Kim said he hoped the United States "will not continue to be led on by North Korea" when talks over nuclear inspections enter a third round in Geneva in two weeks.


Home Video
Endless Versions
Besides its many television showings each Christmas season, Frank Capra's "It's a Wonderful Life" ranks among the most exploited of all video titles.
In the public domain since its copyright expired in 1974, the movie has been fair game for marketing by any freelancer who can duplicate a tape cassette.
"We've seen versions of it from 20 or 30 companies, but even mom-and-pop stores put out their own copies," said Irv Slifkin of Movies Unlimited, a Philadelphia chain and mail-order company.


Gallego Is a Regular, but His Position Isn't
On Monday, it was shortstop.
Tuesday brought a trip to second base.
And Wednesday, in the afternoon sunshine, he found himself at third base.
Mike Gallego didn't care.
Gallego knows what it's like to ride the bench; he experienced it again during the early season, when he and Manager Buck Showalter would cross each other in the Yankee locker room and not even meet eyes.
He knows what it's like to come to the ball park miserable and to dread looking at the lineup card.
Baseball isn't fun then.
It is now.


First Up in 2d Season: Pick Three on 2 Coasts
The "second season" of the racing year will be launched in waves this weekend, starting tomorrow when six prime 3-year-olds compete in the $200,000 Dwyer Stakes at Belmont Park, six fillies meet in the $150,000 Molly Pitcher Handicap at Monmouth Park and 10 senior stars race in the $750,000 Hollywood Gold Cup at Hollywood Park.
The three races will be followed on Sunday by the $300,000 Suburban Handicap at Belmont, one of the landmark events in American racing since 1874.
And the Fourth of July holiday weekend will close on Monday at Belmont with the $100,000 Tremont Breeders' Cup for 2-year-olds taking early steps toward the big leagues.


New Closed-Captioning Rules Fuel an Industry Trend to Include More Consumers with Special Needs.
TELEVISION commercials aren't just for watching any more.
Increasingly, viewers can read them, too.
A growing number of spots are being produced with closed-caption capabilities, meaning the audio portions can be made to appear on screen, superimposed over the video, much like subtitles in a foreign-language film.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Price (Who Else?) Alone in Lead  Picking up where he left off last week, Nick Price birdied half the holes he played and established a one-stroke lead yesterday in the first round of the Western Open in Lemont, Ill.
Price, who had a closing 65 Sunday in winning the Greater Hartford Open, used the same Zebra putter in improving to an eight-under-par 64 on the Cog Hill course.
He missed one fairway by about a foot, hit all 18 greens in regulation and "hit irons inside of 15 feet 12 or 14 times," he said.
Mark Wiebe played without a bogey and was second with a 65. (AP) SOCCER Argentina Advances and Will Play Mexico Argentina defeated Colombia in penalty kicks, 6-5, last night in Guayaquil, Ecuador, to advance to the championship game of the America Cup tournament on Sunday against Mexico.
The teams had played to a 0-0 tie through regulation and overtime.
On Wednesday night, Hugo Sanchez and Mario Ramirez scored goals and Mexico took advantage of a driving rain in the second half to hold on and beat Ecuador, 2-0, in the other semifinal game, which was played in Quito.
Sanchez scored in the 23d minute and Ramirez added a goal in the 54th as Mexico, playing for the first time in this tournament for South American national teams. (AP) HORSE SHOW A Spotless Ride in Less Than a Minute Beezie Patton of Cazenovia, N.Y., rode Kanpai to victory in the Sugar Creek Stores Speed Stake yesterday in the 24th annual Lake Placid (N.Y.) Horse Show.
Patton, the seventh of 26 entries to ride the 14-jump course at the North Elba Show Grounds, took the class lead by riding penalty-free in 52.064 seconds.
Leslie Lenehan of Westport, Conn., winner of a record seven Grand Prix events in Lake Placid, finished in 49.641 seconds on Lenny, but knocked down a rail at the second-to-last fence and had four penalty seconds added to her time. (AP)


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Indigo, Oliver Hirsch, Bahiyyih Watson and Beans read from their work.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
EXPLORING THE BROOKLYN MUSEUM, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"Italian Renaissance Panel Paintings," by Martha Usdin, today at 2 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


A Misfit Who Turns to Murder
Since the days of Jack the Ripper, forensic psychiatrists have come far in sketching the inner dynamics that shape a serial killer.
Some well-established patterns seem to fit what little is known so far about Joel Rifkin, though it is far too early to tell how his case may differ in singular specifics, the experts say.
Like confirmed serial killers, Mr.
Rifkin kept mementos from his victims -- driver's licenses, lingerie and the like -- displayed on his dresser, the police say.
They were, the authorities say, much like the more grisly collection of victims' body parts kept on display by Jeffrey Dahmer, the Milwaukee serial killer, in his apartment.
And, like Mr.
Dahmer, Mr.
Rifkin was a social outcast, isolated in his school years as an eccentric.


German Citizen Law Has No Nazism Link
To the Editor:
William Safire insinuates in "Blood and Irony" (column, June 17) that Germany's nationality law, which determines citizenship by descent ("ius sanguinis"), is somehow linked to the Nazi era ideology of "blood and soil."


I.B.M. Disk Crammed With Data
Scientists at an I.B.M. research laboratory in Silicon Valley said today that they had developed an optical technique that allows ultra-dense storage of computer data.
The storage system uses a short wave-length laser to store information at 2.5 billion bits a square inch, five times more than today's most advanced optical disk drives.


Why New Yorkers Have Fought Hard to Keep Rent Regulation
To the Editor:
After the tulips, the first robin and the rhubarb, there invariably comes your editorial excoriating New York City rent regulation.
This year a bumper crop: not one, but two (June 14 and June 22).


Grading the N.B.A.'s Multiple-Choice Test
Chris Webber spent about 10 minutes with the Orlando Magic, but it will take much longer to determine whether the Magic did the right thing by trading him.


Market Place; The President's Logging Plan Finds Its Fans on Wall Street.
HAVE stocks of companies in the wood and paper business finally hit the rebound?
Or will prices start sinking again faster than investors can yell "timber"?
Those questions were raised yesterday when President Clinton disclosed a plan to reduce logging on Federal lands to meet environmental concerns.
Timber companies groaned with dismay, saying the plan would harm the industry.
But on Wall Street, investors cheered, giving shares in most paper and forest companies a sharp boost.


Luckily, Birds Don't Have Sense of Smell; Perching Kestrels
To the Editor:
Birds may be nesting on rooftops (Topics of The Times, June 22), but less so this year in Manhattan's West 80's, where kestrels (falcons, sometimes likened to hawks) have taken up residence.
Check out the television antennas around Broadway and 82d to 84th Streets for these robin-size birds.
SETH FIELDING  New York, June 23, 1993


Harry Wallerstein, 87, a Pioneer In Transfusions to Save Newborns
Dr.
Harry Wallerstein, who originated a type of blood transfusion that saved the lives of countless newborn infants, died on Saturday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.
He was 87 and lived in Mount Vernon.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


E. Esty Stowell, 81; Led Ogilvy &amp; Mather
Edward Esty Stowell, a former president of Oglivy &amp; Mather and an environmentalist, died on June 23 at his home in New Vernon, N.J.
He was 81.
His wife, the former Helen d'Olier, said the cause was cancer.


Pentagon Pinocchios
The 1980's were the go-go years at the Pentagon, and that meant anything goes, including lying to Congress.
According to General Accounting Office investigators, the largest peacetime military buildup in American history was powered by "systematic" misrepresentations.
The Pentagon inflated the Soviet threat, exaggerated the performance of new weapons and understated their costs.
The G.A.O. findings should make Congress skeptical about current Pentagon claims: If military project managers were prepared to play Pinocchio when military spending was all the rage, what will they do in the harder times to come?


METRO DIGEST
NEW POLICY ON ABUSE BY PRIESTS
Responding to a growing number of sexual-abuse allegations nationwide against parish priests, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York has spelled out new procedures for investigating such cases and disciplining offenders.
A1.
FIGHT OVER MENTAL HEALTH FINANCING
A major political struggle has developed in Albany to force Gov.
Cuomo to spend money the state is saving by closing psychiatric hospitals on community care for the mentally ill.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Gooden And Green Aren't on Same Page
Dwight Gooden needed one pitch in the eighth inning to decipher the meaning of the moment.
"I was done," said Gooden after tonight's 7-5 loss to Florida.


The Failure to Police Empire
Incompetence all around.
That's the dismaying finding of a Senate staff report on Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which has lost an astonishing $600 million over the last six years providing medical insurance to nearly half the population of New York State.
The report rebuts, in exquisite detail, Empire's claim that its problems are mainly due to unfair practices by commercial competitors and other factors beyond its control.
Empire's managers performed ineptly, the study shows, yet they were lavishly rewarded.
Empire's board of directors seemingly slept while the company's fortunes plummeted.
The State Insurance Department, led by Superintendent Salvatore Curiale, was ineffective.
And an independent audit ordered by the Legislature and performed by Arthur Andersen &amp; Company was not so independent and was fatally flawed.


Croats and Serbs Gang Up Against Muslims, U.N. Says
United Nations officials said today that they had strong evidence of close military cooperation between Serbian and Croatian militias against the mostly Muslim Army of the Bosnian Government.
"We're getting it from so many different sources, including our own observers," said a spokeswoman for the United Nations military force in Bosnia, Lieut.
Col.
Patricia Purves.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.92
3.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
3.00
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.11
3.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.41
5.42
6.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.68
6.67
7.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.38
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.72
5.76
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Arbour Deal Is Done: The Man Is an Islander
The playoff ride was too exciting, the future possibilities too intriguing for Al Arbour to give up now.
And so Arbour, who seriously considered ending his 18-year coaching career with the Islanders this summer, has instead agreed to sign on for at least one more year as the team's head coach.
General Manager Don Maloney said yesterday that he and Arbour had come to a good-faith agreement that would keep Arbour behind the Islanders' bench for a minimum of one more season and in the organization beyond that.
Consistent with his past agreements with the Islanders, Arbour will sit down with Maloney following the 1993-94 season and reassess his options, deciding then whether to extend his coaching contract or move into a front-office role. 'Gets Your Juices Going'
"There's no doubt that when you're out of it for a while and you get back into the playoffs, it certainly gets your juices going," said Arbour, who led the upstart Islanders past the Pittsburgh Penguins and into the Wales Conference finals this spring.
"The question is always whether the challenge is there, and that's what brings me back. I thought with the club and the way we finished, there would certainly be a challenge to keep it going that way."


Sessions Is Said to Fight Removal Till New F.B.I. Head Is in Place
Negotiations between William S. Sessions and the Clinton Administration broke down this week after Mr.
Sessions insisted he would not resign as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation until a successor is confirmed by the Senate, Administration officials said today.
That scenario, which could leave Mr.
Sessions in office for months, created a new roadblock for the Clinton Administration, which is trying to ease him out.
Judge Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, a former F.B.I. agent, has emerged as a leading candidate to succeed Mr.
Sessions, Administration officials said.


No Headline
"I'm not saying this is a great work of literary distinction, but it is as good as a hundred other romance novels being published this year." -- STEVEN SCHRAGIS, publisher of a novel written -- more or less -- by a computer.  [ D16:6. ]


On Stage, and Off
Anything but Loverly
At Fourth of July picnics a year from now, some theater folk may still be swapping yarns about the bad luck that has bedeviled the national tour of the newest revival of "My Fair Lady." That's the Broadway-bound surrealist reinvention of the Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe musical that stars Richard Chamberlain as Henry Higgins.
Crisis No. 1: Only a week before the show was to begin its tour in Fort Myers, Fla., Melissa Errico, the actress who had been chosen with much fanfare over 612 others to play Eliza Doolittle, ruptured a capillary in her right vocal cord.
Her understudy, Meg Tolin, had never sung the role during rehearsals in New York.


I.N.S. to Seize Sheik Linked To Bomb Case
The Justice Department decided yesterday to detain the Islamic fundamentalist preacher whose followers are suspects in two bombing conspiracies, law enforcement officials said.
The authorities said Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a 55-year-old self-exiled Egyptian, would be detained on immigration charges, but they would not say when or where.


Congresswoman Is Target in Navy T-Shirt Episode
In a sign that the Navy's repeated efforts to combat sexual harassment face outright defiance from some officers in its own ranks, aviators from several reserve squadrons in the San Diego area have distributed T-shirts emblazoned with lewd statements about Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado.
The T-shirts feature a mock front page of a fictitious newspaper, The Investigation Daily.
The page is dominated by a huge headline that makes a crude sexual reference to Ms.
Schroeder, 52, a senior Democrat on the House Armed Services Committee.
Other offensive references to her are emblazoned elsewhere on the page.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Encountering The Digital Age -- An occasional look at computers in everday life.; Potboiler Springs From Computer's Loins
A decade ago, Scott French bet a few Silicon Valley friends that a computer could write a novel.
Not Tolstoy or Faulkner maybe.
But a computer, Mr.
French told his friends, could probably be programmed to turn out a trashy page-turner -- the sort of steamy fiction that Jacqueline Susann, author of "Valley of the Dolls," used to crank out.
A rough draft within a year, he wagered.
Twelve months later, Mr.
French was wiser and $300 poorer.
But that lost bet fueled an eight-year obsession that resulted in the publication this week of "Just This Once," which carries this explanatory subtitle: "A novel written by a computer programmed to think like the world's best-selling author" -- Ms.
Susann -- "as told to Scott French."


Review/Film; The Way To Her Heart: Through Her Hair
The new Disney comedy titled "Son-in-Law" is of a ghastliness so consistent that it becomes remarkable.
Even failed comedies sometimes stumble upon a laugh.
Not "Son-in-Law," which is so befuddled that it doesn't even introduce its star, Pauly Shore -- for whom the film is supposed to be a vehicle -- until it seems to be halfway over.
Mr.
Shore is the MTV stand-up comic who appeared in "Encino Man." He has frizzy hair and a public persona that suggests he failed his correspondence course in "The Improvisational Comedy of Robin Williams." There is far less of Mr.
Williams in this performance than of Richard Simmons, the television fitness guru.


President Receives Base-Closing Plan; Approval Expected
President Clinton is expected to approve the recommendations of a Presidential commission responsible for deciding which military bases to close, White House officials said today.
The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission submitted its official report to Mr.
Clinton today, but the panel's conclusions have already been widely reported.
The White House is expected to announce Mr.
Clinton's decision on Friday.


Art in Review
'On Paper' 'The Figure in 20th-Century Art'
Michael Rosenfeld  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Aug. 20
"On Paper: The Figure in 20th-Century Art" is the kind of informal free-for-all group show that makes the traditionally downsized summer art scene fun.
The hundred-plus drawings range from a wonderful Joseph Stella graphite sketch of an old man, done around 1900, to Paul Cadmus's luxuriantly polished "Male Nude," from 1983, and if the exhibition draws no single thematic thread to the surface, it suggests how astonishingly varied the figurative sensibility in American art has been.


Progress Is Reported in Northwest Talks
Northwest Airlines and its pilots' union have narrowed some of their differences over concessions the airline says it needs to avoid filing for bankruptcy protection, people close to the talks said yesterday.
The pilots have agreed to work-rule changes worth roughly $65 million in savings for the carrier over three years, the people said.
That represents an additional concession to the $300 million in wage cuts the pilots previously agreed to grant Northwest, which is seeking to restructure a debt load it has concluded is insurmountable.


Manning Re-Enlists, but Only for a Year
All-Star forward DANNY MANNING signed a one-year contract with the Los Angeles Clippers yesterday that will keep him with the team at least through the 1993-94 season.
He will make a reported $3.2 million for next season, a 25 percent increase over his 1992-93 salary.
Manning apparently will become an unrestricted free agent after the 1993-94 season if the Clippers do not sign him to a long-term contract.


African Festival Opens in Brooklyn


Student Loan Bill Fixes What Isn't Broken
To the Editor:
Congress is about to vote on student loan legislation that may make it impossible for scores of small private and public colleges in New York State to function.
Under the legislation about to be enacted, loans to college students will no longer be processed through local banks, but will have to be issued directly by the colleges themselves.


After His F.C.C. Victory, Murdoch Battles Unions
Rupert Murdoch's Federal Communications Commission victory on Tuesday set the stage for a bruising second act in his effort to purchase The New York Post: a war of nerves with the New York newspaper unions.
Fresh from the decision in Washington giving Mr.
Murdoch's company the right to buy The Post and keep a New York television station, Mr.
Murdoch acted quickly this week to increase pressure on the unions with new threats of death for The Post.
He set a deadline of July 9 for contract talks that had been stalled awaiting the F.C.C. ruling.


Review/Film; Old Hollywood Horror, but With Depth and Flair
How does an all-American guy respond when his bride hints that an old Serbian curse might turn her into a panther?
"Oh, Irena, you crazy kid," he says cheerfully.
A nurse who has stumbled into a job with a peculiar Caribbean family begins her story in a lilting, lighthearted voice.
"I walked with a zombie!" she chirps, very much as if she were saying: "Silly me! I stubbed my toe!"


Books of The Times; Lights, Camera, Action! Act Cynical and Greedy
The Negative
By Michael Covino
353 pages. Viking. $21
The plot of this first novel by Michael Covino sounds like a high-concept Hollywood pitch, made in the wake of the success of Michael Tolkin's "Player": the one and only negative of one of the world's most anticipated movie sequels (a kind of "Star Wars" redux) is stolen and held for ransom by a small-time gangster and his two cronies; manic mayhem ensues.


Review/Art; Fountains of Mercury, a Piano Spitting Out Keys: Sculpture as Dramas
The sculpture of the German artist Rebecca Horn has been on the move for nearly 20 years, igniting little Surrealistic shocks of recognition with mechanized gestures that mimic actual, pulsating life, human and otherwise.
Her preferred materials range from everyday objects like high-heeled shoes and worn leather suitcases to more exotic fare like mercury, electrical sparks and especially feathers, which she often causes to fan open and shut, like disembodied wings.
A cryptic, almost Minimalist sense of narrative, charged with intimations of glamour, sex and violence, runs through much of her art.
Ms.


Inside Art
A Screen's Price
Auction houses have always been places for recycling.
And often art objects come back on the market in new incarnations.
Take a 10-panel screen of silk embroidered with flying geese, ducks and bamboo trees.
It originally belonged to Juan Portela, the Manhattan antiques dealer, and was prominently displayed in a corner of the dining room of his Manhattan town house.
At least, that's where scores of people saw the screen before a sale of Mr.
Portela's furniture and objects at Christie's in New York on Jan. 27.
In its catalogue, Christie's described the screen as Chinese and estimated that it would sell for $7,000 to $10,000.
The screen sold for $6,050 to Joseph P. Carroll, a New York-based art collector and dealer who specializes in Korean art.


Gunman Raids Law Office and Kills 8
A gunman carrying hundreds of rounds of ammunition terrorized a high-rise office building in the financial district here late this afternoon, killing eight people and wounding six others with a hail of automatic and semiautomatic fire before shooting himself to death.
The gunman, whose identity was still undisclosed tonight, first opened fire in the 34th-floor conference room of a law firm, Pettit &amp; Martin, the authorities said.


From Sarajevo To Hardwood Haven
Emir Halimic looped a heavy duffel bag over his slender shoulder and stepped off the Bosnian basketball team's bus into brilliant sunshine.
Nearby, in Olympic Park, young lovers rolled by on bicycles, wrinkled men hunched over a chess table and a well-fed child tottered along a path with plenty of help from her father.
It was a mood utterly different from the one at Sarajevo Airport during the early hours of April 1.


For Children
Art and Nature Workshops
Wave Hill  West 249th Street  Riverdale  The Bronx  (718) 549-3200  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Tomorrow and Sunday
The presence of Wave Hill reminds New Yorkers that they don't need to escape the city in the summer, even if they have children.
At this generously green estate, with the sky unlimited, the trees dinosaurlike and the Hudson so loud and clear, youngsters acquire a sense of the city's grand possibilities.


A Russian Tradition So Old It's Revolutionary: Trial by Jury
"It will be hard to change," admitted Judge Galina Zmicharovskaya, who presides in the Siberian region of Irkutsk.
"I'm used to deciding on the evidence myself. But I'd like to try it."
Judge Zmicharovskaya and dozens of her colleagues from all over Russia are weighing what they've learned from a short course in a tradition long forgotten in this country: trial by jury.


Restaurants
Le Madri
Le Madri has a revolving kitchen door.
Since the airy, Tuscan-style restaurant opened four years ago, a succession of three chefs has minded the stoves, but changing hands seems to have little effect on the restaurant's food: it is often pleasing and usually prettier than it tastes.
The wood-burning stove in the dining room issues a smoky promise of rustic Tuscany.
But the actual food is air-brushed Italian, more Armani than Mama.
The cooking style resonates nicely with the crowd faithful to the Seventh Avenue restaurant.
At lunch and dinner, Le Madri is a stylish human landscape swathed in the latest fashion, punctuated by high cheekbones and well-sculptured chins.
Giggles and a steady chorus of "ciao" bounce off the restaurant's vaulted ceiling and vanilla-washed walls.
But the noise level is mitigated by generous spacing between the tables, which is rare in Manhattan restaurants.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Pentagon's misleading appraisals of its acquisition programs referred incorrectly to the status of the B-1B bomber.
The Air Force has imposed flight restrictions on the aircraft at various times because of mechanical problems.
There are no restrictions now.


John Anderson, 54, Lawyer and Breeder Of Highland Cattle
John MacKenzie Anderson, a Cincinnati lawyer and breeder of Scotch Highland cattle, died Monday at Jewish Hospital in Cincinnati.
He was 54 and lived in East Walnut Hills, Ohio, a suburb of Cincinnati.
He died of complications from cancer, his family said.


Thrills, Chills, Very Wet Spills
ON a recent episode of "The Simpsons," that lovable, snide cartoon family visited a water park.
Hundreds of revelers in bathing suits were waiting in line for the best ride, called H2 WHOA!, a long, blue plastic pipe with water rushing through it.
Bart and Lisa cut to the front of the line; then Homer barreled up to the entrance and jumped in.
The only problem was that Homer, whale that he is, got stuck in the pipe.
The security officer assumed that whatever was causing the blockage was too big to be human.
Eventually a crane had to remove the section of tubing with Homer in it.
That probably wouldn't happen in the real world, but water parks do offer a bizarre peek into American recreational culture.
To be frank, they're a little silly.
Why not go to the ocean, where you have access to a natural resource?
Why not go to an amusement park, where at least you can keep your clothes on?
To the uninitiated, the water-park experience can seem rather traumatic.
You strip to your bathing suit, splash around in front of strangers and jump into a giant serpentine slide like a melted bobsled run that flings you around, then dumps you unceremoniously into a swimming pool.
Whose idea of fun is this?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  MANDELA BACKS OFF ON SANCTIONS  Nelson Mandela, in Washington, said he was not yet able to urge the end of all sanctions against South Africa, despite progress on talks over the transition to majority rule.
A3  Nelson Mandela's economist called for a "reconstruction levy." A3


Guilty of Murder, He Could Still Profit
Can a child who murders his parents inherit their estate?
In most cases the answer would be no, thanks to the legal doctrine that criminals cannot profit from their actions.
But a case in Illinois is putting that principle to an unusual test.


Lewis-Morrison Bout Set; Both to Earn $8 Million
For backpedaling successfully against 44-year-old George Foreman and winning the decision last month, Tommy Morrison has been rewarded with a heavyweight title shot worth more than $8 million against Lennox Lewis.
Morrison's co-manager, Bill Cayton, said yesterday that the deal had been agreed to, and that the fight for Lewis's World Boxing Council title would take place in Las Vegas, Nev., probably in October.


Purchasing Managers Report a Drop for June
The spate of weak economic numbers continued today as the nation's purchasing managers reported that their industrial index skidded in June to under 50 percent, the dividing line between expansion and contraction.
It was the lowest reading in 18 months.
Meanwhile, outlays for construction were reported to have edged up a scant one-tenth of 1 percent in May, which analysts considered disappointing, and confidence among top business executives ebbed.


Art in Review
Marjorie Welish
E. M. Donahue Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Wednesday
Marjorie Welish mixes a lot of art history into her dense, airless, resolutely unpretty geometric paintings.
They combine Mondrian's primary colors with the grid-based, systematic approach of Minimalism and add sufficient stylistic quirks to claim a spot in the painting-about-painting "conceptual abstraction" of the last few years.


Acting Chief For Schools Takes Helm
Dr.
Harvey Garner's first hours of work as interim Schools Chancellor for New York City were a flurry of phone calls and meetings, but by yesterday afternoon he finally got a chance to peer around his office on the 10th floor of Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn and to see where fate had landed him.
The former Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, had left little behind, just eight potted plants, four volumes of school regulations and a vast desktop, utterly empty except for a one-page letter of instructions that began "Dear Harvey." The office walls, bristling with empty hooks, looked a bit barren with Mr.
Fernandez's paintings gone.


White House and Chiefs Snagged On Retaining Gay-Ban Language
President Clinton would find it "very difficult" to accept a proposal by the Joint Chiefs of Staff for a policy on gay men and lesbians in the armed forces that would label homosexuality as "incompatible with military service," a senior White House official said today.
But Mr.
Clinton is reserving judgment on any new policy until he can review specific details of a complete plan the Pentagon must submit to the White House by July 15, the official said.
Meeting With Joint Chiefs
The Joint Chiefs have urged Mr.
Clinton to leave unchanged the language on incompatibility, which is the first sentence of the Pentagon's current regulation banning homosexuals in the armed services.
But the White House official said Mr.
Clinton was reluctant to accept that sort of language, which would stop well short of his pledge to permit gay men and lesbians to serve in uniform without discrimination or fear of punishment.


Germany Starts Enforcing New Entry Rules
The German authorities began applying procedures allowing them to turn back asylum-seekers today as a constitutional change went into effect, but it was business as usual at most border checkpoints.
At Germany's biggest international airport, in Frankfurt, 18 people from Africa and Sri Lanka applied for asylum.
Under the new law, they would normally be held there a maximum of 19 days as their cases were decided.
But most were told that the 19-day limit would be waived, giving them the opportunity to apply under the old system, which allowed would-be immigrants to remain in the country -- sometimes for years -- while their cases were being decided.
A Nigerian man was held under the new procedure, the authorities said, because they did not have enough personnel to handle his case.


A Parade of Events for the Fourth of July
Here is a sampling of Fourth of July Weekend events in the New York metropolitan region: NEW YORK CITY Today  BASEBALL: METS VS.
GIANTS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens.
Today at 7:40 P.M. and tomorrow at 7:10 P.M.; Sunday at 1:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
"ALL AMERICAN" CONCERT, Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center, 7 P.M.
Free.
Goldman Memorial Band, conducted by Gene Young.
Information: (212) 886-9887.
Tomorrow  STARS AND STRIPES REGATTA, South Street Seaport, Fulton and South Streets, lower Manhattan.
The seaport plays host to some 100 sailboats and crews in the annual two-day, two-race event in New York Harbor through July 4.
Sponsored by New York Newsday.
Races start at 11:30 A.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
GOVERNORS ISLAND.
A tour of the largest Coast Guard installation in the world, the homes of Ulysses S. Grant and General John J. Pershing, and two early 19th-century forts.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at noon and 2:30 P.M.; fee: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"GREENWICH VILLAGE II." A walking tour of historic sites associated with radical political movements.
Sponsored by Radical Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M. in Sheridan Square in front of Village Cigars.
Fee: $6.
Information: (718) 492-0069.
SUNSET BEACH WALK, Crooke's Point, S.I.
A moonlight walking tour along the beach led by a park ranger.
Bring a flashlight.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreation Area.
Meets at 8 P.M.
Reservations and information: (718) 351-6970.
Sunday  FIFTY-GUN SALUTE, the esplanade, Battery Park.
The Veteran Corps of Artillery fires a salute to the nation.
Noon.
Free.
Information: (212) 861-4896.
ARMY BAND CONCERT, Fort Hamilton, Fort Hamilton Parkway at 101st Street, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Fireworks follow the concert. 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 630-4820.
INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, at Arthur Kill Road, S.I.
Old-fashioned ice cream social, speeches in the tradition of the 1860's and a pie-baking contest.
From 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students, the elderly and children from 6 to 18; free under age 6.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
MACY'S "TIME FOR HEROES" FIREWORKS CELEBRATION, lower Hudson River.
A half-hour display starting at 9:20 P.M.
Music to be broadcast on WPLJ-FM, 95.5, at 9:20 P.M.
Best viewing in Manhattan: West Side from the World Financial Center to West 12th Street.
"A SALUTE TO NEW YORK CITY," Great Lawn, Central Park.
Kurt Masur conducts the New York Philharmonic in Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man," Charles Ives's "Variations on America," Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" and Leonard Bernstein's Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story." Afterward, a fireworks display by the Grucci family. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5709.
FOURTH OF JULY PARADE, Travis, S.I.
Parade begins at Victory Boulevard and West Shore Expressway and proceeds on Victory to Glen Street, Cannon Avenue, Victory Boulevard and East Service Road. 11:30 A.M.
Information: (212) 374-5176.
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT CONCERT, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan.
The Larry Elgart Orchestra performs big band swing music at 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
FIREWORKS CRUISE, Circle Line, leaving from Pier 83, 43d Street at Hudson River, Clinton. 7 to 10 P.M.
Tickets: $30; $15 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 563-3200.
FIREWORKS CRUISE, World Yacht, leaving from Pier 81, West 41st Street at Hudson River, Clinton.
A cruise including a five-course dinner and viewing of the fireworks. 7 to 11 P.M.
Tickets: $179.
Information: (212) 630-8100.
ALL-NIGHT WALKING TOUR, lower Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Warren Shaw, a historian and writer, celebrating Independence Day with a candlelight procession through the streets around City Hall.
The tour ends with a Staten Island Ferry ride at sunrise.
Meets at 2 A.M. on the steps of City Hall, Broadway at Duane Street. $15.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Information: (212) 996-1100.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
GIANTS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens. 1:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
HOT DOG EATING CONTEST, Nathan's Famous, 1310 Surf Avenue, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Twenty contestants compete in a 12-minute competition.
Noon.
Free.
Information: (212) 385-3803.
Monday  INDEPENDENCE DAY FESTIVAL, Woodside Avenue between Roosevelt Avenue and 65th Place, Woodside, Queens.
A street fair with a block-wide petting farm.
Sponsored by Woodside on the Move. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 995-9412.
LONG ISLAND Tomorrow  THE GREAT AMERICAN FOURTH OF JULY FESTIVAL, St.
James General Store, 516 Moriches Road, north of Route 25A, St.
James.
Through July 5.
Crafts, entertainment, music, raffle and children's activities.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 862-8333.
AMERICA'S BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION, Vanderbilt Museum, 180 Little Neck Road, Centerport.
The Long Island Brass Guild performs at the picnic area at 8 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Picnic dinners may be ordered for $10 a person.
Information: (516) 262-7800.
MOSTLY MOZART FESTIVAL, Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay, Route 106 North to Northern Boulevard.
Gerard Schwarz will conduct the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra with Joshua Bell as violin soloist at 8 P.M.
Sponsored by Friends of the Arts.
Tickets: reserved tent, $30 and $35; lawn, $20.
Information and reservations: (516) 922-0061.
STAR-SPANGLED BLAST, Baker Farm, Route 58, Jamesport.
Hayrides, picnicking and fireworks by Grucci.
Admission: $25 for each carload. 2 P.M.
Information: (516) 286-0088.
Sunday  FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION, Sagamore Hill National Historic Site, 20 Sagamore Hill Road, Oyster Bay.
Reopening of the Theodore Roosevelt home and gala celebration, including concert and parade. 1 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 922-4788.
Monday  "NEW YORK'S MOST HISTORICAL PARADE," Wantagh.
Celebrating the 350th year anniversary of the Town of Hempstead.
The parade will begin at 10 A.M. from Park Avenue, proceed north on Wantagh Avenue and end at Beech Street School.
Information: (516) 571-4391.
WESTCHESTER Sunday  FIREWORKS AND DEBATE, Engels Waterfront Park, Ossining.
A Lincoln-Douglas style debate between County Clerk Andrew Spano and Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, followed by live music and fireworks.
Sponsored by League of Women Voters.
Free. 6 P.M.
Information: (914) 941-0009 CONNECTICUT Tomorrow  INDEPENDENCE WEEKEND AT MYSTIC SEAPORT, Route 27, Mystic.
A re-creation of an 1870's Fourth of July, including historic re-enactments, patriotic ceremonies and a parade.
Through July 4; 9 to 8 P.M.
Seaport admission: $15; $7.50 for children 6 to 15; free under age 6.
Information: (203) 572-5315.
Sunday  "BOOM BOX PARADE," Jillson Square to Memorial Park, Willimantic.
WILI-AM, 1400, plays an hour of marching-band music while thousands of people march with their radios blaring.
Noon to 1 P.M.
Information: (203) 456-1111.
NEW JERSEY Tomorrow  INDEPENDENCE DAY WEEKEND FESTIVAL, Brighton Park, between Illinois and Indiana Avenues, Atlantic City.
Art, crafts, antiques and collectibles.
Through July 5. 10 to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (609) 344-7855.
Sunday  PRINCETON POPS AND FIREWORKS, Mercer County Park, West Windsor.
A concert by the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra followed by a fireworks display. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (201) 624-3713.
ROCKLAND COUNTY Today  INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Bear Mountain State Park, Route 9W, Bear Mountain.
Billed as the world's biggest barbecue, with a performance by the Rockland County Concert Band at 8 P.M. and fireworks afterward. 5 to 9 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 786-2701.


A Second Top Pro-Israel Lobbyist Is Forced Out After Insulting Jews
A vice president of the leading pro-Israel lobby was forced to resign today after calling Israel's Deputy Foreign Minister "a little slime-ball."
The lobbyist, Harvey Friedman, was the second senior official of the America-Israel Public Affairs Committee to be dismissed this week for disparaging other Jews.
On Monday the executive director, Thomas A. Dine, was asked to resign after having been quoted as saying that some people regard ultra-Orthodox Jews as "smelly" and "low class." Mr.
Dine apologized and insisted he was not describing his own views, but was still asked to leave.


Review/Dance; Tapping, Across The Board
Tap is an amiable dance form.
Yet it is not easy to assemble an evening of nothing but tap-dancing, because rhythmically emphatic pieces in succession can grow much too similar in tone and intensity.
The American Tap Dance Orchestra, a highly disciplined company directed by Brenda Bufalino, made a gallant, but not always successful, attempt to find an unhackneyed format for tap-dancing when it offered "American Landscape" on Wednesday night at Town Hall.
Often, in tap programs, soloists perform their own specialties, then join together for a finale.
In contrast, "American Landscape" combined solos with ensembles of dancers moving in unison and in counterpoint to an accompaniment that featured songs by Hoagy Carmichael.


New Mayor Faces Hard Part: Running Los Angeles
He's made all the right moves so far, cajoling legislators in Sacramento for money, jogging with President Clinton in Washington, riding in the gay-pride parade on Sunday and appointing a respected City Council aide as chief of staff.
Now the question is whether Richard J. Riordan, as Mayor, can rescue this city of fan palms and hibiscus blossoms from its slide into racial discord, criminal violence and economic despair.
Will American urban salvation be found in the likes of this conservative 63-year-old Republican, a millionaire businessman who has never held elective office before?


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Energy Secretary's criticism of the management of the Superconducting Supercollider project referred incorrectly to a private research group that reported on spending on the project.
It is the Project on Government Oversight.


2 Israelis and 2 Palestinians Die as Guerrillas Attack Bus
Two Palestinian gunmen opened fire today aboard a crowded bus in Jerusalem, shooting three people and then hijacking a car in a failed attempt to escape that ended when they and the Israeli woman driving the car were killed at an army roadblock.
Another Israeli woman who had been shot in the head on the bus died hours later.


Big Board's Gainers and Losers


Sophia Jacobs, 91, In Forefront of Fight For Human Rights
Sophia Yarnall Jacobs, a lifelong advocate of civil and human rights, died on Wednesday at her home on Mount Desert Island in Northeast Harbor, Me.
She was 91.
Her daughter, Charlton Yarnall Phelps, said the cause was congestive heart failure.


Elephants in the Mail
Pity the poor mail carriers.
In 1992 incumbent members of the Republican-dominated New York State Senate, nervous about the impact of reapportionment, sent out 345 tons of taxpayer-financed mail.
Reform-minded Democrats obtained this piece of information by filing a Freedom of Information request with the Postal Service, then did an interesting calculation: all that mail equaled the combined weight of 104 elephants weighing 6,600 pounds each.
The mail -- largely targeted at constituencies like senior citizens -- was timed for maximum political benefit.
Shortly before the general election, senators sent out more than two million pieces at a cost of $364,000.
That followed an earlier surge just before the primary election cutoff for Senate mail, when some incumbents confronted stiff challenges.


New GATT Chief Turns Up Heat
Declaring that "it is simply not good enough for international leaders to mouth good intentions about trade," Peter Sutherland became the world's top trade official today and said the core of a long-delayed world trade agreement must be hammered out in Tokyo next week.
In an interview here at the quaintly staid headquarters of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade just a few days before the Tokyo summit meeting of major industrialized nations, Mr.
Sutherland, a 47-year-old Irish lawyer, immediately served notice that he would be as blunt and outspoken as his predecessor was mild and circumspect. 'Shoot From the Hip'
"I am going to say it as it is, and shoot from the hip," Mr.
Sutherland said, using language in sharp contrast to the chain-smoking Arthur Dunkel, his predecessor.
Mr.
Sutherland said he had twice rejected the job but took it this time after receiving assurances from trade officials -- including Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative -- that they want a GATT accord this year.


Finding a Stinger in a Haystack


The Trouble With Punitive Smokers' Tax
To the Editor:
Jeffrey Harris states that a $2 increase in the Federal excise tax on cigarettes (Op-Ed, June 4) would increase excise tax collections from $5 billion to $32 billion.
Michael Grossman (letter, June 18) accuses Professor Harris of underestimating the response of smokers to higher taxes, thus overestimating the likely tax revenues.
Mr.
Grossman's research suggests a tax of $1.26 a pack would maximize Federal revenues from the cigarette excise tax.


Germans Reduce 2 Key Rates
The German central bank lowered two key interest rates today, answering calls from President Clinton and European leaders to loosen the monetary reins in Europe's largest and most depressed economy.
The Bundesbank's moves, which were made at a meeting in the economically devastated eastern German city of Leipzig, also took Chancellor Helmut Kohl off the hook on the issue of high German interest rates in advance of next week's summit meeting in Tokyo of the seven leading industrial nations.


Police Block AIDS Demonstrators from Political Funeral Cortege


Why New Yorkers Have Fought Hard to Keep Rent Regulation; To Raise Tax Revenues
To the Editor:
Rent regulation affects more than New York City landlords and tenants.
Sometimes overlooked in the debate over rent regulation is that limiting protections for wealthy New Yorkers would increase municipal revenues.
If they paid higher rents, the buildings they inhabit would be assessed at higher values; this would increase property tax revenues.


In a Fearful Age, Security Comes in Squeeze Bottles
N this late-20th-century summer of political and environmental dreads, the symbol of the season is no longer the deck chair or the beach blanket or the fishing pole.
It is the bottle of sunscreen.
Who hasn't seen the clenched squint of a child at a beach or a park braced for yet another insistent, and probably overdone, parental application of the dreaded goop?
And who among parents who have applied goop to a squirming child, then watched him run innocently out into the world, has not felt the nagging uncertainty: Oh, sure, shielded for now, safe, protected, but then what?


Accord Reported on Choice Of New York Schools Chief
Despite an announcement that it would seek new candidates for schools chancellor, members of the New York City Board of Education said yesterday that they had agreed in principle to offer the job to Dr.
Bernard R. Gifford, a California education professor who was once a deputy chancellor in New York.
No formal vote was taken at the board's meeting Wednesday night.
But board members said yesterday that Dr.
Gifford passionately wanted the job and that if he could clear up his commitments to a new educational software company, the job was his for the asking.


'All American' Concert
The Goldman Memorial Band is to present a free concert of American works tonight at 7 o'clock in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
Gene Young is to conduct the ensemble in works by Robert Russell Bennett, Foster, Gershwin, Ives, Barber, Rodgers and others.
Included: selections from "Porgy and Bess" and Sousa's "Stars and Stripes Forever." Information: (212) 886-9887.


No Headline
Andrei Tropillo began his career in the 1970's as a producer in this city's underground music scene, back in the days when rock-and-roll was outlawed as a dangerous threat to Soviet youth.
Twenty years later, Mr.
Tropillo's hair is still combed back in a ponytail, and he is still producing music.
The difference now is that he is no longer a crusader for rock music, doing battle with the Government.
He is a record pirate king, operating above ground in a country that has become a bootlegger's heaven.


Postal Study Aims to Spot Violence-Prone Workers
Faced with 34 deaths resulting from a wave of shootings within its ranks over the last 10 years, the Postal Service is conducting an extensive study to determine what type of employee is most prone to violence.
Postal officials say they hope the study will yield a psychological profile -- a list of 8 to 10 characteristics -- that could be used to identify potential gunmen among the agency's 700,000 employees, the nation's largest civilian work force.


Art in Review
Madoka Takagi
Simon Lowinsky Gallery  575 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through July 10
A host of distinguished photographers, from Weegee to Sid Grossman to Robert Frank, have recorded the crowded beaches at Coney Island.
Now Madoka Takagi tries her hand at this time-honored subject, with quiet black-and-white portraits that are printed using the demanding platinum process.


Review/Theater; Knitters Undone By a Needler
Theresa Rebeck, a comic playwright with a good-humored feminist outlook, may not have intended it.
But a male chauvinist multi-millionaire who deals in mergers and acquisitions walks away with her new play, "Loose Knit," which opened on Wednesday night at the Second Stage Theater.
Miles (Daniel Gerroll), the character who steals her play, is a supercilious Master of the Universe (in the language of Tom Wolfe), who drives a Rolls-Royce, wears his golden hair in pleats and exudes a monumental smugness.
In his scientific quest for a mate, he squires each woman he dates to the same exclusive Japanese restaurant, whose chef, he boasts, used to work for the emperor's cousin.
A typical date is more like a job interview than a dinner conversation, because he spends most of the time firing pointed questions and jotting down his impressions in an official-looking notebook.


Mandela to Hold Off Calling for an End to Sanctions
Nelson Mandela said today that despite some recent progress on talks over the transition to majority rule in South Africa, he is not yet able to make a much-anticipated call for a lifting of all sanctions against his country.
On his second day in the United States, Mr.
Mandela said he might be able to make such an announcement within three weeks if talks with the white South African Government and other parties make sufficient advances on plans for establishing an interim government until elections next year.


The 'Candles' Readied for Our Birthday Celebration


Report Says Proposition 48 Increased Graduation Rates
A statistical report released yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association showed improved graduation rates for Division I student-athletes who entered school in 1986, the year Proposition 48 policy was instituted.
Proposition 48 sets academic standards for incoming freshman.
Athletes who fail to meet the standards, a 2.0 grade-point avearge on a scale of 4.0 in a core curriculum and a certain score on standardized entrance tests (Scholastic Aptitude Test or American College Testing) are not eligible to participate in intercollegiate play until at least the second year in college.


Flood Idles Barges on Mississippi, Raising Costs of Shipping Products
The flood-swollen Mississippi River will be closed to boat traffic for three more weeks or longer, causing tens of millions of dollars in losses to the shippers and companies that must find other, more expensive ways to move their products.
Some consumers could see higher prices in the weeks and months ahead on everything from grain to electricity because shipping costs are increasing and the cost of grain futures contracts at the Chicago Board of Trade have been rising as fast as the river.


4 in Prominent Harbor Family Are Charged With Polluting
Four members of the Frank family, which owns a network of marine transport companies that have been called persistent polluters of New York Harbor, were indicted yesterday on charges of criminal conspiracy and environmental-law violations.
The family members charged include Evelyn Berman Frank, the family matriarch, and a daughter, Susan Frank, who was New York City's Commissioner of Ports and Terminals from 1983 to 1985.
The charges follow a three-year investigation by Federal and New York State officials.


Raise Social Security Taxes
Nobody likes being singled out for a tax increase, and it's no surprise that most higher-income Social Security beneficiaries oppose President Clinton's plan to tax more of their benefits.
Nevertheless, it is a good idea.
It is only fair.
Why should Social Security -- by far our biggest pension system -- be taxed differently from private pensions and Government career pensions?
Retirees under these other plans pay income tax on the part of their benefit that exceeds what they paid in.
They don't pay on their own contributions because those have already been taxed, but the rest of the benefit is income with no more special claim to exemption than other income, like workers' wages.


Sounds Around Town
Recalling an Avant-Garde
Charles Gayle Trio, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 219-3055.
Mr.
Gayle, who plays tenor saxophone, is an expressionist who draws his cues from the jazz avant-garde of the 1960's.
He's a cult figure on the downtown jazz scene, a bit of an anachronism in this age of the classical.
The show is tomorrow at 9:30 P.M.
Tickets are $12.
Diblo at S.O.B.'s
Diblo, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
One of the greatest Zairian guitarists, Diblo sets figures going, and they drive his dance band on.
He'll be joined by one of the best of the young Haitian bands, Boukman Eksperyans, which mixes carnival, voodoo and other rhythms.
The show is on Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $16.


Upheaval in the Forests; Clinton Plan Shifts Emphasis From Logging But Does Not Create Off-Limits Wilderness
he plan that President Clinton announced today to bring peace, jobs and a degree of protection to the ancient forests of the Pacific Northwest will not end the decade-long civil war in the woods here.
But the plan does signal a historic shift in the way the Federal Government will manage more than 23 million acres of public forests in America's timber basket.
Logging will no longer dominate decisions, with the number of trees cut reduced by more than two-thirds from its highest levels.
At the same time, there also will not be any large formal wilderness areas, which would be off-limits to anything but light-footed visits by man.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Wednesday about a change in management at Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. referred incorrectly to another of the company's publications.
Britannica also publishes Compton's Encyclopedia; the publisher of Collier's Encyclopedia is P. F. Collier Inc., a subsidiary of Macmillan Inc.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Exxon Capital Corp., New York, is offering $250 million of 6 percent notes due in 2005 at 99.775 to yield 6.026 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated AAA by Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. is offering $100 million of debentures due in 2003 at 100 to yield 6.28 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The issue is callable in three years.


Summergarden Music
Summergarden, the annual series of free concerts in the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art, is devoted this year to music by 20th-century Latin American composers.
With recent graduates of the Juilliard School as players, the series opens tonight with works for chamber orchestra by Martin Matalon, Rafael Aponte-Ledee, Paul Desenne, Tania Leon, Juan Orrego-Salas and Max Lifchitz.
Cheryl Marshall, a soprano, is soloist; Joel Sachs conducts.


CHRONICLE
JOHN CHANCELLOR, the veteran broadcaster, bid a preliminary goodbye to network television last night with his last commentary on "NBC Nightly News." Mr.
Chancellor, 65, who is retiring after 43 years at the network, will say a more personal farewell to viewers next Friday, thanking them for "their patience and courtesy," he said in a telephone interview yesterday.
During his commentary last night he ruminated about "the change that worries me the most," he said, and that is the growing isolation of Americans brought about by television and computers.


Robert Currie, Interior Designer For Couture's Stars, Is Dead at 45
Robert Currie, an internationally known designer of commercial and residential interiors, sets for television and print advertisements, died on Wednesday at New York University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 45.
A friend, Marjorie Rosen, said the cause was complications from AIDS.


Packers Sign Simmons, Top Draft Pick
The Green Bay Packers yesterday signed their top draft pick, Clemson linebacker WAYNE SIMMONS, to a four-year, $3 million contract.
The deal includes a $1.2 million signing bonus.


G.E. Appoints a New Chief For Its Jet Engines Division
The General Electric Company has named the head of its former aerospace division, Eugene F. Murphy, as president and chief executive of the division that makes jet engines for airliners and military aircraft.
He succeeds Brian H. Rowe, who will remain chairman of the unit until his retirement at the end of next year.
Mr.
Murphy, who is 57, was chief executive of G.E.'s aerospace division until it was acquired by the Martin Marietta Corporation on April 2.
Before that he headed the company's communications and services businesses.


Who Can Harness History?  Only the U.S.
For the first time since the Hitler era, no would-be global dictator is working to overthrow the established order.
Despite the many civil wars in the world, the U.S. has an opportunity to mold an international system more compatible with the values we have held for two centuries.
But we may be letting that chance pass through our fingers.
The tremendous domestic tasks facing us call not just for our immediate attention but for continued real sacrifice.
Some say that we have carried the weight of world leadership long enough and that we no longer need to maintain a large military establishment.
These attitudes are understandable but misguided.
Beyond the responsibility that goes with power and the altruistic obligation most Americans feel toward their fellow man, very practical, even selfish reasons should move us.





AZT Patent Defended by Burroughs
A Burroughs Wellcome Company scientist told a Federal jury in Bern, N.C., yesterday that the company had full patent protection for AZT, the main AIDS treatment, because its researchers were the first to have the idea or conception for the therapy.
Burroughs Wellcome, a unit of Wellcome P.L.C. of Britain, is suing two generic drug makers and the National Institutes of Health.
The defendants -- Barr Laboratories, based in Pomona, N.Y., and Novapharm Ltd., based in Scarborough, Ontario, -- contend that the patents are invalid because the Burrough Wellcome researchers would not have had the concept without the help of Government scientists, who conducted the first laboratory tests of AZT with the virus that causes AIDS.


At Home Abroad; Defining a Country
When President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela are honored Sunday in Independence Hall, Philadelphia, the setting will have special symbolic significance.
For the American Constitution was written in that hall in 1787, and South Africa today is engaged in one of the most formidable exercises in constitution-making since then.
Like the delegates of 1787, the members of the negotiating forum here are creating a wholly new political system -- creating a country, really.
And they are deliberately borrowing from the American model.


Review/Pop; A Happy Balladeer From Brazil
Emilio Santiago might be described as a Brazilian answer to Johnny Mathis.
For the last 20 years, the singer, who comes from Rio de Janeiro, has recorded albums of ballads by leading Brazilian songwriters like Caetano Veloso, Gilberto Gil, Antonio Carlos Jobim and Joao Bosco.
And at his New York concert debut on Tuesday at the Ballroom, he revealed himself as a romantic balladeer with a strikingly sunny disposition.
Accompanied by a six-member band, Mr.
Santiago performed more than two dozen modern Brazilian pop songs in a continuous stream, often running songs together and barely speaking.
The arrangements were an efficiently streamlined blend of contemporary pop with samba and bossa nova styles.
If they permitted no genuine intimacy and featured no instrumental textures worth noting, they made an effective backdrop for Mr.
Santiago's consistently engaging singing.


Corrections
The credits with a television review on Tuesday about "The Health Quarterly," a PBS documentary, referred incorrectly to one producer.
He is Eric Stange.


U.S. Voicing Optimism on Trade Accord
Administration officials said today that they hoped to submit the North American Free Trade Agreement to Congress in September, as originally planned, voicing confidence that an appeals court would quickly overturn a Federal court ruling that requires a study of the pact's environmental effects.
The Justice Department filed an appeal notice today, and Administration officials spoke optimistically about their chances, asserting that requiring an environmental study improperly interfered with the President's constitutional powers to negotiate international agreements.


Knicks' Mason Meets His Match in Albany
Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO asserts that he's a tougher player than Knicks forward ANTHONY MASON, but he didn't have the chance to prove it yesterday.
Both men were dressed in suits -- Mason's a lime green and Cuomo's a basic blue -- when the Knicks forward stopped by the Governor's office in Albany for a visit.
Cuomo showed Mason the huge desk in his ceremonial office and posed for pictures with the player sitting behind it.


Diner's Journal
Sam's Dies an Orphan
Sam's Restaurant, 152 West 52d Street, one of the trio of restaurants in the Equitable Center, closed last week.
The actress Mariel Hemingway, whose nickname is Sam, opened it in 1986 with her husband, Steve Crisman, and his brother, Eric.
Now that the restaurant is dead, though, nobody wants to claim the corpse.
"We live in California and haven't set foot in the restaurant for years," Steve Crisman said.
"I sold both restaurants years ago." The other restaurant is Sam's Cafe, 1406 Third Avenue (80th Street), which is still open.


TV Weekend; Fleeing a Godfather's Hit Men? Try a Winnebago
Network television seems eager to get on the road this summer.
NBC has updated "Route 66," and now CBS is jumping into a second-hand R.V. to wander around the country in "Johnny Bago," Fridays at 10 P.M.
Starring Peter Dobson ("Last Exit to Brooklyn") in the title role, "Johnny Bago" is created by several of the people -- the director Robert Zemeckis and the writers Peter S. Seaman and Jeffrey Price -- who brought you the films "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" and "Back to the Future." This time around, it looks as if they'll have to go back to the drawing board.
Johnny Tenuti (Mr. Dobson) gets out of prison only to find that his former wife, Beverly Florio (Rose Abdoo), is his parole officer.
Further, Johnny is quickly set up to take the rap for a mobster killing.
He runs to his mom (Anna Berger), who usually can be found sitting next to a statue of the Virgin Mary.
Johnny: "Ma, I didn't do it." Ma, proud of her boy: "Take the credit." On the list of groups not likely to be overly amused by this heavy-handed parody, put Italian-Americans at the top.


Chief Wahoo's Domain Is Still Turbulent
The reaction was mixed yesterday over the Cleveland Indians' decision to keep their grinning "Chief Wahoo" logo when the team moves to the new Gateway Stadium in 1994.
"We are very happy, very excited about this," said SARAH NORMAN of the Save Our Chief group, which collected 10,000 signatures asking the Indians to keep the logo.


Review/Jazz; A Work In Progress At the Piano
The pianist Stephen Scott opened his set at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night with his "Behind the Scenes," a tune that uses bits and pieces of a melody, and a riff, but never really states itself as a traditional song.
Mr.
Scott and his band opened the door on the improvisations, and Mr.
Scott threw himself into a solo that flaunted a group of fractured chords, shards of sound, and glittering dissonances.
The piece seemed to melt away; Mr.
Scott let the balance between the tune's form and improvisation shift, with cascades of drumming overwhelming the piece's borders.
Mr.
Scott, 24 and immensily gifted, seemed almost impatient with the classicism of the mainstream.
The jazz renaissance of the last decade did away with the notion of difficult music in jazz, and "Behind the Scenes," which owed a bit to the more experimental side of Herbie Hancock and later Hampton Hawes (though Mr. Scott is much more referential than either of them), might have been considered abstract by an audience looking to hear the plain mainstream.
Though Mr.
Scott performed a standard or two -- Duke Ellington's "Solitude" and Wayne Shorter's "Infant Eyes" -- and though he and the band swung mightily, it was the sense of exploration, rife through every tune, that suggested that Mr.
Scott is a work in progess.


Gentleman, Start Your Bicycles: It's Time for the 1993 Tour de France
Claudio Chiappucci, who has twice finished second in the Tour de France, knows how to beat Miguel Indurain.
So does Frederic Moncassin, who has never come closer to the Tour than watching it on television.
"It can be done," said Chiappucci.
"The way is to attack him, attack him and attack him again."


White House Errors Cited in Travel Office Review
White House officials said today that the internal review of their handling of the travel office affair, which is to be made public Friday, outlines a series of management errors on the part of aides but does not recommend any dismissals or job transfers.
Also today, officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said their own investigation had so far turned up no evidence of criminal behavior by the seven members of the White House travel office who were summarily dismissed after accusations of mismanagement.


Haitian Army Aide Sees Progress Toward Accord
Appearing to break a five-day deadlock in talks aimed at restoring democracy to Haiti, a spokesman for Haiti's army leader announced yesterday that the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, was close to approving a settlement package proposed by United Nations mediators.
In an evening news conference after an intense afternoon of discussions on Governors Island, in New York Harbor, the spokesman, Serge E. Charles, called the plan "a good proposal." He added, "We don't see any reason why a solution cannot be reached soon."


Bahr to Kick for a 15th Year
Matt Bahr, entering his 15th season in the National Football League as a place-kicker, and Lamar McGriggs, entering his third year as a safety, signed contracts yesterday with the Giants.
Terms were not released.
Bahr, who will turn 37 next Tuesday, holds the Giants' record for career field-goal percentage at .753.
Since he signed with the Giants as a free agent on Sept. 28, 1990 after having played for Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Cleveland, Bahr has made 55 of 73 attempts.


F.D.A. Seeks Tighter Rules On Safety of Blood Supply
The Food and Drug Administration issued new guidelines today to require the nation's blood banks to meet the same kind of strict safety standards that pharmaceutical manufacturers now meet when making drugs.
"We are changing the rules and the whole philosophy of blood centers," said the F.D.A.
Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler.


Critic's Notebook; Ice in the Veins, Crime in the Heart: Vive le Sang-Froid!
CANCEL those reservations in Maine.
Tell California you won't be out there till August.
Turn in those tickets to Rome.
You might go so far as to forget the Hampton of your choice.
Put everybody on hold for the next four weeks.
With the showing of Jacques Becker's "Touchez Pas au Grisbi" ("Don't Touch the Loot," 1953) and Jean Delannoy's "Maigret Tend un Piege" ("Maigret Sets a Trap," 1953), the Film Society of Lincoln Center today begins a retrospective as choice as the fare in a three-star restaurant and as irresistible as junk food.
Even if you can't see all 36 films being presented at the Walter Reade Theater between now and July 27, you can have a terrific time trying.


COMPANY NEWS: A New Phone War; MCI Tries to Collect On A.T.&amp; T.'s Reply
If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, the MCI Communications Corporation just got a big atta-boy from its archrival, A.T.&amp; T.
Five weeks ago, MCI announced a service that offers low-cost collect calls by dialing a toll-free number, 1-800-COLLECT.
Collect calls are a $3 billion business, and MCI estimates that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company has kept about 75 percent of the market.


Hector Lavoe, 46, Helped Define The Style of Modern Salsa Music
Hector Lavoe, one of the great singers in salsa, died on Tuesday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 46.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his record company said.


Holiday Weekend
Independence Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, all others closed.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule, with extra trains Friday afternoon.
Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with extra trains this afternoon, and Sunday night for people who attend the fireworks.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Option to close.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit trains on Sunday schedule, buses on Saturday schedule.
PATH trains on a Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with extra trains Friday afternoon, and Sunday night for people who attend the fireworks.
Traffic Alert SUNDAY MOST HOLY CRUCIFIX STREET FESTIVAL: Mott Street between Hester Street and Canal Street will be closed from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
INTERNATIONAL IMMIGRANTS PARADE: Madison Avenue between 35th and 57th Streets, will be closed from 1 P.M. until completion.
WATER STREET FESTIVAL: Water Street between Fulton Street and Whitehall Street will be closed from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
West Street between 14th Street to the Battery will be closed from 6 P.M. to 2 A.M. for fireworks.


Madeleine Simon, Concert Pianist And Juilliard Teacher, Dies at 93
Madeleine Marshall Simon, a singing coach and concert pianist who taught English diction at the Juilliard School of Music for over half a century, died on Sunday at St.
Lukes-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from a heart attack, said her grandson, J. Kirby Simon.


Samuel Melton, 93, Retired Businessman And Philanthropist
Samuel M. Melton, a retired businessman who spent the first half of his adult life accumulating a fortune and the last half giving most of it away, died yesterday at his home in Columbus, Ohio.
He was 93.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Dow Slips by 5.54 Points in Heavy Trading
Stocks were mixed for the second consecutive trading session as the market drifted despite excitement in gold stocks.
Though some investors had apparently moved to the sidelines before today's release of unemployment numbers for June, trading volume was heavy.
The Dow Jones industrial average declined by 5.54 points, to 3,510.54.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks fell 1.51 points, to 449.02, and the Nasdaq composite dropped 0.36 point, to 703.59.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The German central bank lowered two key interest rates: the discount rate and the Lombard rate.
It was the fifth in a series of reductions that began in September.  [ Page D1. ]
Peter Sutherland became director general of GATT and said the core of a long-delayed world trade agreement must be hammered out at the summit meeting in Tokyo next week.  [ D1. ]


Student Loan Bill Fixes What Isn't Broken; Slower on Federal Role
To the Editor:
In an otherwise excellent article, you state inaccurately that "the national service program is designed to meet President Clinton's objectives of reducing interest rates on student loans by replacing banker intermediaries with Education Department administrators" ("Clinton Wins Key Votes on Plan for Service Tied to School Loans," front page, June 17).


Jersey City's Interim Mayor Is Sworn In for First Full Term
People just couldn't do or say enough about this city's future or its new Mayor today as Bret Schundler, a Democrat turned Republican, was sworn into his first full term.
The ceremony under flowing flags at Liberty State Park attracted a crowd that was a Who's Who of state politics -- testimony to the perception that the comparative political newcomer being inaugurated today could provide important support to those up for election later this year.


On My Mind; A Matter of Views
In the rooms at the State Department where Syrian and Israeli negotiators meet to talk about peace, the conversation often gets murky but the view remains perfectly clear: straight across six thousand miles to a narrow sliver of land high above the valleys below.
The view of the heights, and from the heights, are what the talks have been all about for the 20 months since they started.
Speeches and rumors -- now as always they mean nothing when Israeli and Arab negotiators sit down to talk, compared to kilometers between borders and meters above sea level.


Time Has Its Say: Novotna Upsets Navratilova
Dinosaurs may be in vogue, and at the advanced tennis age of 36 Martina Navratilova has borne the brunt of that allusion more than once while struggling to maintain her eminence in a sport that favors its female stars in bobby sox and pigtails.
Today, time had the final word.
In the year in which Wimbledon is celebrating the 100th anniversary of its ladies' championship, the nine-time champion won't be around to contest the final on her treasured Center Court domain.


COMPANY NEWS
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORPORATION, Newark, has completed the previously announced acquisition of eight branches of the Dime Savings Bank of New Jersey in Somerset.
STERLING SOFTWARE INC., Dallas, said its previously announced agreement to acquire Systems Center Inc. in a stock-for-stock transaction had been approved by shareholders of both companies.
The acquisition is valued at approximately $156 million.


G.M. Elevates Officials
Directors of the General Motors Corporation elected five corporate vice presidents to its automotive components group today.
The appointments are meant to underscore G.M.'s commitment to the divisions, said a spokeswoman, Toni Simonetti.
Those elected included Gerald L. Elson, 51, general manager of Inland Fisher Guide division, which manufactures instrument panels and seating parts; George G. Johnston, 61, general manger of Delco Chassis, which provides handling and braking systems; Rudolph A. Schlais Jr., 52, general manager of the Packard Electric division, which manufactures electronic components, and Jan E. Tannehill, 53, general manager of the AC Rochester division, which develops engine-management systems, including spark plugs.


HBO Grants Benefits to Staff's Same-Sex Partners
HBO, the television entertainment division of Time Warner Inc., began offering health insurance on a trial basis yesterday to the domestic partners of its gay and lesbian employees.
HBO made the move after considering it for a year, largely to bring gay and lesbian employee compensation into parity with that of heterosexual employees.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Joe McGinniss's forthcoming book about Senator Edward M. Kennedy referred imprecisely to the method used by William Manchester in arriving at some dialogue in his 1967 book "The Death of a President." Mr.
Manchester says he recreated dialogue on the basis of interviews with Kennedy family members and friends.


Training Harder
Westcott Communications produces training and educational programming, which it transmits via satellite to business and government clients.
Its stock fell sharply yesterday after an analyst lowered his 1993 earnings estimate.
But the analyst said the recent acquisition of Industrial Training Systems could improve earnings.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT and MRS.
CLINTON have decided not to take their daughter, CHELSEA, on their trip to Japan and Korea for a meeting of world economic leaders.
The Clintons will be in Japan on July 7, 8 and 9 and in South Korea on July 10 and 11.
"The President and First Lady are going to be on a tight schedule, and they would have very little time to spend together as a family," Lisa Caputo, Mrs.
Clinton's press secretary, said yesterday.


Denny's Parent Vows Larger Role for Blacks
Besieged by discrimination lawsuits, the parent company of Denny's restaurants announced a plan yesterday to give blacks a larger role in the company's management and to increase minority ownership of its franchises.
The plan resulted from months of negotiations between Flagstar Companies Inc., the parent of Denny's and three other restaurant chains, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Flagstar said it would provide $1 billion in jobs and benefits over seven years.


There's No Choice for Poor Women
Twenty years have passed since the Supreme Court decision in Roe v.
Wade, but millions of Americans still refuse to accept a woman's right to end an unwanted pregnancy.
Since abortion remains so divisive an issue, it's no surprise that Wednesday's House debate on the Hyde Amendment, which forbids Federal funding of the procedure, aroused a lot of heat.
The heat is pardonable; the words with which Representative Henry Hyde defended his legislation are not.
When Representative Cynthia McKinney described the amendment as "nothing but a discriminatory policy against poor women who happen to be disproportionately black," Mr.
Hyde threw the race card right back in her face.
"About those people that say the poor are discriminated against," he said, "you know what we do? We tell poor people: 'You can't have a job, you can't have a good education, you can't have a decent place to live. I will tell you what we will do. We will give you a free abortion because there are too many of you people and we want to refine, refine the breed.' "


CHRONICLE
MARY COURTNEY KENNEDY, 36, the fifth of Robert F. Kennedy's 11 children, has married PAUL MICHAEL HILL, 38, who is free on bail while appealing his conviction in the murder of a British soldier.
The wedding took place on Saturday aboard a ship in the Aegean Sea, according to a statement issued yesterday by MICHAEL KENNEDY, a brother of the bride.
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Kennedy described Mr.
Hill as "a human rights advocate who is involved in the issues of Northern Ireland."


Hotheads Need Not Apply to the Men's Final Four
The cooler heads will prevail when the top four men in the world do battle Friday in the semifinals at Wimbledon.
Form followed function as the top four seeded players advanced to the penultimate round for the first time since 1927, which also happens to be the first year that seedings, besides those involving grass, were sown.
Back in 1927, the names atop the purple-and-green marquee were Rene Lacoste, Bill Tilden, Jean Borotra and Henri Cochet.
This year they are no less impressive, and not only include the world's No. 1 player and the man he displaced at that spot, Americans both, but also feature two men who have collected five of the last eight championships on Center Court.


El Salvador Finally Removes Military Chiefs
After months of international pressure that included the freezing of United States military aid, President Alfredo Cristiani replaced his Defense Minister today and ordered a complete reorganization of the armed forces command.
The changes were required by the peace accords that last December formally ended this country's 12-year civil war.
Defense Minister Rene Emilio Ponce and many other top officers who entered retirement today were listed in a United Nations report for roles in atrocities during the war.


Thrills and Wet Spills, Bathing Suits Not Included
Six Flags Great Adventure
Exit 7A, New Jersey Turnpike, Jackson, N.J.; (908) 928-1821.


Lacking Pact, Albany Buys 3 More Days for Rent Law
Failing for the second time in 24 hours to compromise on proposals to change rent stabilization laws, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders agreed Thursday night to simply extended the existing laws for three more days.
The stalemate over the rent laws this week has virtually paralyzed the Legislature, which has yet to vote on major bills concerning the environment, hospital financing and mental health.


Teamsters Officials Face Extortion Charges
Federal prosecutors announced racketeering and extortion charges yesterday against five current and former Teamsters officials.
The five, including the current president and a former president of the most powerful construction industry union in the New York area, Local 282 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, were said to have worked with John Gotti and other leaders of the Gambino family of the Mafia to receive millions of dollars a year in illegal payoffs from construction companies.
They were accused of getting the payoffs, between the late 1970's and 1991, by threatening work stoppages and slowdowns and by allowing companies that made the payments to violate contract provisions.


At the Bar; To One Advocate, Environmental Law Begins With the Stationery.
The legal community has dabbled in environmentalism for some time.
Yellow legal pads are gradually giving way to white ones, Styrofoam cups to ceramic mugs and waste baskets to recycling bins.
But concerned ecologists say the bar has things backwards.
What matters even more than what lawyers consume in their offices is what they produce for outside consumption.
According to the American Bar Association Journal, each of the nation's 780,000 lawyers goes through an average of one ton of mostly virgin paper every year.
The Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund in San Francisco somehow calculated that California lawyers alone file 293,776,455 sheets of paper a year, enough to blanket all of Los Angeles County.


Art in Review
Larry Sultan
Janet Borden Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through next Friday
Like post-modern snapshots, Larry Sultan's photographs of his parents combine intimacy with an implicit social analysis.
Mr.
Sultan mixes photographs of his parents, now in their 70's, taken in their current home near Palm Springs, Calif., with blown-up family pictures from the 1950's.


Up to 30 Dismissed By Ayer in New York
Ayer Inc. said yesterday that it had dismissed 4 percent to 5 percent of the 600 workers at its New York office, or 24 to 30 people, as part of a continuing streamlining effort.
The layoffs were the most recent by a large agency as the industry slump continues.


Sounds Around Town
Zahn's New Selection
Sara Zahn, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
Ms.
Zahn's carefully constructed one-woman tributes to the Broadway songwriters Charles Strouse, Leonard Bernstein and Carolyn Leigh have earned her a reputation as one of New York's most discriminating cabaret performers.
In her new show at Michael's Pub, she has branched out to perform an array of standards by Cole Porter, the Gershwins, Jule Styne, Rodgers and Hart, Peter Allen, Jerry Herman and others.
She is accompanied by Ben Aronov on piano, Chip Jackson on bass and Ron Zito on drums.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
Shocked's Keen Vision
Michelle Shocked, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Ms.
Shocked writes wonderful anecdotal folk songs that capture the moment with an acuity that seems offhand.
She is also a superb storyteller and entertainer whose mixture of canniness and charm onstage suggest a younger, Texan cousin of Arlo Guthrie.
Almost everything she does, from singing Texan swing music (on her album "Captain Swing") to adapting traditional folk songs with her own lyrics (on her album "Arkansas Traveler") is done with savvy and a real passion for her musical roots.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Santiago at the Ballroom
Emilio Santiago, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
An interpreter, not a songwriter, Mr.
Santiago, who comes from Rio de Janeiro, suggests a younger, punchier Brazilian answer to Johnny Mathis.
In his New York engagement, he sings more than two dozen modern Brazilian songs arranged for a six-member band, in streamlined pop-samba arrangements that effectively set off his glowing baritone.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 P.M.
Tickets are $20 and $25, with a two-drink minimum.


Parties Play Budget Game By Different Sets of Rules
Call it the battle of the pie charts.
Having lost the budget battle in the Senate last week, the Republicans appear convinced that they will win the political war by using pie charts to argue that President Clinton's deficit-reduction plan would mean more than twice as much in tax increases as in spending cuts.


INSIDE
San Francisco Gunman Kills 8
A gunman who terrorized a high-rise building also wounded at least five others in a hail of bullets before he himself was killed.
Page A8. 4 Killed in Israeli Bus Attack
Two Palestinian gunmen opened fire aboard a bus in Jerusalem, and then hijacked a car.
Four people, including the hijackers, were killed.
Page A6.
I.N.S.
Plans to Detain Sheik
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, whose followers have been charged in two bombing conspiracies, is to be taken into custody, officials said.
Page B1.


Police Detail Confession of L.I. Murder Suspect
In their first detailed account of the confession of Joel Rifkin, the New York State police said today that it was hours into their interrogation before he hinted that he had killed many more women than the one found in the back of his pickup truck.
For hours after his arrest early Monday, Mr.
Rifkin sat in the state police barracks here, talking to a senior investigator, C. Thomas Capers, and others about that decomposing body, said Thomas A. Constantine, the superintendent of the state police.
The case seemed bizarre but not extraordinary.
In fact, investigators thought they were dealing with, as one top official put it, "just a one-person homicide."


Venice Journal; On Piazza, Merchants Appeal For Mercy
For many years, art and commerce have entwined in this watery city, whose people thrive on the prices outsiders can be prevailed upon to pay to tarry amid its beauties.
Suddenly, though, like gondolas awry in the morning mist, the two have collided.
The specific issue is this: Should 35 owners of stalls be permitted to peddle their wares from their barrows on the Piazza San Marco, thereby assuring themselves both a livelihood and a place in the posterity provided by hundreds of thousands of snapshots taken each year of pigeons, spires, domes, arcades and, inevitably, the peddlers themselves?


Difficulties Rise at Home for Mandela
As Nelson Mandela embarks on his optimism-building tour of America, he is not getting much help from the country he left behind.
First, while Mr.
Mandela was preparing to court American business, his chief economist went public with a proposal guaranteed to wrench executive stomachs: the next government, he says, should force all individuals and companies to hand over a share of everything they own here as a "reconstruction levy" to repair the injustices of apartheid.


DISPUTE IN ALBANY ERUPTS OVER FUNDS FOR MENTALLY ILL
As New York State closes underused psychiatric hospitals to cut costs, a major political struggle has developed in the Legislature to force Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to use much of the savings for community care for the mentally ill.
The fight goes to the heart of a dispute that began in the 1950's, when the advent of mood-leveling drugs allowed the state to begin emptying its massive psychiatric hospitals.
The state saved millions by reducing hospital beds for the mentally ill and has made significant increases in financing community care.
But mental health advocates charge that it has not redistributed a corresponding amount to community programs for those who were released from institutions.


Patient's Fatal Overdose Is Declared a Homicide
The death of an 83-year-old terminally ill woman at a Queens hospital three weeks ago was a homicide, caused by a massive overdose of morphine that was apparently administered by a doctor in what may be a rare case of euthanasia, medical authorities and law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
An autopsy by the city's Chief Medical Examiner found that the woman, Edna Conner, of 34-25 Linden Place in Flushing, died at the New York Hospital Medical Center of Queens on June 8 of acute morphine poisoning that was "intentionally administered intravenously in a homicide," said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's office.


Kuwaitis Back U.S. Missile Strike on Iraq Capital
The Clinton Administration's decision to fire missiles at Iraq's intelligence complex last weekend has been greeted warmly by Kuwaitis, for whom Iraq's guilt in an attempt to assassinate former President George Bush in April was never in doubt.
"It is part of the punishment that most people around here believe is well deserved by the Iraqi Government," said Fatma Hussein, editor of Samra, a publication concerned with women's issues in Kuwait.
"We hope there will be more."


Art in Review
Painting Invitational
Barbara Gladstone Gallery  100 Greene Street  SoHo  Through July 30
Compared with the relatively exuberant shows of cartoon-oriented painting with which several New York galleries are winding down the season, this group show of five young painters has the cool, clinical air of Conceptual correctness.
The precedents here are 1980's Pictures Art (especially Jack Goldstein), Gerhard Richter and Photo Realism; the appropriation of images is carefully self-referential.


Trade Pact Vital for Mexico's Leader
Jan. 1 has become a do-or-die date for President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico, and nothing -- not fence-sitting by American Congressmen, high Mexican interest rates or a United States judge's ruling that could threaten the North American Free Trade Agreement -- has weakened his pledge to have the pact in place on that day.
That stiff-necked attitude shows just how vital a role the accord plays in his attempt to transform Mexico.
In many ways, he has staked the judgment of history on timely approval of the agreement.


Foreigners Find a Place in the Sun
Question: When is a $6 million Miami condominium a bargain-basement steal?
Answer: When you're a foreigner looking for that second home hideaway.
At the exclusive and pricey Fisher Island, a picture-book luxury community on Biscayne Bay that is accessible only by air or water from mainland Miami, sales of condominiums to foreign buyers have skyrocketed.
About half the sales now are to foreigners, said John E. Riordan, the president of the island sales operation.


U.S. Mideast Paper Draws Criticism
The Israelis and the Palestinians today criticized an American draft paper that the Clinton Administration hopes will form the basis for agreement on principles for Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
"Israel is very displeased with the changes that appeared in the American proposal which was presented yesterday," Elyakim Rubenstein, the chief Israeli negotiator with the Palestinians, said as the 10th round of Middle East peace talks ended without any tangible progress.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Bill Doran, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent William Suero, infielder, to New Orleans of the American Association.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Optioned Jim Bullinger, pitcher, to Iowa of the American Association.
Activated Greg Hibbard, pitcher, from 15-day disabled list.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Jamey Wright, pitcher.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jeff Tam, pitcher; James Dorsey, outfielder, and Dave Maize, catcher.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Fired Rick Cerrone, vice president of public relations, and Douglas L. Bureman, senior vice president of business operations.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Signed Terry Clark, pitcher, and assigned him to Rancho Cucamonga of the California League.
Basketball National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Signed Danny Manning, forward, to a one-year contract.
Football National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Wayne Simmons, linebacker, to a four-year contract, and Mark Brunell, quarterback.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Re-signed Stephen Braggs, cornerback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Matt Bahr, placekicker, and Lamar McGriggs, safety.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Daron Alcorn, placekicker.
Hockey National Hockey League  NHL -- Named Gil Stein special adviser to the commissioner.
BOSTON BRUINS -- Signed John Blue, goaltender, to a two-year contract.
DALLAS STARS -- Signed Mike McPhee, Brent Gilchrist and Reid Simpson, forwards.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Agreed to terms with Al Arbour, coach.
Auto racing NASCAR -- Suspended Ken Schrader, driver, and Joe Hendrick, owner, for four races for mechanical improprieties.
Soccer American Professional Soccer League  FORT LAUDERDALE STRIKERS -- Signed Patrick Tardien, forward, for the remainder of the 1993 season.
College  BALL STATE -- Named Lynn Mitchem, Larry Davis and Chris Theobald, men's assistant basketball coaches.
BUFFALO -- Named Frank Valenti, Ron Torgalski and Tony Jones, men's assistant basketball coaches.


Sports of The Times; Next Waves Pounding Navratilova
THERE was already a faint summer-vacation feel to the place since the squeals for Barbra and Andre died down on Wednesday.
Jimbo doesn't come around any more.
Junior is only a voice on the tube.
Seles is still injured from that hideous stabbing.
Tennis, even Wimbledon, needs all the mystique it can get.
It still needs the old lady who waved a defiant forefinger in the air after being bluntly dispatched by Jana Novotna, 6-4, 6-4, in the semifinals yesterday.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE WAKING DREAM: PHOTOGRAPHY'S FIRST CENTURY," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Selections from the Gilman Paper Company collection of works from 1839 to 1939.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly; children under 12 free.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


A Hard Look at Young's Plight: It Isn't All Bad Luck
Anthony Young has remained oddly anonymous through all of his recent fame.
He has been chronicled.
He has not been explained very much.
And an 0-24 run of bad luck and bad performances could probably use some explication.
The questions are as obvious as they are awkward to pose, and the list begins with the long overdue inquiry: What is Young still doing in the major leagues?
Yes, the supply of pitching in baseball in 1993 is arrestingly thin.
Yes, it has been kind of noble of the Mets to keep giving Young the baseball.


The Driest Wines (and the Drollest) Are in the Museum
INTOXICATING dry wine in open bottles, stoppered decanters and goblets lies within easy grasp throughout the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
This wine, mainly European and American, never spills or ages.
It is a blend of the painter's palate and palette.
The canvases in many galleries reward a wine lover's single-minded search for wine themes in the Met.
Literal and symbolic, these motifs are central and incidental to depictions of life and the afterlife.
Some take on fuller dimensions in marble, bronze, lead, earthenware and plaster.


Argentine Charged in Marseilles Case
JORGE BURRUCHAGA, who helped Argentina win the World Cup in 1986 in Mexico, was charged yesterday in connection with accusations that European Cup champion Olympique Marseilles offered bribes to players on an opposing French club.


Restrictions Levied on Luring Business
Legislative leaders agreed today to a measure that would restrict the lengths to which New York cities and counties can go to attract new jobs and retain companies that are being lured by other states.
Saying they were troubled by the courting tactics of some municipalities, the bill's sponsors said they hoped to rein in the local industrial development agencies that broker such deals.
The measure would subject the agencies to stricter monitoring and place conditions on some of the incentives that they are permitted to offer, like sales-tax exemptions.


Ewing Assists McDonald's Tournament
Knicks center PATRICK EWING announced yesterday that he will be the honorary commissioner of the McDonald's Twilight Summer Basketball Tournament, a six-week tournament for high school youths in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


In Latest Shakeup, Empire Names Former MetLife Executive as Chairman
Turning for help to its for-profit competitors, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield yesterday named its third chairman and chief executive in as many months.
He is Philip Briggs, a former executive of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
Mr.
Briggs, who is 65 years old, retired in March from his position as vice chairman of Metropolitan Life's board of directors.
He will be Empire's first chief executive in decades with experience at a for-profit insurance company.


Luckily, Birds Don't Have Sense of Smell
To the Editor:
Re "Birds With Attitude" (Topics of The Times, June 22): As a volunteer teacher-naturalist at Westport's Nature Center for Environmental Activities, I say three cheers to the considerate humans who are allowing birds to nest undisturbed on a roof in a Peegee hydrangea tree.


Dudley's Up for Grabs And Open To Offers
Chris Dudley was at home in southern California yesterday morning, waiting for a telephone call from his agent to find out how rich a man he can expect to be.
After the agent, Dan Fegan, checked in, Dudley had this to say regarding his anticipated departure from the Nets as an unrestricted free agent:
"I don't think anything's going to happen for a little while. Not today, anyway."


Corrections
Because of a production error, a report in the Currents column of The Home Section yesterday about a preview gala this Saturday at the Southampton show house misstated the cost of a ticket.
It is $150, not $15.


Republicans Kill Measure On Gay Rights
The Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, and his Republican colleagues tonight killed legislation to guarantee civil rights to homosexuals by refusing to allow a vote on the bill by the full Senate.
After a nearly two-hour discussion with his members behind closed doors, Mr.
Marino said "the vast majority" of the 35 Senate Republicans opposed putting the gay-rights bill on the floor.
"I am thoroughly convinced that my conference doesn't want to have this bill passed and therefore it will not see it to the floor," said Mr.
Marino, who is from Oyster Bay, L.I.


Night of Unrest Follows Death of Robbery Suspect
The shooting death of a 21-year-old black man after he was trapped in an alley by the police early Thursday touched off a night of shooting and bottle and rock throwing in a predominantly black South Norwalk neighborhood.
The man, Keith Sumpter of South Norwalk, died of a gunshot wound early Thursday morning after seven police officers chased him into an alley.
Police officials said that after exchanging fire with pursuing officers, one of whom is black, he put a 9-millimeter pistol to his temple and killed himself.
They said Mr.
Sumpter fit a description of a robbery suspect.
Family Skeptical
Despite a preliminary autopsy ruling by the Office of the Chief State's Medical Examiner Thursday that Mr.
Sumpter's death was a suicide, members of his family and community leaders are not convinced.


Beneficiaries Complain Of Rules and High Fees
WHEN John Brewer died 10 years ago, he left $250,000 for his wife in trust, naming the local bank as trustee.
His widow, Elizabeth, soon became frustrated with the trustee's high fees and inflexibility.
When she wanted to buy a new home, the bank refused to let her pledge the trust money as collateral.
"I found I had very little control over the decisions of the trustees," recalled Ms.
Brewer, who is 62 and lives in suburban Philadelphia.
Although prohibited by law from switching trustees, she discovered last year that she could take out a small portion of the principal periodically.
She is removing $5,000 annually, the maximum permitted, and placing it in mutual funds of her own choosing.
"I was determined to regain some control," she said.
Across the nation, beneficiaries like Mrs.
Brewer have begun to fight for their rights after losing trust, as it were, in their trustees.
They are complaining about trustees who are inflexible, charge steep fees and produce poor investment results.
In addition, they are seeking the right to move their trusts to other institutions, not now allowed in most states unless egregious acts can be proved or the trust document specifically permits the change.
The movement partly reflects the increasing number of trust beneficiaries.
The Internal Revenue Service reports that 2.88 million personal trusts filed tax returns in 1992, almost 50 percent more than the 1.96 million trusts recorded a decade earlier.
For several reasons, including the increase in home values in the 1980's, more people are looking to trusts to trim inheritance taxes.
The Federal Reserve says the average personal trust totaled $660,000 in 1992, far below the multimillion-dollar level associated with patrician wealth.
The best time for beneficiaries to win more power is when the trust is drawn up.
Tax issues and provisions to prevent beneficiaries from squandering their money tend to dominate this discussion, said Robert Whitman, professor of law at the University of Connecticut and the chairman of a committee on trust and probate law at the American Bar Association.
On Aug. 10, the American Bar Association plans to take up legal reform for trust beneficiaries at its annual convention in New York in a session led by Dr.
Whitman.
"Too often beneficiary rights are ignored," he said,
If a trust is already in place, a lawyer can review the document to see if there is any flexibility in managing and distributing the assets.
In terms of performance and fees, the best way to monitor the trustee is to dissect the trust statements.
Unsatisfactory performance or incomplete information should be brought to the trustee's attention.
For their part, banks say that they are often hamstrung by the grantor's requirements and that their administrative costs have risen considerably.
Trustees who resist change might be swayed by an outsider.
Consider hiring a financial adviser to press your case with the trustee, advised Tracy Gary, who founded Resourceful Women of San Francisco, a 10-year-old association for women beneficiaries whose programs are being copied in 10 other cities.
If a trustee is not responsive, beneficiaries may want to consider a legal challenge.
Two people associated with Heirs, a group for beneficiaries founded two years ago in Villanova, Pa., have sued the Mellon Bank, calling its trust fees exorbitant.
"Their fees kept going up and up and my income kept decreasing," said John Upp of Cecilton, Md., who sought relief in the suit.
Mellon, which won an appeal, has denied any wrongdoing in the case, now scheduled for a rehearing.
Heirs has since taken aim at four other banks.
And some 25 members of Resourceful Women are taking their institutional trustees to court.


Pope Issues Censure Of 'Nature Worship' Among U.S. Women
Pope John Paul II urged American bishops today to combat what he termed a "bitter, ideological" feminism among some American Catholic women, which he said had led to "forms of nature worship and the celebration of myths and symbols" usurping traditional celebrations of the Christian faith.
The Pope's remarks were directed at small feminist fringe groups that have achieved some prominence in the United States, where they worship an earth goddess or "Mother Earth" and represent what church leaders have said is an extreme departure from normal liturgical practice.


Look Harder for a Schools Chief
New York City's Board of Education is apparently ready to anoint Dr.
Bernard Gifford as the next Schools Chancellor.
It has given him another 30 days to untangle some business affairs.
But the board should seize this extra time and seriously comb the field for other candidates.
Dr.
Gifford's business dealings may prove too complicated to unravel and his on-, off- and on-again candidacy raises serious questions about his commitment.
After three months of culling through more than 100 names, a search committee identified Dr.
Gifford and two other educators as the top finalists to succeed Joseph Fernandez, who was forced out when a warring board voted 4 to 3 against renewing his contract.
The other two candidates -- Waldemar (Bill) Rojas, Superintendent of Schools in San Francisco and Gerald Tirozzi, a highly regarded former State Education Commissioner in Connecticut -- ostensibly remain in contention.


R. T. Gatchell, 50; Produced Musicals For Lloyd Webber
R.
Tyler Gatchell Jr., a theatrical general manager and producer long associated with the musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber, died on Thursday en route to Kennedy International Airport.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said his companion, Mark Shannon.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.27
3.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.97
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.09
3.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.38
5.41
6.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.663
6.68
7.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.40
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.72
5.72
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Yankees Go West And Down to Defeat
Bob Wickman has another burgeoning streak going.
The Yankee pitcher had won 11 adventuresome games in a row from last season before going to Baltimore last weekend, but he was bombed there and took a nasty fall again tonight to the Oakland A's, 4-3.
Unnerved perhaps by Dion James throwing error, which hit Ruben Sierra's elbow instead of third baseman Wade Boggs's glove, Wickman's subsequent pitch in the sixth inning was hammered over the right-field fence by Oakland's Terry Steinbach for the winning run.


F.C.C. Lets TV-Shopping Stations Demand Access to Slots on Cable
The Federal Communications Commission voted 2 to 1 today to give television stations devoted to round-the-clock shopping the same right as regular broadcasters to demand that cable television systems carry their programs.
The decision is a windfall for the Home Shopping Network, which pioneered the all-shopping format and is carried on a number of cable systems.
The network also broadcasts by satellite to about 100 small stations around the country.
Those stations, often situated just outside big cities, will enjoy a much broader reach if they are carried on cable.


Observer; Busby Goes Berserk
What passes for violence in television and movies usually isn't.
It is merely entertainment.
This is why TV and movie executives sound so fraudulent when issuing the usual pieties about the creative artist's need for maimings and slaughter.
Cautioning the TV audience that the next show may be unhealthy for children is no concession at all from industries that treat casual butchery as the modern way of doing the old Busby Berkeley musical.


Corrections
A secondary headline for a dance review on Wednesday about the fourth New York International Ballet Competition misstated Hillary Rodham Clinton's role.
Mrs.
Clinton was honorary chairwoman of the event, held at Alice Tully Hall in Lincoln Center, but did not attend.


In Brooklyn, Guarded Optimism
Inside the small offices of the Caribbean Air Mail on Church Avenue in Brooklyn, a constant flow of Haitians poured in and lined up yesterday, waiting to wire money to relatives in Haiti.
During these often long waits at the Haitian version of a Western Union, the conversation usually consists of pleasantries about the family back home and the difficult economic times.


2 Japanese Aides Admit Seeking Donations
In another setback to Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party, two members of the Japanese Cabinet admitted today that they have been seeking political donations from companies they regulate.
Finance Minister Yoshiro Hayashi sought donations from banks and insurance companies, and Construction Minister Kishiro Nakamura asked for support from contractors.
Each insisted that he had done nothing wrong.
It is unclear whether any laws have been broken.
Still, the revelations are likely to fuel demands for reforms to limit the influence of money in Japanese politics.


Corrections
A pop music review on Thursday about a performance by Tom Ze, a Brazilian singer and songwriter, in Central Park misstated the date of his next appearance in New York City.
It is next Saturday at S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street.


No Headline
"The river won't stop coming, and people are really getting frustrated and depressed. I've seen a lot of eyes filled with tears." -- PAUL ARNOLD, flood coordinator in Grafton, Ill.  [ 5:1. ]


Marseilles Official Arrested
The general manager of the Olympique Marseilles club was arrested yesterday and detained for questioning about bribery accusations that have tainted the French team's European club championship title.


Falcons Close In on Dickerson
The Falcons said last night that they have reached "tentative agreement" on financial terms with running back ERIC DICKERSON and were working on a deal with the Los Angeles Raiders that would bring him to Atlanta.
"I think we've got it worked out," said JIM HAY, the Falcons' vice president for finance, referring to the salary arrangements.
"We've got a tentative agreement with his agent, MARVIN DEMOFF." The agreement was believed to be $1.3 million for a one-year contract.


U.S. Detains Cleric Linked to Militants
Surrounded by chanting supporters, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Islamic fundamentalist whose followers have been linked to two bombing conspiracies, emerged from a Brooklyn mosque and surrendered to Federal authorities last night, ending a months-long Federal debate over the danger he posed as a free man.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman walked on the arm of his lawyer shortly after 6 P.M. from the Abu Bakr Elseddique mosque across the street to a firehouse that had become a Federal command post, after a day of negotiations over his detention on immigration charges.
He was greeted cordially by Federal agents and lightly frisked.


Foster Care's Horrors Argue for Intact Families; No Quick Fixes
To the Editor:
People are always looking for a quick fix to the serious problem of abused children.
Today the notion that families must be preserved at all costs is either being hailed as the new solution or attacked as dangerous to the child, as in "Family Preservation and Its Victims" (Op-Ed, June 19).
In the late 1970's the answer was adoption.
Before that it was foster care.
The truth is there is no quick fix.
The only way to protect the rights of children is to have a child welfare system that has properly trained staff, with a range of options to deal with each individual child's case.


New Citizens Take Oath in Spanish-Language Ceremony


Foster Care's Horrors Argue for Intact Families; Assault on the Poor
To the Editor:
The cleverness of Patrick T. Murphy's challenge to pending Federal family preservation legislation (Op-Ed, June 19) masks an insensitive assault on poor families who struggle to contend with inadequate housing, insufficient employment opportunities and the unavailability of decent child care.
As Mr.
Murphy has done repeatedly in Illinois, he argues from a handful of horror stories about families who have brutalized their children, concluding that family preservation dollars spent on parents charged with neglecting or abusing their children is wasted money.
Yet Mr.
Murphy's tales bear little resemblance to the vast majority of families who face state intervention based on charges that they have failed to take proper care of their children.
Most of the parents who populate the halls of our country's juvenile courts are not child abusers, but individuals who have been charged with "inadequate supervision" or "environmental neglect," and who have fallen short of society's high standards in their struggle to feed, clothe and house their families on pitifully inadequate resources.


Review/Dance; Taking an Idea and Leaping With It
"Bedtime Stories" and "A Portrait" are the final premieres that Pilobolus Dance Theater is presenting during its current season at the Joyce Theater.
Like most of its new works in recent years, these need an editor in residence.
Every dance troupe goes through a bad patch, but Pilobolus is in a special situation, being cursed as well as blessed with the idea of collective creativity.
Choreography by consensus has been its hallmark, with uneven results, although the original wit and freshness that shot the troupe to prominence and popularity were never in doubt.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Assigned Kelly Wunsch, pitcher, to the Beloit Brewers of the Midwest League and Pat Fetty, pitcher, to Stockton of the California League.


Istanbul Journal; Turks Espouse Change (She Has a 'Smile of Steel')
Her family's wealth is said to total some $50 million.
Her clothes are designer-chic and her command of languages makes her just as at home in Munich or Maine as on the Sea of Marmara.
That is to say, even if she had not just become the first woman to be Turkey's Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller would be a defining emblem of what unabashed success means in a land that has propelled itself in a decade from military rule to free-market riches -- a boom that has restated Turkey's claim for acknowledgement as a worthy partner of the West.


Down on the Farm, With Russians
The average tourist driving through the Midwest might not notice neatly trimmed farmhouse lawns, but along with spotless cheese factories, high-tech tractors and standard pickup trucks, such details can be inspiring to Russian farmers.
The sights are the hallmarks of a life style that gives people a far larger personal stake in their homes and workplaces than residents of the collective farms in Russia have.
And the American life style -- not incidentally -- tends to be far more productive and attentive to the little things, like the way a home looks.


Giuliani's Strategy: Don't Give Dinkins a Target
For weeks, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, has given speeches ringing with an image of a new New York City, a place transformed by tough decisions, major reforms and fundamental change.
"The next mayor of New York is going to have to smash up the way in which we practice politics and we do business in this city," he announced at the City Club in May.
Absent that, he warned, "This city is going to continue to deteriorate economically. It's going to continue to deteriorate financially. It's going to continue to deteriorate morally."


Review/Jazz; Happily Rooted in the Past
Blue Brass Connection, which is performing through tomorrow at Sweet Basil (88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village) is an octet of musicians whose hearts are in the demanding jazz of the mid-1960's.
Most of the players are middle-aged journeymen who never had to join the current hard-bop revival because they never left the style behind; they're steeped in modal vamps, rugged melodies and extended harmonies.
The group's first set on Tuesday night was a blowing session on compositions by two of its members (the saxophonists John Stubblefield and John Purcell) and by others, spanning the hard-bop spectrum from altered blues to asymmetrical sprints to a growling, bluesy reworking of "Que Sera Sera" featuring Ray Anderson on trombone, who could sound simultaneously clownish and heartfelt.


METRO DIGEST
CLERIC LINKED TO BOMB PLOT SURRENDERS  Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a Moslem fundamentalist preacher whose followers have been among those arrested in the bombing at the World Trade Center and a plot to blow up four targets in New York City surrendered to Federal authorities outside a Midwood, Brooklyn, mosque.
Page 1.


Review/Music; Bach Recital Proves Power Of a von Beckerath Organ
There are some magnificent church organs in New York City, and although many of them are taken for granted, the recent installation of a new organ at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola has reminded concertgoers what magical, complicated instruments these can be.
There is another fine organ, built by Rudolf von Beckerath in 1967, at St.
Michael's Church on Amsterdam Avenue at 99th Street, and on Wednesday evening the church presented the first in a series of "Bach on the von Beckerath" concerts.
The concerts are benefits for the organ itself: although it sounds healthy and is said to be showing no strain, the church's music office has prudently arranged for a maintenance overhaul in October 1994.
The organ will be dismantled, cleaned, regulated and restored, a process that will take 10 weeks and will cost about $80,000.
Proceeds from concerts to be presented over the next year will go toward the renovation.


Some Searing Criticism Of Foreign Bond Funds
THE P.R. guy at the table was twitching, but Nicholas Bratt pressed ahead with his argument that the benefits of investing abroad come only from stocks.
Foreign bonds?
"I think they are speculative," said the star manager of the Scudder International Fund, with a percussive British accent on the last word.
The P.R. guy interjected that Scudder happens to have a top-performing international bond fund -- with just over $1 billlion, by far the most popular no-load fund in its category.
No matter.
Mr.
Bratt insisted that only stocks compensate for currency risk by letting investors benefit from rising corporate earnings.
"You get bailed out in equities, not bonds," he said.


Corning Wins in Bidding for Lab Company
National Health Laboratories declined today to sweeten its takeover offer for the Damon Corporation, ending up the loser in a bidding contest with its rival, Corning Inc., which will strengthen its position in the blood-testing industry.
With National Health taking itself out of the competition, Corning said it would begin its $23-a-share offer in the next few days for 16.1 million Damon shares.
Damon, based in Needham Heights, Mass., operates 12 labs in the United States and one in Mexico City.


Canseco Finished for the Year
First, it was the old ball-off-the-head trick for Texas Rangers right fielder JOSE CANSECO.
Then, he pitched.
As it turns out, the pitching was a lot more painful.
Canseco said Thursday that he is out for the season because of a torn ligament in his right elbow, which he injured during the May 29 pitching performance in Boston.
After an examination by the orthopedist Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS, who recommended surgery, he also didn't rule out the possibility that his playing days were over.


Correction
In early editions of yesterday's paper, an editorial criticizing the Pentagon referred incorrectly to the status of the B-1B bomber.
It should have read: "A series of malfunctions has grounded them from time to time."


A 'No' for Libyan Athletes
Libyans are generally unwelcome in the United States because of their Government's alleged support of terrorism.
And Libyan athletes, it appears, are no exception.
The Clinton Administration is planning to reject an application by a team of Libyans to compete in the World University Games in Buffalo next week, Administration officials said Thursday.
The officials spoke on condition they not be named.


U.S. Judge Weighs Retrial Of New Yorker Libel Case
A Federal judge has begun weighing whether to retry the entire libel case between Jeffrey M. Masson and Janet Malcolm, the writer for The New Yorker magazine, or whether to revisit only the issue of monetary damages for Mr.
Masson, the renegade Freudian scholar who won a vindication of sorts from a jury here last month.
That eight-member jury, after three weeks of often titillating testimony, found that the writer had fabricated five defamatory quotations in her 1983 series of articles about Mr.
Masson and that two of those quotations were libelous.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a discount to be offered by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company for collect calls on July 4 misstated the amount of the discount.
It will be about 25 percent.


N.F.L. Upholds Marshall's Pact
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue cleared the way yesterday for Wilber Marshall to play for the Oilers this National Football League season by upholding the contract the All-Pro linebacker agreed to with Houston a month ago.
Marshall will be paid $2.75 million by the Oilers for 1993 and will receive another $150,000 from the Washington Redskins for agreeing to be traded.


Interior Secretary Pushes Forest Plan in the Northwest


For Divorced Women, It Pays to Know All About Social Security Benefits
Older women who have been divorced for many years may not be taking full advantage of their Social Security benefits.
Divorced women generally can collect the spousal portion of their former husband's Social Security pension if the marriage lasted 10 years and the divorce is at least two years old.


Jazz Festival Started in Newport as One Couple's Dream
To the Editor:
Your coverage of New York City's JVC Jazz Festival has twice inaccurately identified the founder of the Newport Jazz Festival as George Wein.
Not so.
In 1953 my parents, Elaine and Louis Lorillard, had a dream of starting a jazz festival in Newport, R.I., where they lived.
They came to New York to ask Eddie Condon if he would work on the project, but he turned them down.
They spoke to the influential jazz record producer John Hammond.
He suggested Mr.
Wein, who was connected with the Boston jazz club Storyville.


Religion Notes
'Cycles of Violence'
While public opinion polls show that Americans were solidly behind President Clinton's decision for a missile attack on Iraq last weekend, the nation's major Christian ecumenical group this week registered its strong opposition to the strike.
In a letter to President Clinton, the group, the National Council of Churches, said the attack continued the "past cycles of violence, of attack and retaliation."


There Were Once Three Statues of Diana
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Diana in Philadelphia" (letter, June 19), the original Augustus Saint-Gaudens's statue of Diana, which once stood above Madison Square Garden, is not in Philadelphia.
The first Diana premiered in October 1891; at a height of 18 feet, it was deemed disproportionately large for the building and removed the next year.
A 13-foot version was placed atop the Stanford White building in 1893 and remained until 1925, when it was removed to a Brooklyn warehouse at the Garden's demolition.
That is the one ultimately acquired by the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
The fate of the original, larger Diana is not known.
It was apparently last exhibited in 1909 at a Chicago retrospective of Saint-Gaudens.


Haitian's React to News With Caution
The news of an accord leading to the restoration of the deposed President of Haiti, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was greeted in the Haitian capital today with a mix of optimism and sheer disbelief.
Father Aristide's critics pronounced themselves happy with the news from New York, where representatives of the Haitian military leadership were gathered with Aristide aides and United Nations mediators.
But the Aristide critics were quick to warn the toppled leader that there could be no repeat of the divisive invective he is accused of using.


Help for the Mentally Ill
Once again the well-being of the mentally ill is in political jeopardy.
The issue in Albany is an old one: how to make sure that patients are released from wasteful psychiatric hospitals and given community care instead.
The Assembly and Senate have agreed on a bill to empty hospital beds and reinvest in community services.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo initially said he would veto the bill because he wanted more of the savings for the state budget.
But the Governor now says that if the Legislature closes hospitals, rather than just reduces the number of patients in them, he would agree to apply the savings to community services.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENTURA BANKS INC., Rocky Mountain, N.C., announced it would acquire Canton Savings Bank upon approval of regulators and Canton's shareholders.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENTURA BANKS INC., Rocky Mountain, N.C., announced it would acquire Canton Savings Bank upon approval of regulators and Canton's shareholders.


Fred Gwynne, Popular Actor, Is Dead at 66
Fred Gwynne, an actor who had a diverse career but was best known for his portrayal of Herman Munster in the hit series "The Munsters," died yesterday at his home.
He was 66 and lived on a farm near Taneytown, Md.
The cause was complications of pancreatic cancer, a family spokesman said.


Inside Baseball: Insurers' Terms
BENEFIT PERIOD The period for which payments will be made.
Coverage varies from a few years to age 65 to a lifetime (the last a very expensive option).
FUTURE INCREASE OPTION The option to buy more coverage in the future without additional medical tests.


Dow Starts the Holiday With a Fizzle, Off 26.57
With many investors fleeing early in hopes of a long sunny weekend, and with those who stayed feeling the chill of wan employment figures, the Dow Jones industrial average drooped to its lowest level of the week yesterday in moderately heavy trading.
After a last-gasp rally gasped its last, the Dow finished the day down 26.57 points at 3,483.97 -- disquieting perhaps, but only 6.92 points below the previous Friday's close of 3,490.89.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks dropped 3.18 points, to 445.84, while the Nasdaq composite eked out a gain of 0.90, to 704.49.
The American Stock Exchange composite finished down 0.60 at 435.27.


Arboretum Concert
The Mostly Mozart Orchestra is to open the Friends of the Arts' Summer Festival tonight at 8 in the Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay, L. I.  With Gerard Schwarz conducting, the orchestra is to play Mozart's Symphony No. 4 and Violin Concerto No. 3 (Joshua Bell, soloist), Richard Strauss's Serenade for Winds and Mendelssohn's Symphony No. 4.
Tickets are $20 to $35.
Information: (516) 922-0061.


Strawberry's Fall From Grace, Chapter 2
Darryl Strawberry's reputation, which usually precedes him, finally arrived here last week.
It must have traveled by stagecoach, considering he bolted New York three years ago, but the dour, noncommunicative and clandestine side of Strawberry at last showed up at Dodger Stadium.
Strawberry's off-the-field troubles started June 26, when he showed up at the ball park for an afternoon game just in time for the seventh-inning stretch.
He had been on the disabled list, his home away from home, for six days, but was not permitted to set his own hours. (The Dodgers, who pay Strawberry $19,230.76 a day, keep him on a figurative time clock.)


Bleak House: Plan to Use a Hotel for Homeless Is Still Stymied
After spending more than $25 million and five years trying to transform a bleak former rooming house on 42d Street into a model residence for homeless adults, the city is trying again to rid itself of the still-empty property.
Hearings start on July 12 on a proposed sale of the building, the former Holland Hotel, to Manhattan Bowery Corporation, a nonprofit social services organization that promises to operate the hotel for single homeless people.


The Arts Forward Fund Names Grant Recipients
More than two dozen arts organizations in New York City are to receive grants totaling about $1 million from the Arts Forward Fund, a consortium of 36 private and corporate donors.
The support is for new creative projects that are expected to have a significant impact on the long-term financial stability of the city's cultural institutions.


Oil Prices Fall on Speculation About Iraqi Exports
Oil prices tumbled yesterday to the lowest level since before the Persian Gulf war 30 months ago as traders, reacting to comments by an American official, speculated that a ban on Iraqi crude oil exports might soon be lifted.
The August futures contract for domestic crude fell 50 cents, to $17.95 a barrel, on the New York Mercantile Exchange, after the United States delegate to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, told reporters in Geneva that the United States would not object to a resumption of Iraqi exports if Iraq met United Nations conditions when Iraqi and United Nations officials meet on Wednesday.
A Long-Held U.S.
Position
Although her comments reflected a long-held American position and she said the oil proceeds could be used only for humanitarian purposes approved by the United Nations, traders speculated that a resumption of exports was imminent.
They cited the fact that her comments came five days after American missiles severely damaged Saddam Hussein's military intelligence center in Baghdad.


Negotiating New York In a Soundless Vacuum
ALAN Barwiolek is an angry deaf person.
He is angry about waiters who ask people dining with him what he wants to order as if he were not there, angry about illiterate cab drivers who cannot read addresses on the notes he writes, angry about people who think he can hear if they shout, angry about people who tell him to read their lips, angry about dozens of things, little and big, that happen to him every day.


Review/Pop; Jefferson Starship, Reassembled for the 90's
It has happened several times before.
Whenever the loosely knit agglomeration of San Francisco musicians that has called itself Jefferson Airplane and Jefferson Starship at various times, seems on the verge of dissolution, a vestigial community spirit reasserts itself.
The latest version of the group to convene, this time as Jefferson Starship, arrived at the Beacon Theater on Thursday evening with several new songs and an air of optimism.
In what is billed as the "Deep Space 1993" tour, the reconstituted group, led by the singer and guitarist Paul Kanter, has eight members, including two longtime associates, Jack Casady on bass and Papa John Creach on electric violin.
Darby Gould, who sounds like a softer-edged Buffy Sainte-Marie, sings Grace Slick's parts.
This edition's biggest selling point is Marty Balin, the singer and songwriter, who is performing with the group for the first time in four years.


Croats and Serbs Strike Town, Cutting Off Muslims
Bosnian Croat infantrymen backed by Serbian tanks reportedly cut off some 100,000 mostly Muslim civilians today, United Nations officials said.
The new Serbian-Croatian alliance proved decisive in the attack, which overran the town of Zepce.
The mostly Muslim Bosnian Army expelled Croatian forces from the town just days ago in a one-on-one showdown.


Foster Care's Horrors Argue for Intact Families
To the Editor:
For every horror story Patrick Murphy cites in "Family Preservation and Its Victims" (Op-Ed, June 19), I can give 10 examples of the horrors of his preference: continued overreliance on foster care.
Eighteen-month-old Sara Eyerman was taken from her mother in California because child welfare authorities thought she wasn't growing fast enough.
Six weeks later, she was dead of viral pneumonia because those same authorities ignored her 104-degree fever for two days.


Sports of The Times; Young Yanks Shut Down The Locals
BAD day for the European Community.
Those Yanks, those crude and violent Yanks, are advancing.
Those civilized champions from the Old World are falling by the wayside.
Much will be made in Britain that on the Fourth of July there will be two Yanks in the Wimbledon singles final.
One of them is Pete Sampras, who fired a tennis ball into the stratosphere earlier this week to say a warm and fuzzy and vulgar farewell to the obscurity of Court 14.
The other Yank is Jim Courier, who fires off the odd obscenity in public and kicked a tennis ball like a soccer midfielder and yesterday offered to do a little "one-on-one interview" with a persistent questioner.


Attackers of Bus Sought Hostages, Israel Says
The Israeli police said today that two Palestinian terrorists who attacked a commuter bus in Jerusalem on Thursday apparently had intended to take the passengers hostage, but instead opened fire and tried to escape when the bus driver struggled with them.
Two Israeli women and both gunmen died in the incident.


3,000 Miles of Practice
A fleet of nine yachts is expected to set sail from New York Harbor today on a 3,000-mile trans-Atlantic race to England.
But for three of the sailboats, the competition doesn't begin in earnest until they arrive in Europe.
All three boats are 60-footers.
They include Winston, whose skipper, Dennis Conner, is a veteran America's Cup helmsman from San Diego; the United States Women's Challenge, helmed by Nance Frank, of Annapolis, Md., and Dolphin, a British boat with Ian MacDonald Smith as skipper.


The Broker Who Killed 8: Gunman's Motives a Puzzle
He appeared to be a portly middle-aged professional carrying an attache case and wheeling a lawyer's case on a dolly.
But when he stepped into the law offices on the 34th floor of a downtown office building here, he shed his jacket, donned a pair of orange ear protectors and went to battle with three semi-automatic pistols.
The question today in San Francisco was what drove the gunman, identified as Gian Luigi Ferri of Los Angeles, into a murderous spree on Thursday afternoon in which he killed eight people, wounded six others and then ended his own life with a bullet from a .45-caliber Colt placed under his chin.


Bonneville, Citing Drought, Lifts Power Rate 15.6%
Announcing details of a rate increase that has been dreaded throughout the Pacific Northwest, the Bonneville Power Administration said today that it would raise rates by 15.6 percent on Oct. 1.
Earlier this spring, Randy Hardy, Bonneville's administrator, warned that the increase might be as high as 24 percent.


I.B.M. Facing More Decisions on Cutbacks
I.B.M. is planning to take a charge against second-quarter earnings of roughly $2 billion to pay for the costs of trimming its payroll by another 50,000 or so workers, according to consultants and I.B.M. officials.
The big charge, though in line with projections made recently by financial analysts, means I.B.M.'s board will face a tough decision about whether to cut the dividend again.
The International Business Machines Corporation's directors are scheduled to meet on July 27.


Clinton Proposes to Soften the Blow of Base Closings
In an effort to cushion the economic blow to communities suffering military base closings, President Clinton today announced a package of proposals to speed and increase assistance to scores of affected areas.
Mr.
Clinton's plan, a combination of existing programs and new proposals that would require Congressional approval, was announced by the President at a White House news conference.


CHRONICLE
PIERRE SALINGER has a new mission: to pay homage to the five million American men and women who fought in Europe and North Africa during World War II.
He is collecting their names to carve into a Wall of Liberty, actually a series of walls, to be built in Caen, in Normandy, near the beaches where Allied armed forces landed on D-day, June 6, 1944.
Construction is scheduled to begin next year on June 6, the 50th anniversary of the invasion, and the target date for completion is May 8, 1995, which will be the 50th anniversary of the end of the war in Europe.
Mr.
Salinger, who was press secretary to President John F. Kennedy and is now chief correspondent for ABC News, lives in France.
He is the chairman of the Wall of Liberty Committee of the Battle of Normandy Foundation, a nonprofit group in Washington that works to foster understanding of the war.


Jobs Data Stagnant for June
The unemployment rate ticked back up to 7 percent in June as job growth nearly vanished after two months of solid gains, the Labor Department reported today.
The rise in unemployment, from 6.9 percent in May, was accompanied by the disappearance of 53,000 manufacturing jobs.
The figures were weaker than anticipated, even allowing for the steady procession of disappointing economic figures in the last few weeks.


In Weary Town, Mississippi Shows Its Might
The last time the Mississippi River betrayed this town this badly, it flooded Betty Gerber's street two blocks away.
She and her four children were forced to live for eight weeks without electricity or cooking gas in their mobile home.
When the river finally retreated far enough, she ran an extension cord to the local car wash so she could operate her refrigerator and a small fan.


HAITIAN MILITARY IS SAID TO ACCEPT PLAN TO END CRISIS
In what they described as a breakthrough in efforts to resolve the political crisis in Haiti, United Nations negotiators said yesterday that they had won the approval of Haiti's army commanders for a series of steps aimed at returning the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to power by Oct. 30.
Father Aristide withheld agreement from the settlement proposed by the United Nations, however, holding out for a more rapid schedule for his return to power, the negotiators and aides to Father Aristide said.


Q &amp; A
Caps on Health Plans Q. Do company health plans have a cap on what they will pay per year or over a lifetime?
ERIN GRAY, Manhattan  A. In evaluating a health insurance plan, you should look at many factors, including the items covered, the deductible, the co-insurance rate and the out-of-pocket maximum.
Most employer-based health plans place a limit on the amount of health benefits they will pay over an individual's lifetime.
"In establishments with more than 100 employees," said William S. Custer, director of research of the Employee Benefit Research Institute, "the most common limit is $1 million."
Health maintenance organizations are not likely to have lifetime or yearly maximum benefits for hospital or doctor treatment, but they may have them for specific benefit programs like prescriptions drugs.
Reporting Bond Profit Q. I sold at a premium convertible bonds purchased in the aftermarket at a discount.
Am I to include the increase in price on my tax return not as a capital gain, but as interest income?
EDWARD DOWNIE, Downers Grove, Ill.
A.
Gains on securities, including convertible bonds, are normally taxed as capital gains.
But for bonds issued after July 18, 1964, and purchased at a market discount, ordinary income treatment is applied to the extent that there is so-called accrued market discount.
"What this does is split up any gain into an interest portion and a capital gains portion," said Edward Mendlowitz, a partner in the East Brunswick, N.J., accounting firm of Mendlowitz Weitsen.
"This is important since capital gains are taxed at lower rates and capital gains can be offset by capital losses."
Of course, if a bond is converted to stock, no capital gain or loss is recognized until the stock is sold.
Reverse Stock Splits Q. What are the advantages, if any, of reverse splits to shareholders?
ARTHUR A. DELANEY, Roslyn, L.I.
A.
Companies with a very low stock price are often ignored by many investors.
Among the reasons: these stocks are deemed to be speculative, and they are not eligible for purchase on margin.
As a result, a corporation will sometimes declare a reverse split, which reduces the number of shares outstanding but retains the same total market valuation.
For instance, a company with 100 million shares selling for $1 apiece will have 10 million shares at $10 each after declaring a 1-for-10 reverse split.
"Its hope is that a higher-priced stock will be more respectable, attract more purchasers, induce more research analysts to follow and recommend the stock and make it easier to sell more shares to the public," said William K. Joseph, a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers.
"This strategy works best when a company's health and fortunes are improving, but can backfire for a languishing company that declares a reverse split for cosmetic purposes."


Woman Found Dead
A Bronx woman was found stabbed to death in her bedroom Thursday evening, and her 3-year-old son was found unharmed in the apartment, the police said yesterday.
Marlene Rivera, 29 years old, was pronounced dead in her home at 2721 Barker Avenue, in the Morris Park section of the Bronx.
She had a single stab wound to the torso, and the police found a knife at the scene.
The child was released to the custody of his grandparents.


Review/Jazz; 'Tonight' Players, Live
The bassist Bob Hurst's show at the Five Spot on Wednesday night started an hour and half late, and even then it didn't quite start.
The drummer, Jeff Watts, had misplaced his cymbals, so Mr.
Hurst and the saxophonist Branford Marsalis proceeded to improvise on some standards.
The music, lovely and intimate, was the product of two relaxed and supple musicians enjoying themselves with the material.
Things totally dissolved when the band -- basically Mr.
Marsalis's band, plus the trumpeter Marcus Belgrave -- went into a set of tedious pieces that were surprisingly lackluster and cliche-heavy.
A few years ago, the band was a contender with Mr.
Watts and Mr.
Hurst able to swing with real authority.
The evidence from its first set suggests that the band has completely lost its individuality.


Head of Black Medical School Called Top Choice for U.S. Post
Dr.
David Satcher, President of the Meharry Medical College in Nashville, a historically black institution that has produced many of the nation's black doctors, is the leading candidate to head the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, an Administration official said today.
Dr.
Satcher is credited with rescuing Meharry and Metropolitan General Hospital, Nashville's largest public hospital, from financial catastrophe by merging them.
Until eight years ago, Meharry's doctors, most of them black, had no access to the public hospital.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article and headline yesterday about the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation misidentified Judge Louis J. Freeh, who has emerged as a top candidate for the job.
He is a Federal judge in Manhattan, not Brooklyn.


Graf Is Still Perfecting Her Pursuit of Winning
Steffi Graf pursues perfection the way most mortals pursue their morning coffee: to feel good about herself on any given day, she has to have it.
On Saturday, Graf will pursue perfection, in the form of a third consecutive Wimbledon title and her fifth over all, by keeping her 20-match streak of invincibility intact here as she faces Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic in the 100th anniversary rendition of the ladies' singles final.


Edward Herold, 85; Led Effort to Make First Color-TV Tube
Edward William Herold, an inventor in broadcasting technology whose career at the RCA Corporation spanned 42 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 85.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


Leaving the City, and Traffic, Far Behind


Charles Gosnell, State Librarian And Mason, 83
Charles Francis Gosnell, a former New York State Librarian and a past Grand Master of Masons in New York State, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Utica, N.Y.
He was 83 and lived at the Masonic Home in Utica.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said Robert C. Singer, grand secretary of the New York Grand Lodge of Masons.


Indurain Races the Legends on This Tour
The word for Miguel Indurain is "serene."
Loose and smiling, Indurain glowed with confidence as he prepared to set out Saturday to try to win his third successive Tour de France bicycle race.
"I really believe that the only person who can defeat me is myself," he said.
There is no evidence to dispute him.


Review/Pop; Croon Meets Primal Cry In P. J. Harvey's Intensity
When P. J. Harvey performed at the Academy last Saturday, the setup included a bank of white lights, aimed forward, that flashed to blind the audience temporarily.
It's a standard effect for post-punk bands, and usually gratuitous.
But with P. J. Harvey, the almost painful illumination matched the searing climaxes of Polly Jean Harvey's songs.
Ms.
Harvey, the English band's guitarist and singer, writes about the struggles between lovers, touching the raw nerves where affection and need become rage and betrayal.
She doesn't simply blurt things out.
Her voice teases, croons, offers sweet attentions; then, suddenly, Steve Vaughan on bass and Robert Ellis on drums slam out a beat and she hurls accusations.
The title song of the trio's second album, "Rid of Me" (Island), opens with breathy pleas -- "My darling, don't leave me" -- and works up to a vengeful shout: "Don't you wish you'd never, never met her!"


Earning and Learning: How a Student Built a Small Business
Profile: Julie DeFillippo, 20, of Armonk, N.Y., was struggling 18 months ago to meet the payments on her second-hand 1986 Pontiac.
As a business major at Fairfield University, she felt she should earn more than the minimum wage and come up with something to enhance her resume.


Flaws in the U.S. Visa System
The failure of a computer system to identify undesirable immigrants helped Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman enter the United States.
Page 22.


In Serial-Killer Inquiry, Doubts Arise on Prostitute Link
As the state police reach the grim conclusion that Joel Rifkin was probably telling the truth about killing 17 women and dumping their bodies in the New York region, they expressed doubt today about another part of his story: that all his victims were prostitutes he had hired for sex.
Officially, the tally of victims whose bodies have been matched to Mr.
Rifkin's confession or discovered by following its details remains at 13 today.
Investigators continue to try to track down the women whose credit cards, licenses, library cards and clothing were found in Mr.
Rifkin's cluttered East Meadow bedroom.
Few Identities Known
But they say it now appears that at least a few of the women were not soliciting Mr.
Rifkin for sex and that his targets may not have been limited to prostitutes.
"The prostitute label was provided by Mr. Rifkin when he was first arrested," said State Trooper Thomas Collins.
"There were some instances where that was not substantiated."


Corrections
An article and a diagram in Science Times on June 15 about the circulation of molten rock in the earth's crust misstated the term for molten rock that has not emerged from the earth's surface.
It is magma, not lava.


In U.S., South Africa Leaders Press Clinton for Aid
Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk held separate meetings with President Clinton today, underscoring their position as political rivals but individually carrying the message that each views American economic assistance as vital to South Africa's future as a multiracial democracy.
A crucial step will be to lift economic sanctions against South Africa.
That awaits a signal from Mr.
Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, which led the worldwide campaign that resulted in the sanctions being imposed on the white-minority government there.


Aid for Owls, Trees and Loggers
President Clinton's plan to manage and protect 800-year-old forests and spotted owls in the Northwest won't end the tension between loggers and environmentalists, but he has taken a giant step in the right direction.
He shields not just a bird, but a rich, irreplaceable ecosystem of timber, water, fish and fowl, while still permitting sustainable logging.
The President offers a reasonable compromise.
He would allow logging that environmental absolutists prefer to ban outright, but would set tight limits that timber interests misrepresent as ruinous.


Review/Opera; Later Strauss Works Fill In Telling Details
The San Francisco Opera's monthlong "Celebration of Strauss" has performed a vital service to a composer who, for all his enduring fame, is still underestimated in 20th-century musical history.
Of the four operas by Richard Strauss presented here, "Salome" and "Der Rosenkavalier" are masterpieces from the composer's heyday, and "Capriccio" and "Daphne" are lesser-known but musically undiminished works from the dusk of a 70-year career.
The balance of early and late, famous and obscure, show the breadth of the composer's achievement.
Strauss's works after "Der Rosenkavalier" should no longer be dismissed as instances of stylistic confusion or regression.
His loose manipulations of tonality, his experiments with "real life" opera and erudite eclecticism, now seem ahead of their time, not behind it.
Strauss was a compulsively original composer who went against any prevailing tide, either conservative or progressive.


Review/Music; A Modern Nestled Among Mozart et al.
Paul Angerer's Concilium Musicum ensemble plays on period instruments but does not confine itself to 18th- and early-19th-century music.
Mr.
Angerer, a violinist and violist, is also a composer, and when the group made its New York debut on Tuesday evening at Weill Recital Hall, one of his own works was nestled amid Mozart, Haydn and Albrechtsberger scores.
Actually, Mr.
Angerer's "Exercitium Canonicum" (1980) was not terribly out of place.
Although its bittersweet melodic language recalled Shostakovich and, fleetingly, Stravinsky, its formal precision put it firmly in the tradition of the program's other works.
Scored for two violas, its four movements are strict canons, each characterized differently.
The most interesting of the movements, the finale, was based on a chordal theme that seemed at first to present scant opportunity for canonic writing.
But Mr.
Angerer spun it out effectively.


Backing Robb, Clinton Infuriates Wilder and Enters Virginia Feud
President Clinton has thrown himself smack into the middle of what promises to be one of the nastiest Senate races in the country next year by writing a letter of support for Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, who announced last week that he would challenge Mr.
Robb in the Democratic primary, today denounced Mr.
Clinton's endorsement, which came in a fund-raising letter that the Senator's campaign organizers mailed this week.


How a Slave Captured a Confederate Ship
To the Editor:
You make brief reference in a June 13 article on Beaufort, S.C., to the seizure of mansions there early in the Civil War by Union forces.
It was the Union Navy that captured Beaufort and the surrounding Sea Islands in 1862, thereby preserving the area.
Soon thereafter, a great act of heroism took place in Beaufort harbor.
A Confederate sidewheeler, the 140-foot Planter, was docked in Charleston, S.C., where it had been transporting military supplies for the rebel army between Charleston and the outer islands.
It was loaded with ammunition and guns for Forts Sumter and Riley.


Flaws in Computer Check Helped Sheik Enter U.S.
In an effort to determine how Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman entered the United States, the State Department ran the names of four high-profile terrorists through a computer system meant to identify undesirable immigrants.
All four passed.
The failure of the system was one of a series of deep and pervasive flaws in the United States visa system uncovered by State Department investigators.
They concluded that it was these flaws, as well as bureaucratic bungling, that allowed Mr.
Abdel Rahman to enter the United States, according to Congressional officials from both parties.


White House Rebukes 4 In Travel Office Shake-Up
The White House today issued a strikingly self-critical report that faulted the behavior of one of its authors and rebuked four other officials for the dismissals of the White House travel staff last May.
The four were reprimanded for improperly dismissing the staff members, for appearing to pressure the F.B.I. and for permitting a friend of President Clinton's to become involved in a matter in which he had a financial stake.


Justice Nominee Defended For Joining Exclusive Club
Groucho Marx once said he would never belong to any club that would have him as a member.
Now one of President Clinton's nominees to a senior Justice Department post is being questioned for doing almost precisely the opposite.
Eleanor D. Acheson, a lawyer who is Mr.
Clinton's choice to become Assistant Attorney General for Policy Development, came under criticism earlier this week because of her longtime membership, abandoned last March, in an exclusive Brookline, Mass., club that has no black members.


The Seesaw, 11th-Hour Making of Laws
Andres Gonzalez had never seen anything quite like it.
On Wednesday and again on Thursday, Mr.
Gonzalez, 35, a tenant advocate from the Bronx, hopped on a bus for the 130-mile trek to the state Capitol, hopeful that he would see the Legislature break a logjam and assure the long-term survival of the rent-stabilization laws.


Mississippi River Towns Under Siege


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the comeback of a veteran Communist, Heydar Aliyev, in Azerbaijan misidentified the Soviet leader who made him a full member of the Soviet Politburo and misstated the year.
Yuri V. Andropov appointed him, in 1982.


Young Is Still Trapped in His Private L


17-1 Long Shot Provides Early Belmont Fireworks
Racing's first blockbuster weekend of the summer got off to a rousing start yesterday at Belmont Park when a 17-1 long shot named Casa Eire won the season's first stakes for juvenile fillies and the 1-5 favorite Camcorder ran an equally stunning fourth.
It was even more of a shock than that.
Casa Eire was chased home by two other outsiders, finishing nearly three lengths in front of She Rides Tonight, who was 19-1, and another length in front of Daily Routine at 13-1.
Then came the beaten favorite, Camcorder, a royally bred daughter of Forty Niner who is owned by William Haggin Perry and trained by Bill Mott.
And Camcorder has been the local prodigy since winning her debut by six lengths two months ago.


Islamic Group in Egypt Vows Attacks on American Targets
The Islamic Group, whose spiritual leader surrendered to Federal authorities in New York, vowed today for the first time to start a concerted terrorist campaign against American targets in Egypt and the United States in retaliation.
"We will hit American targets," a leader of the Islamic Group said in an interview late this evening in the sprawling slum and militant stronghold in Imbaba.
"And not just American targets in Egypt, but throughout the Middle East, Europe and the United States."


Dinkins Orders Sharp Budget Cuts To Save New York's Bond Rating
Responding to pressure from fiscal monitors and Wall Street, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday took the unusual step of ordering significant new cuts in New York City's budget only two days into the new fiscal year.
Mr.
Dinkins said he was trimming the new budget and planning to make similar reductions in future budgets to head off a threat by Standard &amp; Poor's, a major credit-rating agency, to lower the city's bond rating.


Emerging Markets Shine for Foreign Stocks
Among the 89 foreign stock funds that invest completely outside the United States, the most successful for the last three years have favored Hong Kong, Korea, Mexico and other emerging markets and avoided Japan (though Japan has come roaring back this year).
These funds are a good way for investors to balance domestic stock portfolios without picking regions of the world.
The best diversification is provided by funds that do not hedge currency risks as a matter of policy, like Templeton.
Harbor International does hedge.


Bridge
There were some major surprises in the European Championships, sponsored by Generali, an Italian insurer, which ended a week ago in Menton, France.
It was not surprising that Poland won the open title, but neither France, the reigning Olympiad champions, nor Iceland, the reigning Bermuda Bowl champions, did well enough.
Advancing to the world championships in Chile in September, along with Poland, were Denmark, Norway and the Netherlands.
The Polish team consisted of Cezary Balicki, Adam Zmudzinski, Marcin Lesniewski, Krzysztof Martens, Piotr Gawrys and Krzysztof Lasocki, who have had many successes in international play.
They will be one of the favorites in Chile along with Brazil and two American teams.


Business Digest
Companies
The F.C.C. gave television shopping a major windfall, saying cable systems must carry such programs that are broadcast over the air.
The decision could force smaller cable systems to drop channels to make room for home shopping.
Consumer groups and some Congressmen attacked the ruling.  [ Page 1. ]
I.B.M. is expected to take a charge of roughly $2 billion against second-quarter earnings to pay for trimming its payroll by another 50,000 or so workers.
The company had previously said the work force cuts would exceed 25,000.
The big charge means I.B.M.'s board may decide to cut the dividend again.  [ 33. ]
The Bonneville Power Administration will raise its rates by 15.6 percent on Oct. 1, in a decision that may weaken the already-anemic economy of the Pacific Northwest.  [ 35. ]
Chrysler plans to sell its 2.75 percent stake in Mitsubishi.
Analysts estimated that the holding of 23.25 million shares of the Japanese auto maker was worth about $165 million.  [ 35. ]
St.
Paul will pay $420 million to acquire an insurance unit from Kemper.
The sale of the Economy Fire and Casualty Company is part of Kemper's plan to focus on its core operations.  [ 35. ]
National Health Laboratories did not sweeten its bid for Damon.
Corning will now begin its $23-a-share offer in the next few days for 16.1 million Damon shares.  [ 35. ] The Economy
The unemployment rate rose to 7 percent in June as job growth nearly vanished after two months of solid gains.
The rate had been 6.9 percent in May, but since then, 53,000 manufacturing jobs have disappeared.
The figures were even weaker than had been expected.  [ 33. ]  The improvement in New Jersey's unemployment rate continued in June, when it stood at 6.9 percent, compared with 7.4 in May and a dismal 9.1 percent in April.
But New York State's unemployment rose to 7.8 percent in June, and New York City's rate was 9.4 percent.  [ 45. ]
Mayor Dinkins ordered sharp budget cuts just two days into the fiscal year to forestall a bond rating cut by Standard &amp; Poor's.  [ 1. ]
Visiting Russians have been dazzled by American farms in a tour sponsored by an arm of the World Bank.
The goal is to stir up a zeal for privatization among the Russians.  [ 33. ] International
GATT may have outlived its usefulness, some political leaders believe.
The doubts about the benefit of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade revolve in part around the perception that freer trade usually means lost jobs somewhere.  [ 33. ] Markets
Oil prices fell to the lowest level since before the Persian Gulf war after the Administration was said to support an end to the ban on Iraq's crude oil exports.
The August futures contract for domestic crude dropped 50 cents a barrel, to less than $18.  [ 33. ]
The Dow Jones industrial average declined 26.57, to 3,483.97, as stocks retreated on the weak unemployment numbers and never recovered.
For the week, the Dow lost 6.92 points.  [ 34. ]
Treasury securities prices advanced as fears dissipated that the Fed would raise interest rates to combat inflation.  [ 43. ]
The dollar moved higher against most foreign currencies, despite the disappointing report on job growth.  [ 44. ] Your Money
The world of disability insurance is complex, but buying a policy can relieve uneasiness for people who are self-employed or who do not get such coverage through their employers.  [ 31. ]
International bond funds can be dangerous investments, according to some prominent mutual fund executives.
Investing  [ 31. ]
Many beneficiaries are seeking more power over their trusts after having lost faith in their trustees.
Trusts.  [ 32. ]


At Least 226 Die in the Philippines as Overcrowded Boats Sink


Holiday Weekend
Independence Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, all others closed.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETSClosed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule, with extra trains Friday afternoon.
Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with extra trains this afternoon, and Sunday night for people who attend the fireworks.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on Sunday schedule, buses on Saturday schedule.
PATH trains on a Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with extra trains Friday afternoon, and Sunday night for people who attend the fireworks.
Traffic Alert TOMORROW MOST HOLY CRUCIFIX STREET FESTIVALMott Street between Hester Street and Canal Street will be closed from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
INTERNATIONAL IMMIGRANTS PARADE Madison Avenue between 35th and 57th Streets, will be closed from 1 P.M. until completion.
WATER STREET FESTIVAL Water Street between Fulton Street and Whitehall Street will be closed from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
West Street between 14th Street to the Battery will be closed from 6 P.M. to 2 A.M. for fireworks.


Kemper Sets Insurer Sale To St. Paul
The Kemper Corporation has agreed to sell its Economy Fire and Casualty Company to the St.
Paul Companies for $420 million in cash and other assets as part of its plan to focus on its core financial services and life insurance operations.
About two-thirds of the transaction will be paid in cash and one-third in assets like stocks and bonds distributed from Economy Fire and Casualty's investment portfolio.
The St.
Paul Companies, a group of property and casualty insurance underwriting and insurance brokerage companies based in St.
Paul, said it would finance the deal with internal funds.
It also plans to replace the assets distributed from Economy Fire and Casualty's investment portfolio with an "appropriate amount" of assets.


CHRONICLE
American music fans could learn a thing or two about devotion from the Japanese.
Take, for example, the distance that some admirers of the Japanese pop singer MARIKO TAKAHASHI are willing to go to hear her sing.
Miss Takahashi, who is renowned in Japan for her light pop ballads, is giving a concert in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday, so about 300 of her especially ardent admirers are coming to New York this weekend for the show.


A New Glimmer of Recovery For New Jersey Employment
In a continuing improvement, the unemployment rate in New Jersey fell in June to 6.9 percent from 7.4 percent in May, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.
June was the first month since January 1992 that New Jersey, one of the states hit hardest by the recession, posted a rate below the national figure.
The Federal report said that the unemployment rates in New York State and New York City remained worse in June than the nationwide rate, which rose to 7 percent from the 6.9 percent of May.


Dinkins Appoints 8 to All-Civilian Complaint Review Board
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appointed 8 of the 13 members of a new independent agency that will investigate civilian complaints of excessive force, racial insults and other misconduct by police officers.
The agency is to begin work Monday.
The panel -- with no members or investigators employed by the police, with its own budget and the power to subpoena witnesses -- is the first Civilian Complaint Review Board in the city's history whose personnel and operations are totally outside the control of the Police Department.


In U.S., South Africa Leaders Press Clinton for Aid; Date Set for First Election
South Africa's major political parties today confirmed next April 27 as the date for elections that will end white rule and ratified a set of constitutional principles that amounted to a repudiation of the country's political past.
Seven of the 26 parties, including the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party and the white separatist Conservative Party, voted against setting a date for the elections, saying several key aspects of the future state have not been resolved.


Michigan Court Says Adopted Girl Must Be Sent to Biological Parents
In a wrenching interstate custody case, Michigan's highest court decided yesterday that a 2 1/2-year-old girl should be taken from the Michigan couple who have reared her since she was 2 days old and sent to her biological parents in Iowa.
The court ruled 6 to 1 that the Michigan couple, Jan and Roberta DeBoer of Ann Arbor, should surrender the adopted daughter they call Jessica within a month so she can live in Iowa with Daniel and Cara Schmidt, who call her Anna Lee.


Anti-Abortion Rally; Comeback Victory in Congress Sends A Warning to Pro-Choice Lawmakers
Their big victory this week on a vote to bar Federal financing of most abortions for the poor will make it easier for anti-abortion forces in Congress to block already faltering legislation that would protect the abortion rights of women generally.
The issues are not the same, but they are related.
And the anti-abortion forces managed with Wednesday's vote in the House to make two important connections.


Confiscate the Cars
To the Editor:
New York City is having a problem with serious accidents caused by drivers without valid licenses.
Suggested remedies include jail terms and fines.
It is, however, impractical to put these people in jail since space is at a premium and we all know that someday an elderly aunt who failed to renew her driver's license might end up doing hard time upstate.
A simple solution would be to confiscate on site the automobile that is driven by a driver without a valid license.
If this is a borrowed car, let the lender beware.
If it is a stolen car, the person can also be prosecuted for auto theft.
The confiscated automobiles can be sold and the proceeds can be used to reimburse victims.


After Bodybuilder Is Accused of Murder, Many Point Finger at Steroid Use
In bodybuilder slang, Gordon Kimbrough is known as "a chemical machine," someone who used steroids and other drugs to help create a Schwarzenegger-like physique, which he displayed with pride at competitions around the country.
He subjected himself to years of strict diets and punishing exercise regimes to develop his 5-foot 10-inch frame.
He also used drugs to build up to an impressive 240 pounds.


Maurice M. Class, 94, Engineer and Surveyor
Maurice Morrissey Class, a civil and military engineer and land surveyor, died on June 23 at Beverly Manor Hospital in Monterey, Calif.
He was 94 and lived in Santa Barbara, Calif.
His son, Maurice 2d, said the cause was congestion and heart failure.


Clinton Extends Ban on U.S. Nuclear Tests
President Clinton has decided to extend a moratorium on nuclear testing until September 1994 as long as no other country tests nuclear weapons before then, Administration and Congressional officials said today.
The Administration will decide next year whether to conduct a final series of underground blasts after that deadline and before a comprehensive ban on testing is put into place, the officials said.


Holding the Door for Mr. Sessions
Facing the challenge of a new tide of terrorism, the F.B.I. needs effective leadership.
For months it has been clear that William Sessions, the agency's Director, needed to place the bureau's stability ahead of his own interests and resign.
Now it's time for the White House to act.
Further delay would be unseemly; President Clinton and Attorney General Janet Reno can end the agony.
Mr.
Sessions, a decent though largely ineffective leader, has been painfully aware that he has no future at the F.B.I.
So why doesn't he resign without further formality?
Partly because he vainly seeks full vindication on ethics charges lodged against him by William Barr, the last Attorney General in the Bush Administration.


Grumbling Over GATT
For 45 years GATT has worked.
The 96-page set of basic rules for international commerce designated by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has bolstered a huge increase in international trade.
At the same time, customs tariffs have been slashed to less than 10 percent in industrialized countries, from an average of 40 percent, encouraging ever- greater exchanges of goods.
And the number of nations subscribing to GATT regulations has grown to 111 from 23.


INSIDE
Jobless Rate Inches Up
The nation's unemployment rate ticked up to 7 percent in June as job growth nearly vanished after two months of solid gains.
Page 33.
South Africans Meet Clinton
President Clinton met separately with Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk, who both agreed on the need for U.S. aid to South Africa.
Page 3.
Yanks at Center Court
Americans Pete Sampras and Jim Courier swept the men's semifinals at Wimbledon.
In the women's final today, Steffi Graf, the defender, will face Jana Novotna.
Page 27.


Political Motive Denied In Action Against Cleric
The decisive event that persuaded Attorney General Janet Reno to order the detention of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman took place on Wednesday night when a van carrying the cleric tried to elude law-enforcement surveillance cars, officials said.
That seemingly minor incident on a New Jersey street appeared to tip the balance in favor of apprehending Mr.
Abdel Rahman, an action that Ms.
Reno and her top advisers had rejected only a few days earlier on legal and tactical grounds, including his importance as a gateway into the underworld of Islamic militancy.


Americans Will Vie to Be the King of England
The former champions received a painful Wimbledon comeuppance from the future champions on the tattered remains of the Center Court's grass in both men's semifinals today, a development that brought forth the improbable image of an All-American men's finale on the Fourth of July.
No. 1-ranked Pete Sampras, whose classic strokes were sculptured to embellish this tournament's often puzzling surface, and No. 2-ranked Jim Courier, who was seeded third here because his strokes don't seem to suit the local greenery, will share a joint debut in Wimbledon's final on Sunday.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD McKoy Shines in Two Events Mark McKoy of Canada, the Olympic high-hurdles gold medalist, expanded his talents into the 100 at the BNP Grand Prix in Villeneuve D'Ascq, France, and showed yesterday he can compete with the best.
McKoy won the 110 hurdles in 13.08 seconds, the fastest time of the season, about a half-hour after finishing fourth in the 100 meters in a world-class 10.08.
American Andre Cason won the 100 in 10.03, holding off double Olympic silver-medalist Frankie Fredericks of Namibia, who was second in 10.04.
Carl Lewis, the 32-year-old world record-holder and two-time Olympic gold medalist, took third in 10.07, just ahead of McKoy.
Gail Devers, the Olympic 100-meter champion, ran the fastest time of the year among the women, clocking 10.96. (AP) British Beat Americans: Britain took advantage of a weak American men's team yesterday to register its first victory in a meet between the two since 1961.
Olympic 100-meter champion Linford Christie led the way in Britain's 199-190 victory in Edinburgh, winning his event in 10.06 seconds and beating Calvin Smith in a photo finish.
Britain won all of the men's races with the exception of the 1,600 relay.
As expected, American women dominated the other half of the meet, winning 181-43.
BASKETBALL Russia Defeats Croatia Russia, led by Sergei Bazarevich's 25 points, stunned previously unbeaten Croatia, 84-76, yesterday to advance to the gold-medal game of the European championships in Munich, Germany.
The German team beat Greece, 76-73, in the other semifinal, a game that was followed by physical confrontations between Greek fans and German police. (AP) GOLF Six Tied for Lead in Farr Classic Hollis Stacy, winner of 18 L.P.G.A. tournaments, and rookie Suzanna Strudwick were among six golfers to shoot 67's yesterday and share the first-round lead of the Jamie Farr Toledo Classic in Sylvania, Ohio.
After regulation play and overtime ended with no goals, defending champion Argentina won the penalty-kick shootout, 6-5, and will play Mexico for the title tomorrow in Guayaquil. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  U.N. REPORTS ACCORD ON HAITI
United Nations negotiators said they had won approval from Haiti's army commanders for a plan to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President by Oct. 30.1  IN BROOKLYN, GUARDED OPTIMISM
On the streets of Flatbush, the Haitian Community reacted to news about plans to restore the President to power with guarded optimism.  2
In Port-au-Prince, reactions of optimism and disbelief.  2  POPE ASSAILS 'NATURE WORSHIP'
Pope John Paul II urged American bishops to combat what he termed a "bitter, ideological" feminism among some American Catholic women who worship an earth goddess or "Mother Earth." 1  CUBA SAYS IT FOILED ESCAPE
Cuba said it had intercepted an American speedboat that was trying to pick up people on the shore and take them to the United States, leaving three people dead and the boat's captain wounded.  2  CLINTON MEETS SOUTH AFRICANS
President Clinton met separately with Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk, who both said that American economic aid is vital to South Africa's future as a democracy.  3  3 ITALIANS KILLED IN SOMALIA
Heavy fighting broke out in Mogadishu when Somali gunmen ambushed United Nations troops who were searching for weapons, killing at least 3 Italian soldiers and wounding about 20 others.  3  SERBS AND CROATS SEIZE TOWN
Bosnian Croat troops joined by Serbian tanks reportedly cut off 100,000 civilians, most of them Muslims, overrunning a strategic town.  3  RIOT IN TURKEY KILLS 40
At least 40 people were reported killed when militant Muslim fundamentalists set fire to a hotel in central Turkey in an attack against leftist writers and intellectuals.  4
Istanbul Journal: New Leader's role as a symbol.  4  ISRAEL TELLS OF BUS HIJACK PLOT
The Israeli police said two Palestinian terrorists who had attacked a commuter bus in Jerusalem apparently had intended to take the passengers hostage.  4  National 5-7, 45  A REBUKE FOR WHITE HOUSE STAFF
The White House issued a self-critical report that faulted the behavior of one of its authors and rebuked four other officials for the dismissals of its travel staff last May.  1  ABORTION RIGHTS BILL IN JEOPARDY
News analysis: Anti-abortion forces in Congress may be able to marshal enough votes to defeat an upcoming bill protecting women's abortion rights.  6
The President announces aid for towns with bases closing.  6
Questions are raised about a Justice nominee's club membership.  7
The head of a medical college is the top candidate to lead the C.D.C.  7  CLERICS OPPOSE BOMBING RAID
Religion notes: The nation's major Christian ecumenical group registered its opposition to last week's attack on Iraq.  7  CABLE TO CARRY SHOPPING SHOWS
The Federal Communications Commission voted to give television stations devoted to 24-hour shopping the same right as regular broadcasters to demand that cable systems carry their programs free.  1  BRACING FOR THE RIVER'S DELUGE
Grafton, Ill., was flooded by the Mississippi River two months ago, and the river -- which has stayed at flood stage ever since -- threatens to overrun its banks again this weekend.  5  KILLER WAS FAILED BUSINESSMAN
A man who killed eight people and wounded six others before shooting himself at a San Francisco law firm was a Los Angeles mortgage broker down on his luck.  5  STEROIDS ARE BLAMED IN SLAYING
A San Francisco bodybuilder claims that the steroids he took drove him to strangle his girlfriend, who was also a bodybuilder.  45  BIOLOGICAL PARENTS WIN CUSTODY
Michigan's highest court decided a 2-year-old girl should be taken from the Michigan couple who have raised her and sent to her biological parents in Iowa.  5  A judge is deciding whether to re-try the New Yorker libel case.  45  Metro Digest 21 CLERIC SURRENDERS IN BROOKLYN
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the fiery Islamic fundamentalist whose followers have been linked to two bombing conspiracies, emerged from a Brooklyn mosque and surrendered to Federal authorities, ending a months-long Federal debate over whether he should be arrested.  1  WARNINGS OF TERRORIST ATTACKS
The Islamic Group, whose spiritual leader, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, surrendered to Federal authorities, has vowed for the first time to launch a terrorist campaign against American targets in Egypt and the United States in retaliation.  1  DINKINS ACTS TO HOLD BOND RATING
Responding to pressure from fiscal monitors and Wall Street, Mayor Dinkins has taken the unusual step of ordering significant new cuts in the city's budget only two days into the new fiscal year.  1  Business Digest 33  Arts/Entertainment 9-14  Music: Strauss's "Daphne." 9  Jefferson Starship.  9  Concilium Musicum.  12  Dance: Pilobolus troupe.  9  Obituaries 8  Fred Gwynne, actor.
R. Tyler Gatchell Jr., a Broadway producer.
Charles Francis Gosnell, a former New York State Librarian.
Edward William Herold, an inventor in broadcasting technology.
Sports 26-30  Baseball: Giants beat Mets and Young.  27  Mets reach terms with McIlvaine.  27  Yanks' lose to Athletics.  29  Strawberry's L.A. fall from grace.  29  Column: Vecsey on Wimbledon. 27  Cycling: Tour de France set to begin.  30  Football: Redskins' Marshall awarded to Oilers.  30  Horse Racing: Long shots' day at Belmont.  30  Sports People 26  Tennis: Sampras and Courier win.  27  Graf takes aim at Novotna.  30  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials Holding the door for Mr.
Sessions.
Aid for owls, trees and loggers.
Help for the mentally ill.
Look harder for a schools chief.
Letters  Russell Baker: Busby Goes Berserk.
Steven Halliwell: Aid to Russia can pay for itself.
Thomas K. Duane: Save our discos.
Ira A. Lipman: Thugs with badges.
Michael J. Saks: Malpractice roulette.
Chronicle 24  Bridge 10  Crossword 12


Grumbling Over GATT
For 45 years GATT has worked.
The 96-page set of basic rules for international commerce designated by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has bolstered a huge increase in international trade.
At the same time, customs tariffs have been slashed to less than 10 percent in industrialized countries, from an average of 40 percent, encouraging ever- greater exchanges of goods.
And the number of nations subscribing to GATT regulations has grown to 111 from 23.


Let Changes Begin: Mets Get McIlvaine To Return


One Name on a Roll Call of Death
She favored hip hop, short shorts, clogs and clunky earrings.
She loved to dress up, she loved to go out dancing and she loved it when anyone trained a camera on her pretty face.
She was born in Brooklyn and at 23 years old, she had already stumbled several times, caught up in drugs and prostitution, the misdirected life of a young girl with dreams but little direction or realistic expectations.
But the family and friends of Jenny Soto insist that the young woman whose death was one of the first linked by the police to Joel Rifkin had changed directions and was on track to a different life when she died.


Lilies to the Rescue When Color Is Needed
EVEN though summer is officially here, flower gardens have a common malady, the doldrums.
That is their bloom display is not up to the glory that was spring, and gardeners may even be impatient for fall.
Of course, the showy annuals do fill in the gaps, but sometimes they take several weeks to get going and provide colorful fill-in.
This is where the lilies come in.
Although these plants have been around for centuries, they are coming into their own.
July is their season and they supply dramatic color just when the garden needs a lift.
The best part is that these plants grow from bulbs that will multiply and become attractive clumps in a few years.


Tangled Impulses Lead Photographers To Pursue Flowers
Just in time for Summer, the New York Public Library is offering viewers the exhibition equivalent of a bouquet of fresh-cut flowers.
"Flora Photographica," in the library's Gottesman Exhibition Hall (through Aug. 21), is a wide-ranging celebration of the art of flower photography since the earliest days of the medium.
The show also hints at the surprisingly complex ties that exist between people and plants, joined in a relationship that extends far beyond the dutiful pleasures of Mother's Day bouquets or the solace of summer-cottage gardens.
The 180 prints in "Flora Photographica" (a show that originated in Vancouver and will travel to Toronto and Montreal) include images by a long roster of important photographers, starting with William Henry Fox Talbot.
In his photogenic drawings of the 1830's, he placed bits of fern and lace on chemically sensitized paper and exposed it to sunlight.
Virtually every photographer since Talbot has depicted flowers at one time or another, and the show features pictures by such 19th-century masters as Charles Aubry, Adolphe Braun and Julia Margaret Cameron, as well as by later figures ranging from Modernists like Ansel Adams and Edward Weston to such contemporary artists as Lee Friedlander and Jan Groover.


Prom: The Production
3:30 P.M.
AMBIANCE HAIR SALON: Liz York has had enough complimentary coffee.
She's read every GQ, hummed her way through ancient Billy Joel songs.
"She'll be here," a voice shouts into the salon.
But the makeup girl is not here.
She is not on the Cedarhurst strip -- or anywhere, Liz is beginning to think, on Long Island.
"But, hey, it's O.K.," she says, as she takes three baby steps to check the street. ("The Hair," fixed and newly red, is still settling.) "I mean, it's your prom, right? Your night. You just know you're going to get there with mascara on!"
Her mother, Sharon York, is not so sure.
She picks up a few small bags filled with the last-minute "prom-who-knows-what" and paces alongside her daughter.
"Let's go," she says gently, avoiding The Hair.


Katherine Mack, Stephen Dowdall
Katherine Norma Mack, the manager of executive training at Bloomingdale's, and Stephen Bryan Dowdall, a human resources officer at the Chemical Banking Corporation, both in New York, were married last evening in Fort Worth.
Rabbi Ralph Mecklenberger performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El.
Mrs.
Dowdall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Mack of Fort Worth, graduated from the University of Texas.
Her father is a lawyer at the Forth Worth law firm of McLean, Sanders.
Her mother, Ellen Mack, is the director of education at Temple Beth El.


Crocodile Tears
To the Sports Editor:
I wept when I read John Ed Anthony's reasons for putting down Prairie Bayou after the Belmont Stakes ("No Answer for a Broken Leg; No Solace for a Broken Heart," The Times, June 27).
Then I remembered a conversation I had with a fellow lifetime horseplayer before the race:
Me: "I like Prairie Bayou. He's very consistent."


Keeping Artistic Disciplines Alive
THE county's beauty and relative peace have long attracted artists, who are as apt to work alone in attic studios as in group classes.
One city -- Peekskill -- has created a district where artists can live as well as work, while many private schools -- like the Art Life-Craft Studios in North White Plains, which is celebrating its 40th anniversary -- strive to keep alive the traditional disciplines of drawing, painting and sculpture.
Artists come in all ages and shades of determination, as Nicole Barthelme of Scarsdale and Manhattan, the Brokke family of White Plains and Al Landzberg of Yorktown Heights attest.
Collectively, they enliven the landscape, evoking visions beyond the familiar greenery of summer.


With Liberty, Justice And Money for All
INDEPENDENCE DAY may not seem to have much to do with coins.
There are no bands playing "Three Coins in the Fountain," no drill teams waving silver certificates.
But on this day 217 years ago, the coinage of the American revolutionaries, those upstart Yankees, was about to undergo a great change.
During colonial times there was no real coinage or currency that the Americans could point to and call their own.
Most of the coins in circulation were Spanish silver dollars or pieces of them -- the two bits, four bits, six bits, a dollar of the old high-school cheer.
Some English coppers drifted over, and a few colonies printed their own bills and minted tokens that passed for currency locally.
But as for a distinctly American coin, there just wasn't one.


Dutch Art Show In Jerusalem
Moses may never have made it into the Promised Land, but a Rembrandt depiction of him has.
"Moses With the Tablets of the Law" and other Rembrandt oils are among 50 Dutch works from the 17th century, inspired by biblical themes, that form the core of an exhibition at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem until Aug. 25.
The Dutch of three and four centuries ago considered themselves the spiritual descendants of the ancient Israelites, with their national revival viewed as a product of divine intervention.


Poached Peaches, No Cream
POACHED peaches make a superb low-calorie summer dessert -- provided you leave off the ice cream.
Since France produces some of the best peaches in the world, it is hardly surprising that French chefs have come up with some of the best ways to cook them: in wine.
Georges Blanc of La Mere Blanc in France poaches white peaches in cabernet sauvignon and serves them with a syrup thickened with raspberry puree.
Raymond Blanc (no relation) of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons at Great Milton near Oxford, England, cooks peaches in white wine with slices of orange and lemon.


Lilies to the Rescue When Color Is Needed
EVEN though summer is officially here, flower gardens have a common malady, the doldrums.
That is their bloom display is not up to the glory that was spring, and gardeners may even be impatient for fall.
Of course, the showy annuals do fill in the gaps, but sometimes they take several weeks to get going and provide colorful fill-in.
This is where the lilies come in.
Although these plants have been around for centuries, they are coming into their own.
July is their season and they supply dramatic color just when the garden needs a lift.
The best part is that these plants grow from bulbs that will multiply and become attractive clumps in a few years.


The Price of Vanity Fair
To the Editor:
Obviously my remark regarding the cost of a subscription to Vanity Fair and the cost of advertising in the publication was misinterpreted by Ralph Monti ("Absolut, Cont.," Letters, June 20).


'Camelot,' the Place That Magic Forgot
THIS MUCH WE KNOW ABOUT "Camelot," the 1960 Lerner and Loewe musical about that brief shining moment in English myth when men were knights, women were ladies fair and tables were round:
It has an enchanting score and a ponderous book.
Every time the characters get the opportunity to sing, the show has a real chance of soaring.
Every time they are obliged to act out the drama of royal romance and generous ideals turned sour, it bogs down terribly.


Jacqueline Salas, Mark D. Spiegel
Dr.
Jacqueline Salas, an internist and endocrinologist at the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York, was married on Thursday to Mark D. Spiegel, a vice president of Bruguera Publications, a magazine publishing company in New York.
The Rev.
Ignatius Battaglia, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Santa Rosa de Lima Chapel in Caracas, Venezuela.
The Rev.
David E. Durham, a United Methodist minister and an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Salas-Spiegel, 31, is also a clinical instructor of medicine at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York.
She graduated from the Central University of Caracas, from which she also received an M.D. degree.
She is a daughter of Eulalia Sera Vasquez of Caracas and Miami.
Her mother is a lawyer in Caracas.


Poached Peaches, No Cream
POACHED peaches make a superb low-calorie summer dessert -- provided you leave off the ice cream.
Since France produces some of the best peaches in the world, it is hardly surprising that French chefs have come up with some of the best ways to cook them: in wine.
Georges Blanc of La Mere Blanc in France poaches white peaches in cabernet sauvignon and serves them with a syrup thickened with raspberry puree.
Raymond Blanc (no relation) of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons at Great Milton near Oxford, England, cooks peaches in white wine with slices of orange and lemon.


Park Series Adds Youth Concerts
FOR 15 years, the Untermyer Performing Arts Festival has brought cultural diversity to the county at no admission charge.
For summer No. 16, the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Department of Yonkers has expanded the series with five daytime concerts designed for younger audiences.
Missing, however, are the more traditional classical works, which last year brought opera and chamber orchestra performances to the stage.
Nevertheless, there are many unusual folk and dance attractions to make these Saturdays in Untermyer Park enticing family occasions.


Sagamore Hill: The Vibrant Era Returns
IF Theodore Roosevelt was around Sagamore Hill nowadays he might shout, "Speak softly and carry an armoire, a couch or a water buffalo's head!"
A restoration of the President's summer home in Cove Neck, where he is said to have mediated an end to the Russo-Japanese War, opens to the public today, complete with zebra-skin rugs and water-buffalo heads adorning the walls and rooms of the 99-year-old Victorian mansion.


Corrections
A report on June 13 about the wedding of Carita Anderson and Christopher Shelkin misstated the bride's married name.
It is Shelkin.
The report also incorrectly referred to the bridegroom as Mr.
Anderson.


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Nigeria; A General Dodges Elections, And Even Officers Protest
The commitment of Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, the military head of Nigeria, to civilian rule has had a zigzag pattern.
He twice postponed elections, let them be held at last on June 12, then annulled the results 10 days ago.
But after protests from Great Britain and the United States, he said he would relinquish power to a civilian government on Aug. 27, as initially planned.
The Clinton Administration views General Babangida's change of heart with skepticism.
Administration officials note that while he has once more promised elections, he has barred the two original candidates from running again for President.
American policy makers doubt whether new candidates can be freely selected or elections organized in less than two months.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Pauline Radomsky and Robert Bass incorrectly described Doo-Wah-Zoo, a musical group with which the bride performs.
It is a quintet.
The report also omitted the fact that the bridegroom graduated from Queens College.


Route Opens Up Mount St. Helens
Visitors to the Mount St.
Helens National Volcanic Monument will no longer have to drive two and a half hours along a winding forest road with steep turns to see one of the world's most spectacular volcanic monuments.
The Washington Department of Transportation has officially opened one of the last stretches of the Spirit Lake Memorial Highway (State Route 504), a modern 43-mile road, which allows easy access into the blast zone.
The new road, which begins in the small town of Castle Rock, off Interstate 5 (about 50 miles north of Portland, Ore.), follows the Toutle River Valley and cuts through the foothills leading to Mount St.
Helens.
The drive, which takes an hour, ends at the new Coldwater Ridge Visitor's Center, where tourists have breathtaking views of the volcano whose crater has been steaming since it erupted on May 18, 1980.
The explosion blew off 1,300 feet of the mountain's peak, killing 57 people, and devastating the surrounding 250 square miles.


The Shock of the New: Burnitz Powers Mets
The fastball, a sinking dart, was targeted for the outside corner of the plate.
Most mortals in the major leagues don't touch it.
A couple might fight it off.
The rare and the special do what Jeromy Burnitz did.
Burnitz, the 24-year-old outfielder whose power has sent the first current of authentic electricity through the Mets in 1993, unloaded on the Bill Swift pitch.
The baseball, perhaps shocked itself, jumped off the bat.
It got up in the air, and then it got out of Shea Stadium, with Barry Bonds left to admire its final descent into the bullpen in left field.
Left field happens to be the opposite field for Burnitz.


INSIDE
Don Drysdale Dies
The Hall of Fame pitcher for the Los Angeles Dodgers was 56.
His body was found in his Montreal hotel room hours before he was to broadcast a Dodgers-Expos game.
Page 30.
New Threat in Bosnia
Bosnian Serbs and Croats, emboldened by Western inaction, appear to be trying to take even more land, suggesting that their recent support of a peace plan may be a ruse.
Page 8.
Twain Country Flouts Floods
Ignoring the river's menacing rise, the people of Hannibal, Mo., attended to Tom Sawyer Days, celebrating the writer who immortalized Hannibal and life on the Mississippi.
Page 18.
Graf Wins Fifth Wimbledon
Steffi Graf received her third consecutive title when Jana Novotna succumbed to nerves in their 7-6, 1-6, 6-4 final.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Date Rape Debate
In compiling material for "Calling It Rape," the play Katie Roiphe points to as evidence of growing hysteria about rape, I interviewed many strong and articulate women who had been physically threatened and forced into sex by men they knew -- women who had kept their stories secret for fear of not being believed.
These are the voices conspicuously missing from Roiphe's article.
Had Roiphe been willing to listen to women's stories, she might have learned that bad things happen to strong, pro-sex feminists.


Sega Takes Aim at Disney's World
EIGHT pilot trainees take their positions in the small space capsule known as AS-1.
Their captain, Michael Jackson (yes, that one), appears on the screen in the front.
With Mr.
Jackson issuing orders, the trainees launch the capsule and swerve through space, each firing missiles at enemy vessels and competing for points.
When the captain is hit, he turns over the controls to the player with the best score, who gets to steer the capsule in for a landing.
"Scramble Training," part movie and part communal video game, is a new amusement-park ride by Sega Enterprises.
Sega is best known as the challenger to Nintendo in home video games with its Sonic the Hedgehog character, but its president, Hayao Nakayama, has much grander goals.
"Our target," he says matter of factly, "is Disney."


How City Ballet Gave New Life To the Legacy Of Balanchine
No company other than the New York City Ballet staged a mammoth two-month celebration devoted to 73 of George Balanchine's ballets, and no other company could.
Ten years after his death, one of ballet's greatest choreographers has received the finest tribute imaginable -- an outstandingly danced survey of his work, presented on an unprecedented scale by the company he co-founded and nurtured.
Even the six-and-a-half-hour mini-retrospective with guest stars that closed the Balanchine Celebration with such eclat last Sunday night at the New York State Theater made the same point as the festival as a whole.


Two Salts, Two Boats, Two Different Purposes
For Dennis Conner and Nance Frank, both American skippers who plan to enter yachts this fall in the Whitbread Round the World Race, a voyage filled with personal hurdles comes first.
The two sailors left New York harbor yesterday aboard 60-foot yachts for the start of the Whitbread feeder competition, the Gold Cup Trans-Atlantic Race to Southampton, England.


Mandela Defends Joint Award With de Klerk
Nelson Mandela today defended his plans to receive a medal with President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa, saying Mr. de Klerk was an important part of resolving the political situation in their country.
"As far as any attempt to address the problems of our country, we need all of the political leaders with a substantial following to take part, and that includes Mr. de Klerk," Mr.
Mandela told reporters after arriving for his first visit to Philadelphia.


Attacks on Bosnian Muslims Are Intensifying After Pause
Emboldened by the resolve of the United States and its European allies not to intervene here militarily, the nationalist Serbs and Croats who have already seized most of this country are pushing forward in a new and possibly final chapter in the "ethnic cleansing" of Bosnia's Muslims.
Ten weeks ago, President Clinton's warnings of military action by the United States and its NATO partners -- perhaps in the form of the bombing of Serbian artillery positions around Sarajevo and other besieged strongholds of the mainly Muslim Bosnian Government -- appeared to have shaken the Serbian nationalist leaders.


Rising Spirits a Match for the Rising River Along Stretches of the Mississippi
The Mark Twain Memorial Bridge over the Mississippi River here is closed.
Coast Guard boats patrol two swamped neighborhoods and high water threatens an electric power station and 110,000 acres of nearby farmland.
The river is 12 feet over flood level here, the highest it has been in 20 years.
But the sun was out and, anyway, people here take their Fourth of July celebration very seriously.
They call it National Tom Sawyer Days, the 38th annual festival in honor of Mark Twain, who grew up here in the mid-1800's and borrowed some of its people and places for his books.


Muddy Waters, I Presume
THE LAND WHERE THE BLUES BEGAN By Alan Lomax.
Illustrated. 539 pp.
New York:  Pantheon Books. $25.


Mutual Funds; First-Half Buoyancy From Japan
The hottest sector in mutual funds so far this year may be gold -- up 63.1 percent after a decade in which the group lost money -- but funds that invest in Japanese stocks have shown new life, rising to second place in performance in the first six months of 1993.
As the first half came to a close last week, the six Japanese funds were up 39.1 percent, despite a recent drop of 3 percentage points in the week after the nation's Prime Minister received a no-confidence vote in Parliament.
In third place was a group of funds that invest in the Pacific Rim that rose 25.6 percent.
That group, including the Japan funds and others with interests in the Japanese market, obviously got a boost from the Tokyo gains.


Paralyzed by Scandal, Italy Focuses on German Rates
With their economy in the doldrums and their politics overshadowed by a vast corruption scandal, Italian officials say they want leaders to avoid side issues and concentrate on the question of stimulating growth.
They acknowledge that Italy has not succeeded in getting its own house in order; its state sector still controls some 50 percent of all economic activity, and its budget deficit is Europe's highest at $100 billion.
Even after Germany's interest rate cut on Thursday, one official said, Italian leaders hope its central bank will come under pressure in Tokyo to consider further reductions to help jump-start Italy's debt-burdened industries.
"The reduction is not insignificant," the official said, "but it is not enough." Leaders of Italian industrial giants like Carlo de Benedetti of Olivetti SpA described the German rate cut as "too little too late."


Transforming the Shore of a Seattle Lake
High-tech and research companies are transforming a neglected industrial area on the southern shores of a 6,718-acre lake a mile north of the downtown into a desirable workplace.
One of them, the fast-growing ZymoGenetics, planning to expand its biomedical research, is spending $25 million to restore the landmark Lake Union Steam Plant, Seattle City Light's first powerhouse, which produced electricity until 1983.


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Disarming Congress; Reports Say the Pentagon Inflated Nuclear Threats And the Cost of Defense
What price victory?
Billions of dollars spent on weapons systems the country did not need, investigators from the General Accounting Office said last week.
The reports found that the Pentagon had misled Congress about the most expensive weapons systems built for nuclear war against the Soviet Union by claiming the weapons would cost billions less -- and work far better -- than they do.
The investigators also said the Pentagon talked Congress into the nuclear build-up of the 1980's by exaggerating the threat posed by Soviet weapons and defenses.


The Greatest Show on Coney Island
ON a recent blazing Saturday afternoon, it seemed as if Coney Island had reversed its long slide into unimaginative decay and was beginning to turn around.
One source of the energy was the 11th annual Coney Island Mermaid Parade, a gaudy event that celebrates the mermaid fantasy for both sexes.
Another reason could be that many residents of the East Village in Manhattan have made the historic seaside neighborhood in Brooklyn their summer playground.
"I have never seen more tattoos in my life," said Sue Stahl, who was buying T-shirts with Coney Island iconography from a boardwalk vendor.


Hardly Out of Favor
To the Editor:
As the United States agent for Carl Orff's publisher, B. Schott's Soehne, we were delighted to read John Rockwell's article about Orff's music, in particular the new recording of "Antigonae"  [ "Orff: Two Second Thoughts," June 6 ] .
But as for Orff's music allegedly "falling out of favor," Mr.
Rockwell's statement that "Carmina Burana" is "occasionally performed on pops programs or by ballet companies" will come as a surprise to the 103 performing organizations in North America that performed "Carmina Burana" in the last 18 months.


Mary K. Bissell, H. Hedrick Belin
Mary Katharine Bissell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Bissell of Birmingham, Mich., was married there yesterday to H. Hedrick Belin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dorrance R. Belin of Waverly, Pa.
The Rev.
Louise F. Westfall performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Bissell is keeping her name.
She and her husband, both 25, graduated from Yale University, she magna cum laude.
The bride is a law student at Georgetown University.
Her father is the managing partner in New York of the consulting division of Gunderson Partners Inc., an executive search concern in Detroit.


VERBATIM
"Given that true intellectual and emotional compatibility are at the very least difficult if not impossible to come by, we could always opt for the more temporal gratification of sheer physical attraction. That wouldn't make you a shallow person, would it?"
-- Lyle Lovett, the singer and new husband of Julia Roberts.
From the song "Here I Am" on his 1989 album "Lyle Lovett and His Large Band."


Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License
THE first shots have been fired in a battle that cuts right to the heart of New Jersey's educational process, the training of its 80,700 teachers.
Over the protests of the New Jersey Education Association, the state's largest teachers' union, three separate calls have been issued to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification.
Critics have charged that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's 84-year-old tenure law, the most sacred cow of New Jersey education, since teachers have to hold licenses to receive tenure.
And the struggle over certification within the educational establishment may well become an issue in the gubernatorial campaign.


Jan Linsky and Stephen Smith
Jan Linsky, the daughter of Jane M. Linsky of State College, Pa., and the late Chester Linsky, was married yesterday to Stephen Smith, the son of Nancy Plenderleith of Wexford, Pa., and Kent Smith of Darien, Ill.
The Rev.
R.
Deane Linsky, a brother of the bride, performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Eisenhower Chapel in University Park, Pa.
Ms.
Linsky, who is keeping her name, is the director of human resources at the Sumitomo Corporation of America, a trading company in New York.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University, where her father was a professor of industrial engineering and where her mother is a technical administrator in the applied research laboratory.
The bride received a master's degree in labor and industrial relations from Michigan State University.


UP AND COMING: Michael Henry Brown; Capturing the Complexities Of a Working-Class Family
When Paul Aaron, a producer, first approached Michael Henry Brown to ask him to help create a black family drama for HBO, Mr.
Brown suggested he get somebody else.
"I've always wanted to go to Hollywood, but I was very frank with him," Mr.
Brown, a playwright, recalled.
"I said, 'Why don't you hire some Hollywood screenwriter?' "


Data Bank/July 4, 1993


Mississippi Flooding Soaks Businesses and Spirits


Buffalo Flips Over Games, Hopes for No Flops
The largest athletic event of its kind in the world except for the Olympics starts on Thursday with opening ceremonies featuring Kenny Rogers and Natalie Cole, but anxiety and civic pride are fencing for predominance as the World University Games shifts from four years of intensive planning to 11 days of reality.
Standing in line in a cavernous accreditation and operations center to enlist as a volunteer pizza shuttler, Don Naughton confessed he was there because "a lot of people don't want this to flop."


Ronnell Williams Hasn't Answered All Questions
To the Sports Editor:
I read with pained interest the piece ("The Call of a Lifetime," The Times, June 27) about the high school athlete who impregnated at least two women and who sold drugs to pay for their abortions.
Am I to infer that he is a noble man for having impregnated more than one woman apparently in a short period of time?
Am I to infer that the college that has decided to offer him a full athletic scholarship in spite of more than one sexual misdeed and a felony conviction is even more noble?


Jessica Toth, Erol Erturk
Jessica Toth, a management consultant for the San Diego Gas and Electric Company, was married yesterday to Erol Erturk, a research and development manager at the Hewlett-Packard Company in San Diego.
The Rev.
William Murry, a Unitarian minister, officiated at Woodend, a park in Chevy Chase, Md.
Ms.
Toth, who is keeping her name, graduated from Cornell University.
She and her husband received master's degrees in management from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from which the bridegroom also received a master's degree in mechanical engineering.
Ms.
Toth is a daughter of Paula and Robert Toth of Chevy Chase.
The bride's father, now retired, was a reporter in Washington for The Los Angeles Times.


Inner Landscape
To the Editor: Elizabeth Benedict should be advised that there are many synagogues in New York City where she can attend services on Friday evening or Saturday morning and then participate in a bona fide Sabbath meal.
She will find there many congregants who have returned seeking their ethnic roots.
Many of their parents are totally alienated from the Jewish scene and many of their grandparents were rabbis.


Jennifer Blum, Paul Weinschenk
Jennifer Lisa Blum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Blum of New York, was married yesterday to Paul Stephen Weinschenk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Weinschenk of Charlottesville, Va.
Judge Robert W. Sweet of United States District Court in Manhattan officiated at the Rensselaerville Institute, a community development center in Rensselaerville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Weinschenk, 27, is a law clerk in the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter and a law student at Catholic University.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a partner in Bangser Klein Rocca &amp; Blum, a New York law firm.
Her mother, Barbara B. Blum, is the president of the nonprofit Foundation for Child Development in New York.


Doing a Marathon Role In 'Lettice and Lovage'
WELCOME back to the theater, Michael Learned.
After an accumulation of Emmys (three for "The Waltons," one for "Nurse"), the actress is returning to her stage beginnings in "Lettice and Lovage" at Montclair State's Theaterfest.
Before considering her performance, which is considerable, or the play, which is not, it is important to acknowledge Ms.
Learned for taking on a marathon role, steeped in verbiage and pomposity, and giving a genuine performance instead of making a personal appearance, like the star who drops in for a summer-stock fix.


In the Region: Connecticut; Disclosure Now a Key Home-Sales Issue
DISCLOSURE is becoming the home-sales issue to reckon with in the 90's.
For verification of a property's condition and of the fealty of the broker are increasingly considered vital safeguards against unpleasant surprises following the most important purchase of a lifetime.
Not only buyers and sellers, but a decimated real estate industry find such safeguards desirable.
"Competition and litigation are rising while the number of licensed agents has dropped from 36,000 in 1988 to 19,800 today, and inventories are humongous," said Kenneth Smith, coordinator of the University of Connecticut's real estate licensing courses.


Broad Strokes Revive Interest in Whales
SPERM whales made New London famous 150 years ago.
Sailing vessels returned to the southeastern Connecticut port on a regular basis, their holds filled with oil that had been rendered from the behemoths of the sea.
Now, city officials are hoping that sperm whales will make the city famous again, but in a different way.
The environmental artist known simply as Wyland will be in New London from Tuesday to next Monday to paint a mural on the 220-by-25-foot-wall of a building that faces Eugene O'Neill Drive.
The stop in New London is part of his four-month tour of the East Coast to paint whaling walls, as these depictions of cetaceans are known.
His tour will take in 17 cities in 16 states.
Florida will be the only state to get two of the walls, one in Sarasota and one in Key West.


When the Taxi Arrives by Water
FOG hovered over Long Island Sound as the tiny ferry putt-putted past Potato Island.
The old Victorian homes on the neighboring islands -- Wheeler, Governor, Rogers, Money -- were shrouded by the ghostly gray mist.
The nearby shoreline and the Stony Creek dock were all but invisible.
It's the fog, blinding banks that roll in regularly, that poses one of the biggest challenges to living in the Thimbles, a rocky archipelago of 23 inhabited islands scattered off Branford, Conn., just east of New Haven, 85 miles from New York City.
Residents of the 95 homes in the Thimbles say that should it become foggy past sunset while you're visiting someone else's island, the safest move is not to move; consider yourself an overnight guest.


Lauren Reiff, Michael Stern
Lauren Reiff was married in New York last evening to Michael Allen Stern.
Rabbi Richard Sternberger performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Stern, 26, is a financial analyst in Washington for BIA Consulting, which appraises communications properties.
A graduate of Tufts University, she is the daughter of Babs and Hal Reiff of Harrison, N.Y.


From Movies To Mini-Series And Back
Carl Franklin, whose feature "One False Move" made him one of last year's hot young film makers, has taken his talent to television.
Next weekend, HBO will show "Laurel Avenue," a mini-series Mr.
Franklin directed that depicts a weekend in the life of a working-class black family in St.
Paul.


Julia B. Popenoe, Daniel Brainard
Julia Bowman Popenoe, a daughter of David and Katharine Popenoe of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday at the Stonybrook Friends Meeting House to Daniel Crittenden Brainard, a son of William and Ellen Brainard of New Haven.
Dr.
Popenoe, 27, is a second-year pediatric resident at Children's Hospital in Boston.
She and her husband graduated from Oberlin College, and the bride received a medical degree from Case Western Reserve University.
Her father is a professor of sociology and an associate dean of the faculty of arts and sciences at Rutgers University.
Her mother is the assistant headmaster at the Lawrenceville (N.J.) School.


POSTINGS: Auction by Satellite; Fire Headquarters Goes on the Block
It may not be a fire sale, but the New York City Fire Department headquarters in downtown Brooklyn is for sale.
The 307,000-square-foot building at 250 Livingston Street, between Hoyt and Bond Streets, is among 33 commercial, industrial and residential properties nationwide that are to be auctioned Thursday by Grubb &amp; Ellis and the Ross-Dove Company.
The auction is to be held simultaneously in Boston and Los Angeles, with a satellite link.


Auerbach Leaves Hospital
Celtics President RED AUERBACH, 75, was released yesterday from Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, two weeks after undergoing quintuple bypass surgery.
"He should be able to return to a pretty full schedule in three or four months," said Dr.
ROMAN DeSANCTIS, a cardiologist who treated Auerbach. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Wimbledon Consolation: A Royal Hug
PROTOCOL says you don't touch the royals.
Just not done, you know.
But Center Court is a special place, and strange things happen there, and not just during the matches, either.
Yesterday on Center Court, a forlorn waif named Jana Novotna put her commoner hand on the royal shoulder of Her Royal Highness, the Duchess of Kent, the designated greeter of the Royal Family at the championships each year.


Where the Emphasis Is Italian
THE spotlight of Newark's International Cultural Festival is now on Italy, and for an exhibition at the Public Library here, William Dane and Charles Cummings have joined forces.
Keeper of prints for special collections and assistant director of the same department, respectively, the two scholars have combed the library's holdings for things Italian.
They have also received a number of contributions from enthusiastic local residents.
The result is a show in two parts, "Milestones in Italian Culture," on the third floor, and "Reflections," on the second.
It is also a case of information overload.


Music for a Summer's Night
Two alfresco concerts drew thousands to Central Park, a boathouse party benefited AIDS research, Tiffany's polished its silver and a strong man flexed and was feted.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A WOMAN, A MAN, AND TWO KINGDOMS: The Story of Madame d'Epinay and the Abbe Galiani By Francis Steegmuller.
Princeton University, $14.95.
In the 1700's, Louise d'Epinay, a Paris intellectual and hostess, and the Abbe Ferdinando Galiani, a Neapolitan diplomat and scholar, shared a remarkable friendship.
This book presents it with "expert skill, urbanity and insight," Victor Brombert said here last year.
REGENERATION By Pat Barker.
William Abrahams/Plume, $10.
During World War I, the poet Siegfried Sassoon encountered his own kind of Catch-22.
A decorated British officer, he announced his intention to leave a war he considered unjust; the military responded by putting him in a mental hospital.
This novel focuses on the close relationship between the patient and his psychiatrist, Capt.
W.
H.
R.
Rivers.
Last year our reviewer, Samuel Hynes, said Ms.
Barker "is content to confront a cruel reality without polemics, without even visible anger and without evident artifice."


Elizabeth M. Ramsey, 87, Expert On Human Embryo and Placenta
Elizabeth M. Ramsey, whose discovery of a two-week-old embryo during an autopsy began her career as an authority on human embryology, died Friday at a hospital in Washington.
She was 87 and lived in Washington.
The cause was a stroke, said the Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Dr.
Ramsey worked for 36 years for Carnegie's embryology department on the Johns Hopkins University campus in Baltimore.


Two Scripts for Talking in Tokyo
JAPAN'S Ambassador to the United States, Takakazu Kuriyama, was at the White House recently to talk about the Clinton Administration's emerging Japan policy.
The Clinton team had to be patient in dealing with Japan on trade problems, said the ambassador.
The Clintonites responded in effect with two words: "Trade imbalance." Washington should not forget the importance of security and political cooperation with Japan, said the ambassador.
The Clintonites responded: "Trade imbalance."
It went on that way for an hour, as the American side tried to hammer home to the Japanese the shift in Japan policy being undertaken by the Clinton Administration.
Since World War II United States-Japan policy has been like a three-legged stool: the security relationship, focused on cooperation against the Soviet Union, the political relationship, focused on cooperation to promote democracy around the globe, and the economic relationship, with all of the frictions over trade.


Katherine Adams, Forwood Wiser 3d
Katherine Leatherman Adams, the daughter of John and Patricia Adams of Garrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Forwood Cloud Wiser 3d, the son of Martha Wiser of Princeton, N.J., and the late Mr.
Wiser Jr.
The Rev.
Ray Donohue, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Beaverkill (N.Y.) Methodist Church.
Ms.
Adams, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Brown University and has a law degree from the University of Chicago.
Next month she will become a clerk to Justice Sandra Day O'Connor of the Supreme Court.
Her father is the executive director of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental advocacy group in New York.
Her mother is a writer.


Dodging Trade Criticism, a Wobbly Tokyo Plays Host
With the economy in recession and the Government in danger of being ousted by voters this month, the Japanese would in some ways prefer a stalemate to a summit meeting that ends in firm agreements.
What they would like is a meeting with lots of understanding rather than accords that would corner them into taking tough economic steps.
For months, bureaucrats in Tokyo have been growing edgy over demands by other countries that Japan lift its economy out of recession and boost its imports with a big stimulus package to encourage spending.
The United States has even asked Tokyo to commit itself to specific targets for reducing its huge trade surpluses.


The Executive Life; A Me-First Scramble To Find Screen Gems
A cadre of young, globe-trotting movie executives charged with knowing every nonstudio film being made around the world is transforming the way these movies are bought for distribution.
No longer are these executives waiting for Cannes or Berlin or Toronto or other major film festivals to screen the best of international cinema at the same time as all the other independent distributors, then making their offers in their own time.
In today's cutthroat global film economy, where financing dollars are scarce and releasing costs astronomical -- and where only a handful of independent releases succeed in North America each year -- getting to the right movie first has become the key to survival.


Ms. Sidamon-Eristoff and Mr. Lewis
Elizabeth Sidamon-Eristoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff of New York, was married yesterday to Hunter Lewis, a son of Emily S. Lewis of New York and Welbourne W. Lewis Jr. of Dayton, OhLewis io.
The Rev.
Joseph P. Kreta of the Orthodox Church in America performed the ceremony at St.
George's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Lewis, a graduate of Yale University, is a painter.
Her father, a former administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency's New York region, is of counsel to the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
Her mother, Anne Phipps Sidamon-Eristoff, is a vice chairman of the American Museum of Natural History in New York and secretary of the World Wildlife Fund.


Ending Abuse by Priests
I will not knowingly permit a single act of abuse to be covered up or excused, and I will involve myself in the process of healing any wounds that have been opened.
With these words, John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop of New York, released a detailed plan for dealing with the cases of sexual abuse by priests that have rocked the Roman Catholic Church for nearly a decade.


Manager's Profile; Elizabeth J. Allan
Fund: The Japan Fund Inc., $535 million in assets.
Manager since 1990. (Sponsor: Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark Inc., New York)


Fragile Recovery Is Britain's Strongest Suit
Unlike the other European members of the Group of Seven, Britain seems to be pulling out of a recession.
British officials hope the signs of recovery will bolster the credibility of Prime Minister John Major as he argues for steps to restore growth in the global economy.
At the same time, opinion polls suggest that Mr.
Major is the least popular leader Britain has had in decades.
And while the Prime Minister clearly relishes the opportunity to play the role of statesman, senior officials in London say he does not believe the meeting will yield any agreement of substance, especially now that Germany has preempted some of the pressure to speed up its interest-rate reductions.


Cuba Cutting Direct Phone Service From U.S.
Strapped for hard currency, Cuba has notified A.T.&amp; T. that it is sharply reducing the number of telephone calls the country will accept from the telephone company, A.T.&amp; T. officials said this week.
The officials said Thursday that the Cuban Government had announced it would cut incoming calls to about 20,000 minutes a month, from 20,000 minutes a day.


Compromise Is Reached On Rent Rules
New York State legislative leaders agreed to a compromise plan tonight that would eventually remove rent protections on about 12,000 apartments rented by wealthy tenants, almost all of them living in Manhattan.
But as part of the compromise, the lawmakers said they would extend regulations stabilizing rents on about one million apartments in New York City and its suburbs for four more years, twice as long as they had been extended in the past.


Correction
A review on May 23 about "The Line of Fire: From Washington to the Gulf, the Politics and Battles of the New Military," by William J. Crowe Jr. with David Chanoff, misstated the year in which Admiral Crowe and President Jimmy Carter graduated from the United States Naval Academy.
It was 1946.
Both men are members of the Academy's class of 1947, but graduated early because of an accelerated schedule adopted during World War II.


Deities, Dancing and Percussionists
THE third annual International Performing Arts Festival will be a nine-hour drumming marathon starting at 1 P.M. on Saturday in Bushnell Park in Hartford.
"This year we're taking the pulse of human expression on both sides of the Atlantic," said Tim Wolf, founder and a director of the festival, "celebrating rhythm makers and innovators who use the tool of rhythm to inspire deities, dancing and new worlds of sound."
Among the participating artists are Glen Velez, percussionist with the Paul Winter Consort (and before that a member of Steve Reich and Musicians), Samm Bennett, who improvises on an electronically enhanced drum set, the Ghanian ensemble Odadaa, and Virunga, a popular music group from Kenya.
Admission and parking is free, and should the weather fail to cooperate, all performances move indoors to Lincoln Theater at the University of Hartford.
For more information, call 956-5586.


Cone and Royals Put Sting on the Blue Jays
Royals 3, Blue Jays 2


F.B.I. Watches for Retaliation In Wake of Sheik's Detention
In a sign of concern about possible retaliation by followers of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Federal Bureau of Investigation today opened the command post that it uses to keep watch over crises, Clinton Administration officials said.
They said the post would be used to monitor developments in the wake of Mr.
Abdel Rahman's detention in New York and to deploy agents to respond to them if necessary.
Authorities in New York, meanwhile, increased security at airports, tunnel, bridges and a number of buildings.


Chain-Saw Army Fights Surge of Elm Disease
Summer in a New York City park: children dashing through a fountain's spray, ice cream vendors making change, opera surging across the grass at twilight -- and this year, the drone of chain saws.
The chain saws are tools in an effort to combat a new surge of Dutch elm disease.
Victimized by budget cuts, mild weather and possibly a new strain of the disease that wiped out millions of trees nationwide earlier in the century, the city's 32,000 American elm trees are once again at risk, experts say.


By Windjammer
To the Editor: Thanks to Betsy Wade, I opened the Sunday paper and was hit with an ocean breeze: There we were off the coast of Maine on a windjammer.
This is a way of life that is as endangered as the whales who cruise these same seas.
Save for a few foolhardy souls who strive to make a living three months a year, this way of life would vanish also.
They do it for the love of these old ships, and the seas they sail.


7 Rich Nations Expecting Little At Tokyo Talks
Struggling with slow economic growth, high unemployment and bitter trade disputes, the leaders of the world's seven wealthiest nations will gather here for their annual summit meeting next week amid widespread doubts that they will make much progress in setting the global economy on a more prosperous course.
Negotiations on resolving the remaining differences among the so-called Group of Seven -- the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada -- are continuing and may yet produce modest agreements on liberalizing the world trading system, pumping new life into the industrial economies and providing financial assistance to Russia.


The 43% President
BILL CLINTON'S political fortunes have fluctuated as wildly and rapidly as those of any President in recent history.
In the 1992 Presidential campaign, he seemed one of the most impressive politicians of his time.
By the end of his first four months in office, he was being widely dismissed as an inept and rudderless leader.
Now, after weeks of careful repositioning, he appears slowly to be regaining the public's ear.
How do we explain such radical swings in public perception?
Is the President himself responsible for the roller-coaster-like character of his Presidency so far?
Or has he been the victim -- and at times beneficiary -- of events beyond his control?
The new Administration has, to be sure, made its share of early mistakes.
But the speed with which many of them seem to have been forgotten suggests that they received more attention than they deserved -- and more attention than the similar early missteps of most of Clinton's predecessors.
What has made the President's first months so rocky has been less his own performance, which includes real achievements as well as failures, than the character of the contemporary political environment.


Transit Union Urges Legislature To Reduce Retirement Age to 50
In an 11th-hour lobbying blitz, New York City's transit workers' union has asked the Legislature to allow most union members to retire with full pensions earlier than they can now.
Officials of the Transport Workers Union present their proposal as a legislator's dream: one that would increase union morale without costing the New York City Transit Authority an extra dime.


Miss Atwater, Dr. Briccetti
Dr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Atwater of Rochester have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rebecca Wolcott Atwater, to Dr.
Frederick Michael Briccetti, a son of Dorothy L. Briccetti of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Frederick J. Briccetti.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Atwater, a graduate of Brown University, is an executive editor at Paramount Publishing in New York.
Her father is a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Rochester.


Go Ahead, Kill Them Off
To the Editor:
Stephen King's suggestion, in "Son of Best Seller Stalks the Moors" (June 6), for a possible sequel to "From Here to Eternity" is, of course, several decades behind the times.
James Jones himself followed it with "The Thin Red Line" (1962) and then "Whistle" (1978).


On Fifth Avenue, Two New Buildings Come to the Rescue
HAIL, TAKASHIMAYA AND 565 Fifth Avenue: so great is the symbolic importance of Fifth Avenue that the arrival of even a couple of small buildings on this street is an event of architectural significance.
Actually, maybe small buildings make for greater architectural significance than large ones, since part of what's gone so dismally wrong with Fifth Avenue in the last 20 years is that it's gotten too many buildings that are far too big for it.
Here's one place where a little less would add up to a lot more.
Fifth Avenue is not a street of skyscrapers.
It may be New York City's most renowned street, but its fame does not come from New York's most renowned building type.
What gave the mile or so of Fifth Avenue below Central Park its remarkable ambiance was its sequence of low masonry buildings, six or eight or a dozen stories tall, each one elegantly detailed, built out to the street and lined with lavish shops.
Where there were skyscrapers, as at Rockefeller Center, the towers were pushed back from the avenue behind low bases that fit the traditional mode of Fifth. (Even the tower of the Empire State Building down at 34th Street sits back, behind a five-story base.)


Men's Style; Dependents Day
The best thing about the July 4 weekend is the extra time you have with family and friends.
To enjoy it, you need stuff that hangs tough and looks good swinging from a tree or pedaling a bike -- clothes that come clean after being pelted in a watermelon fight.
Oh, sure, you can get away with ripped T-shirts and jeans, but don't forget, these are the people who have already seen you at your worst.
So why not surprise them this Independence holiday and finally measure up?


Travel Costs Fell a Bit in U.S.
The cost of travel in the United States dipped in April for the first time in 1993, according to the United States Travel Data Center's Travel Price Index.
The drop was five-tenths of 1 percent from the March level.
The hotel industry cut prices 1.9 percent, and air fares dipped 0.8 percent compared with March. (Regular, not discounted, hotel rates and air fares are used in the comparison.) Motor fuel prices were up 1.1 percent from March.


Stephanie Jeong, William Gleason
Stephanie Anne Jeong and William Franklin Gleason 3d, vice presidents in corporate finance at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York, are planning a September wedding, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Jeong Jr. of Huntington Beach, Calif., have announced.
Mr.
Gleason is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gleason Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
Miss Jeong, 28, graduated from Brown University.
Her father owns a real-estate investment advisory concern bearing his name in Newport Beach, Calif.


Conversations/Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo; He Wants to See His Former Jailer, But Is Castro Ready for Him?
AS commander of the Second Front Army, Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo was one of Fidel Castro's principal allies in the struggle to overthrow the Batista dictatorship.
As founder of the exile paramilitary group Alpha 66, he later became one of Mr.
Castro's most bitter adversaries and, eventually, a prisoner for 22 years of the very regime he helped establish.
Now this former guerrilla leader has returned to the battle for Cuba's future in yet another guise: as an advocate of sitting down and talking with the enemy in Havana.


Race and the Workplace
To the Editor:
The article contributed (perhaps unwittingly) to the feelings of hostility and resentment on the part of white males against African-Americans, women and other groups whose economic opportunities have been historically limited because of racism, sexism and other isms that seek to legitimize hatred and bigotry.


Screens With Splines Are Easiest to Repair
REPAIRING torn or sagging window and door screens is easy and takes just a short time, making it an ideal summer project.
If you do not object to the cost of new screening -- material for a 3 x 4-foot window costs about $2.50 -- replacing some torn screens can be as easy as repairing them, and the finished result can be more attractive.
Screens held in place by a vinyl cord called a spline, pressed into a groove around the frame, are the easiest to replace.
Remove the frame from the window or door -- the frames are often found in metal combination storm and screen doors -- so that it can be laid flat.
Measure the opening covered by the screen and buy replacement screening that is at least two inches longer and wider than those dimensions.


Big on Nature, but Small on Salmon
On our drive north to Errol, where we planned to canoe to a remote campsite on the Maine side of Lake Umbagog, we pulled off Route 16 to watch a trio of anglers on the Androscoggin River.
They were fishing the spot just downstream of the lower end of the Mollidgewock campgrounds, a location where one may wade out into the river for 20 or 30 yards.


Jean Dubuffet, Giving Pleasure Despite Himself
From beginning to end, the Jean Dubuffet exhibition here at the Hirshhorn Museum is a pleasure to see.
Has any other artist strived so hard to seem rude and irascible and yet spread so much pleasure?
It was the central paradox of Dubuffet's career that he both debunked the art establishment more vigorously and received more encomiums from it than probably any European artist of his generation.
He made his debut in Paris to fanfare in 1944, his wit and mischievousness apparently proving to be just what that enervated city needed after years of deprivation and humiliation.
From then until his death in 1985, at the age of 83, Dubuffet enjoyed the kind of recognition artists mostly dream of.


Painting Behind Locked Doors
CONTRADICTIONS Artistic Life, the Socialist State, and the Chinese Painter Li Huasheng.
By Jerome Silbergeld with Gong Jisui.
Illustrated. 242 pp.
Seattle: University of Washington Press. $50.


Screens With Splines Are Easiest to Repair
REPAIRING torn or sagging window and door screens is easy and takes just a short time, making it an ideal summer project.
If you do not object to the cost of new screening -- material for a 3 x 4-foot window costs about $2.50 -- replacing some torn screens can be as easy as repairing them, and the finished result can be more attractive.
Screens held in place by a vinyl cord called a spline, pressed into a groove around the frame, are the easiest to replace.
Remove the frame from the window or door -- the frames are often found in metal combination storm and screen doors -- so that it can be laid flat.
Measure the opening covered by the screen and buy replacement screening that is at least two inches longer and wider than those dimensions.


No Headline
They put in a flood wall to save Mark Twain's house and all the stuff about that dead man, so I don't know why they don't help the living.
VIRGINIA L. FOILES, on the south side of Hannibal, Mo.  [ 18:4. ]


BEST SELLERS: July 4, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
47
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
5
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
16
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
4
3
5
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
6
12
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
7
9
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
7
8
2
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
8
5
133
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
9
9
9
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
10
11
2
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
11
13
4
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
12
10
11
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
13
16
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young patent clerk.
14
2
THE RED HORSEMAN, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $23.) An American intelligence officer struggles to obtain control of Soviet nuclear forces.
15
15
2
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) Romantic and chaotic experiences of a young woman who is raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
42
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
3
3
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
3
11
2
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
4
2
47
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
5
4
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation; reclassified this week as nonfiction.
6
4
8
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
7
6
20
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
8
8
29
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
9
5
8
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
10
7
11
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
11
9
5
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
12
10
4
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
13 *
13
3
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans and suggests ways for addressing them.
14
12
33
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
15 *
15
39
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
51
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
2
4
16
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
3
1
10
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
4
1
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet and nutrition.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ANGELS &amp; INSECTS: Two Novellas, by A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $21.) Two long novellas, and very clever ones, in which insect life is an analogue of Victorian society and literary immortality is compared to the real thing.
CRUELTY AND SILENCE: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World, by Kanan Makiya. (Norton, $22.95.) The cruelty is that of the Saddam Hussein regime in the author's native Iraq; the silence, that of the Arab intellectuals who condone or assist it.
FROM THE HEAT OF THE DAY, by Roy Heath. (Persea, $19.95.) The trapped lives of a married couple suffer irruptions of revelation or transcendence in a Guyanese poet's lucid novel.
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir describing how the author, "interrupted in the music of being 17," spent two years of her youth as a mental patient.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
MARY RENAULT: A Biography, by David Sweetman. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A kindly account of the author who disdained to preach the liberal attitude toward homosexuality that is implicit in her splendid historical novels.
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Mr. le Carre's solution to the disappearance of the Soviet Union is to create an arms dealer-cum-drug lord as smart as the Devil.
PACK MY BAG: A Self-Portrait, by Henry Green. (New Directions, $18.95.) Green (1905-73) published this memoir in Britain in 1940; now it appears here, offering glances into a life the enigmatic novelist largely chose not to reveal.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
A RIVER SUTRA, by Gita Mehta. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $20.) The setting for these interlocking stories is an idealized India, free of political and religious violence.
SAVE ME, JOE LOUIS, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Harcourt Brace, $23.95.) The grifters and drifters in this novel think they're pretty good guys, but their actions suggest otherwise.
SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War, by Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of a middleman in the exchange of political prisoners during the cold war.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.
UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In 40 years of essays and articles, the author expounds on sex, politics, literature, himself and other phenomena.


By Windjammer
To the Editor: Reading "By Windjammer Around Penobscot Bay," I found the account to have some bright spots interspersed among many items that were unfairly critical.
When you book passage on a windjammer, you are returning to a simpler way of life, like the modern-day traveler who joins a contemporary wagon train, or travels to Mystic or Williamsburg.
These ships travel to remote harbors to enjoy the beauty and serenity.
That experience alone has always been intoxicating enough for me without having to search for a complete spirits locker.


POSTINGS: 50,000 Square Feet for Rent; Grand Spaces in Grand Central
In a building where one single room (the main concourse) has a vaulted ceiling 120 feet high, even nooks and crannies can have a monumental quality.
So when the Metropolitan Transportation Authority assessed the retail potential of Grand Central Terminal, it found some remarkable sites for restaurants and stores.
There is the 5,000-square-foot incoming train room, which can be reached from a street entrance at 43d Street and Vanderbilt Avenue.
There is the 10,000-square-foot main waiting room, off 42d Street, where a new restaurant is to be housed.
There are the balconies overlooking the main concourse, with 23,000 square feet of space, one of which is already used by the Grand Central Cafe.
And there is the lower-level suburban concourse, with 35,000 square feet of public area, much of which might be set aside as a food court.


Sound Bytes; Smoothing the Flow As Peripherals Multiply
John Adler, chairman and chief executive of Adaptec Inc. of Milpitas, Calif., is an embodiment of the American success story.
As a Jew in Hungary during the Hitler years, he recalls scrounging for scraps of food and hiding from the Nazis.
After the Communist takeover, he was put to work as a maintenance man at a power plant.
He fled to the United States, penniless, but got a scholarship to learn English and later to study electrical engineering.
After graduation he was hired by I.B.M. ("$115 a week, I was filthy rich") and quickly rose in the company's management.
Burned out by 1979, he quit, bought a boat and "sailed out of San Francisco harbor and turned left." Two years later, refreshed, he returned to join Amdahl, but in 1985 an old I.B.M. friend lured him to Adaptec.
Adaptec makes devices called SCSI host adapters and software for PC's.
SCSI, which stands for small computer systems interface and is pronounced "scuzzy," directs the flow of information between a computer's processor and its peripherals.
Question: One of the great things about the Apple Macintosh is its easy, plug-and-play scuzzy connections.
Why isn't scuzzy on the PC just as simple?


Democrats Protest a Barrage of Last-Minute Legislation
JUNE and the State Legislature were busting out all over last month as hundreds of bills were considered by the Republican-controlled Senate and Assembly.
Democratic leaders contend that partisan politics is behind the barrage of legislation.
In four sessions last month, the Senate considered 220 separate pieces of legislation, while the Assembly, in just three sessions, dealt with 185 bills.
The measures ranged from those with statewide impact, like the $15.4 billion budget bill and a big anticrime package, to those of lesser scope, like one creating a special license plate for "classic" automobiles.


Broad Strokes Revive Interest in Whales
SPERM whales made New London famous 150 years ago.
Sailing vessels returned to the southeastern Connecticut port on a regular basis, their holds filled with oil that had been rendered from the behemoths of the sea.
Now, city officials are hoping that sperm whales will make the city famous again, but in a different way.
The environmental artist known simply as Wyland will be in New London from Tuesday to next Monday to paint a mural on the 220-by-25-foot-wall of a building that faces Eugene O'Neill Drive.
The stop in New London is part of his four-month tour of the East Coast to paint whaling walls, as these depictions of cetaceans are known.
His tour will take in 17 cities in 16 states.
Florida will be the only state to get two of the walls, one in Sarasota and one in Key West.


Sampras and Courier: Friendly Fire in Final
Back when they were rookies exploring life on the professional tennis circuit and occasionally playing hooky from it on the golf course, back when neither their handicaps nor their rankings were in the single digits and they hadn't yet made their first million, Pete Sampras and Jim Courier were buddies.
But time, talent and tennis titles have changed all that, and when the No. 1-ranked Sampras squares off against No. 2-ranked Courier in the final round of Wimbledon Sunday afternoon, friendship will be the last thing on their minds.


Cup Riot Bill Is $2.5 Million
The riot that followed last month's Stanley Cup triumph by the Montreal Canadiens probably will cost insurers about $2.5 million for damages to private property, much less than originally predicted, according to the director general of the Insurance Bureau of Canada.


Stepping Over the Line
To the Editor:
In his essay "In This Dream Station Future and Past Collide"  [ June 20 ] , Herbert Muschamp frets about the degree of visibility and amount of space devoted to retail shopping and advertising signs in Amtrak's proposed station in the landmark James A. Farley Building.
At the same time, he ignores what may be a more serious preservation issue associated with this extraordinary project.


Janine LeBlanc and Anthony Straceski
Dr.
Janine Marie LeBlanc, a research associate at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, was married yesterday to Dr.
Anthony Joseph Straceski, a cardiologist at Montefiore Medical Center, both in the Bronx.
The Rev.
Kevin Toomey performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Jude Church in Waltham, Mass.
Dr.
LeBlanc-Straceski graduated from Tufts University and received a Ph.D. in molecular biology and biochemistry from Wesleyan University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. LeBlanc of Watertown, Mass.
Her father is a physicist with the United States Air Force Geophysics Laboratory in Bedford, Mass.
Her mother, Gracemarie V. LeBlanc, is a librarian at the Watertown (Mass.) Middle School.


Ronnell Williams Hasn't Answered All Questions
To the Sports Editor:
As a reader and journalist, I wish Ira Berkow had asked two more questions of Ronnell Williams ("The Call of a Lifetime," The Times, June 27):


Pamela Jarvis, Richard Mauro
Pamela Jarvis, a lawyer in Fort Lee, N.J., and Richard Mauro, a teacher in Brooklyn, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Andrew Struzzieri, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Refuge Church in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Jarvis, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president and the general counsel at Sanus Corporation Health Systems, a managed-health-care company.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received her law degree from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Ursula S. Colby of South Chatham, Mass., and Theodore Jarvis of Acton, Mass.
The bride's previous marriage was annulled, as was the bridegroom's.


Esthetics Vs. Expediency
To the Editor:
The relocated Amtrak lobby proposed for Penn Station represents expensive, prettified inconvenience.
It is comparable to giving the towering headpiece of a Las Vegas showgirl to someone with weak knees and osteoporosis.


Date Rape Debate
In my college days (1977-1981), when you woke up with a hangover, in someone else's bed, you had no one to blame but yourself.
Now, under the aegis of date rape, you can blame him for your hangover and for what, in the light of day, you decide is a regrettable sexual encounter.
You could probably even blame him for the bad grade you are sure to get on your midterm (the one you meant to come home and study for) that will pull down your course grade that will pull down your G.P.A. that means you will not graduate cum laude.
ALISON C. CORVINGTON Garden City, L.I.


Hill and Thomas Testify Again For $24.95
Almost as soon as the television cameras were turned away from Anita Hill, Clarence Thomas and their mind-spinning 1991 testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, we might have expected a video version.
The predictable follow-up would have been a made-for-TV docudrama that explored the charges of sexual harassment made by a law professor (played by Alfre Woodard, because she has to be tough and dignified) against a Supreme Court nominee (played by Danny Glover, because he has to be hurt and angry).
Toss in Robert Stack as Senator Arlen Specter, and before you could say Waco or Amy Fisher, the producers should have been counting their money.
More than a year and a half later, that hasn't happened, and the seriousness of the issue is only the smallest reason why.
A bigger reason is that the truth behind the he-said, she-said controversy has remained murky, so any drama that took sides would alienate a large portion of the audience -- something television hates to do.
And what point would there be to a video version that didn't try to sort out lies from truth?
We might as well watch the Senate hearings all over again.


Mary C. Jordan, Kevin J. Sullivan
Mary Catherine Jordan and Kevin Joseph Sullivan, both reporters for The Washington Post, were married in Washington yesterday.
The Rev.
Francis A. Sullivan, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Dahlgren Chapel on the campus of Georgetown University.
Ms.
Jordan, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Jordan of Cleveland.


Serbs' Staunchest Allies Questioning Ancient Link
To underline just how close Serbia and Montenegro are, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia once remarked that the two republics are like "two eyes in the same head." But these days the two eyes do not seem to be looking in the same direction.
As the junior partner in what is left of the Yugoslav federation, Montenegro is suffering even more than Serbia from international sanctions for supporting the Serbs fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Its economy, based on trade and tourism, is shattered.


Floating Mural Draws Attention to Water Supply


Date Rape Debate
As a volunteer hot-line counselor at a rape-crisis center, I believe that the premise of Roiphe's article is sadly incorrect.
Her question, "If 25 percent of my women friends were really being raped, wouldn't I know it?" reflects an all too typical insensitivity to the most damaging characteristic of rape: silence.
PAMELA A. DAIKER-MIDDAUGH Cleveland Heights, Ohio


Larsen Creates 'the Simple Life,' Richly
WHEN Jack Lenor Larsen, the textile designer,hung out a shingle in 1949 that said "Jack Larsen, Weaver," his first customer was a homemaker who brought in her husband's torn pants for mending.
A few years later, as head of his own fabric business, Jack Lenor Larsen Inc. in Manhattan, his customers were celebrated architects like Eero Saarinen and Louis Kahn, commissioning Larsen designs for major projects.
Now, 40 years after starting the company of which he is chairman and design director, Mr.
Larsen's enterprises employ hundreds of thousands of artisans carding wool, spinning yarn and producing fabrics in more than 30 countries.


From Deadbeat To Darling In Argentina
A year ago, the banks that had made the mistake of lending money to YPF, the Argentinian state oil company, were forced to take substantial losses on those loans.
Last week, American investors -- no doubt including portfolio managers from some of the same banks -- eagerly bought shares in YPF.
That dramatic turnaround is indicative of just how much friendlier capital markets have become to some companies.
Privatization is in, whether in Latin America or Europe, and investors are quite willing to forgive past sins.
"There is an accelerating appetite on the part of U.S. investors for non-American securities," says Bill Donaldson, chairman of the New York Stock Exchange.


Now Sex and Violence Link at an Earlier Age
EIGHT 9- to 13-year-olds in an elementary school in Yonkers, N.Y., were charged last month with sexual assault after a 12-year-old girl told the police that she had been thrown to the ground, held down and fondled on a school playground.
School officials said those involved had apparently been "playing a rape game" that got out of hand.
And seven Montclair, N.J., teen-agers were arrested last week and accused of a series of sexual attacks on two 14-year-old girls.
One of them said she had been gang-raped three times -- once in a school stairwell.
Three of the accused were seventh graders.


The Executive Computer; New for Graphic Artists: Photoshop for Windows
The Apple Macintosh has been the computer of choice for most graphic artists since its introduction in 1984, even though it is only partly compatible with the I.B.M.-style personal computers used in businesses.
But with the rise in popularity of Windows software, a growing number of graphic artists are discovering that they can do their jobs just as easily, and in some cases faster and more conveniently, on Intel-based PC's.
The best example of this is Adobe Photoshop, long the premier software for editing and processing photographic images on the Macintosh.
Adobe Systems Inc. has now created Photoshop for Windows, and that version appears to be every bit as strong as its Macintosh counterpart.


SURFACING
VIDEO -- "An Affair to Remember": Video stores are reporting a rush of requests for this 1957 Cary Grant tear-jerker that's a favorite of the women in this summer's hit romance "Sleepless in Seattle." LANGUAGE -- Barney Slugs: A toddler couch potato, specifically one with an insatiable appetite for "Barney and Friends," which features a gratingly saccharine, infuriatingly popular purple dinosaur that parents love to hate.
FASHION -- Decorated Doc Martens: Now that these boots have become a fashion staple, wearers are personalizing them by hanging rings, keys, trolls and other playthings from the shoe labels.


Streetscapes: 823 Park Avenue; Is That the Ghost of '29 Out There?
IT is a thought that makes any property owner's blood run cold -- owners abandoning a 38-unit prewar Park Avenue apartment house over about $750,000 in back taxes.
But that is what has happened at 823 Park Avenue, near East 75th Street.
Although it seems that a dispute among the owners, the 823 Park Avenue Partnership, was as much the cause as the drop in the real estate market, it provokes another question: Could things get as bad as they were in the Depression?
And how bad was it on Park Avenue?


Sports of the Times; Honesty and Culpability: A Bribe Is a Bribe
SUPPOSE, just suppose, that Jesse Ferguson had splashed into the tank after Ray Mercer offered him $100,000 to lose.
If Ferguson suddenly had flopped around like a hooked trout in the late rounds of their Feb. 6 heavyweight bout, if whispers of a fix had surfaced, if the Manhattan District Attorney's office had investigated, if a grand jury had listened to Mercer's words on the HBO videotape, wouldn't Ferguson have been indicted for having fixed a fight?


Newly Found Lincoln Files Show Wide Range of Early Legal Work
By luck and by educated guesswork, scholars of Abraham Lincoln have discovered a cache of 34 legal documents in Lincoln's familiar clear and open handwriting in the basement of the Tazewell County Courthouse in Pekin, Ill.
The documents had been overlooked but well preserved in files for nearly a century and a half.
Historians say the new documents are significant because they show the wide range of Lincoln's early practice in every kind of case, civil and criminal, for clients large and small, who wanted a lawyer with a reputation as a courtroom advocate who could sway juries, cut losses through settlements and invoke legal technicalities to delay or gain an advantage in a difficult case.
Signing for Others
Cullom Davis, the director of the Lincoln Legal Papers, a project in Springfield that is documenting Lincoln's law practice from 1836 to 1861, said the legal documents were preserved primarily because they were not signed by Lincoln.


Building Stronger Cases in Gun Trials
There is no question that on the night of Dec. 13, 1992, at least one of two men arrested in East Flatbush, Brooklyn, violated state gun laws.
Lester Smith and Orson Grosse were pulled over by Police Officer Michael Dalton and his partner for a routine traffic violation.
In the car the police found a loaded 10-millimeter Glock semiautomatic, a $600 gun.
Neither man had a permit.
Even if one did, the gun is supposed to be transported unloaded, in a locked box in the trunk.
A Brooklyn assistant district attorney, Kyle Reeves, called it a "stronger than average" gun case.
His first offer to the 21-year-old Mr.
Grosse was 1 to 3 years. (The driver of the car disappeared; there is a bench warrant for his arrest.) The prosecutor's final offer was 30 days, again refused.
Mr.
Grosse probably would have been offered probation, except that illegal guns are such a menace that the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, has implemented a policy of seeking prison time in all gun cases.
More Complex Than It Seemed
But this apparently simple case, which went to trial last month, turned out to be not so simple, and its resolution has much to say about the complexities of law enforcement in New York City.
It mirrors the forces at work in both the high-profile, racially charged Crown Heights murder trial last year and in the daily grind of Brooklyn Supreme Court.


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Nigeria; A General Dodges Elections, And Even Officers Protest
The commitment of Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, the military head of Nigeria, to civilian rule has had a zigzag pattern.
He twice postponed elections, let them be held at last on June 12, then annulled the results 10 days ago.
But after protests from Great Britain and the United States, he said he would relinquish power to a civilian government on Aug. 27, as initially planned.
The Clinton Administration views General Babangida's change of heart with skepticism.
Administration officials note that while he has once more promised elections, he has barred the two original candidates from running again for President.
American policy makers doubt whether new candidates can be freely selected or elections organized in less than two months.


Who Needs Sentimental Ecstasy?
To the Editor:
Many thanks for Stacy Schiff's essay on Antoine de Saint-Exupery.


Swimmers' Guide To 1,200 Pools
Travelers who swim laps have a harder time getting their exercise than runners.
A new paperback guide to 1,200 pools in 750 towns in the United States, by Bill Haverland and Tom Saunders of Miami, eases the task with information on admission prices, hours of operation and the like.
Entries are organized by state and city.
Some entries lack full details, and postcards are bound in for readers' suggestions.


The Texas Three-Step
The Texas horizon goes on forever, punctuated by the occasional oil rig, the lackadaisical cattle herd, and every once in a while, flat urban sprawl.
And everywhere (at least on weekends, as sunset approaches), there are discrete plumes of smoke rising like tumbleweed across the big blue sky.
Barbecue smoke is to the Texas skyline what cathedral spires are to European capitals: sacred things, icons of identity.
Barbecue fanatics speak of it more like religion than cooking.
In Texas, says Dean Fearing, chef of the Mansion on Turtle Creek in Dallas, "Barbecue is God."


EGYPT ASKING U.S. FOR EXTRADITION OF RADICAL CLERIC
The Egyptian Government, in an abrupt shift in policy, has asked the United States to extradite Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Islamic cleric who was detained on Friday in New York on immigration charges, to Egypt, senior Government officials said today.
"The United States and Egypt have decided to work together to deliver this criminal to Egypt to stand trial," said an Egyptian official.
"He is just one man. We can handle him."


If You're Thinking of Living in: Rowayton
ROWAYTON residents liken their neighborhood to a Norman Rockwell painting and to towns along the Maine coast.
Everyone in the community, which has 500 boat slips, 200 moorings and 4 marinas, seems to know everyone else.
"In Rowayton no one minds if you're fancy or if you're not fancy," said Grace W. Lichtenstein, chairman of the three-member elected commission of Norwalk's Sixth Taxing District, which was set up in 1921 by the Connecticut Legislature to allow Rowayton residents to tax themselves to supply services not provided by Norwalk.
Those taxes -- the figure was $555,000 last year -- are applied to the parks, beach and library that help give the community a sense of its own identity, as well as to garbage collection and other services.


Poached Peaches, No Cream
POACHED peaches make a superb low-calorie summer dessert -- provided you leave off the ice cream.
Since France produces some of the best peaches in the world, it is hardly surprising that French chefs have come up with some of the best ways to cook them: in wine.
Georges Blanc of La Mere Blanc in France poaches white peaches in cabernet sauvignon and serves them with a syrup thickened with raspberry puree.
Raymond Blanc (no relation) of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons at Great Milton near Oxford, England, cooks peaches in white wine with slices of orange and lemon.


The Glories Of France In Miniature
EAST of Paris, in the lurid form of the Euro Disney theme park, lies a sort of United States in miniature, complete with New York delis, rodeos, imitation brownstones and pasta smothered in sun-dried tomatoes.
In Elancourt, an equal distance to the west of the capital, it is France that has been scaled down to its essential icons in a Lilliputian park-cum-museum known as "France Miniature."
The place is certainly small -- a mere nine acres compared with the 4,800 of the Disney resort.
But it is packed with 170 beautifully executed, small scale models of monuments, castles, factories and entire villages.
They are arrayed with the dual aim of packaging France for the tourist who in a couple of hours can see its principal monuments in miniature, and of amusing, perhaps even educating, children.


Finding a Lifeboat in a Flood of Asbestos Litigation
WHEN a company faces tens of thousands of lawsuits, nurturing innovative ways to control legal costs can be as crucial to survival as creating new products.
Recognizing that, the Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation, a defendant in about 85,000 asbestos cases, has become a pacesetter among the many businesses moving to limit legal expenses.
From their base at the company's research and development campus here, some 30 miles east of Columbus, Ohio, Owens-Corning's asbestos litigation managers have pared the number of outside defense firms they use to just 7, from 60 in 1988.
That gives the company increased leverage in price negotiations because each firm now has a bigger share of the business and more incentive to do what Owens wants to keep it.


Who Needs Sentimental Ecstasy?
To the Editor:
When Stacy Schiff's biography of Antoine de Saint-Exupery becomes available next year, she is likely to devote some attention to criticisms of the French author, as she did in her essay "A Grounded Soul: Saint-Exupery in New York" (May 30).
She wrote: "His innocence was not always an admirable trait. He was childishly addicted to honesty," as when he related his marital problems to the women in his life.
She also noted that he has been charged with "Boy Scoutism" by those who consider "The Little Prince" mawkish.


Using the End Game As a Total Weapon
IN winning the Sixth International Open Tournament, played May 1-8 in Marigot on the Caribbean island of St.
Martin, the 36-year-old Icelandic grandmaster Helgi Olafsson relied heavily on end-game strategy to achieve his 7 1/2-1 1/2 score.
Indeed, it would not be an exaggeration to say he owed it his $8,000 first prize in the 126-player, Swiss-system field.
Olafsson's use of the end game was not just as a means of carrying through an advantage already established in the middle game.
In his key victories, he went into the end game at an early stage and employed it as his exclusive weapon.
In Round 6, he showed off this method against the Manhattan grandmaster Joel Benjamin.


Steinbrenner Drove Away Fans
To the Sports Editor:
The recent lack of attendance at Yankee Stadium is no mystery.
The parking and the security in the neighborhood have been the same for 20 years, and luxury boxes make money, but do not actually fill a stadium.
The sad truth is that all but the most die-hard fans have been separated from the team by George Steinbrenner.
For over 10 years he beat them into total submission with his stupidity and arrogance.
By thinking that he was part of the show, and doing everything in his power to make a spectacle of himself in the media, one came to feel that rooting for the Yankees was subordinate to rooting for him.
Unlike myself, most found that they could simply live without them.
DAVID M. KORN New York


Poached Peaches, No Cream
POACHED peaches make a superb low-calorie summer dessert -- provided you leave off the ice cream.
Since France produces some of the best peaches in the world, it is hardly surprising that French chefs have come up with some of the best ways to cook them: in wine.
Georges Blanc of La Mere Blanc in France poaches white peaches in cabernet sauvignon and serves them with a syrup thickened with raspberry puree.
Raymond Blanc (no relation) of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons at Great Milton near Oxford, England, cooks peaches in white wine with slices of orange and lemon.


Graf's 3d Straight Title Comes Gift-Wrapped
Just when it appeared that Wimbledon's two-time defending champion, Steffi Graf, was about to fall victim to Jana Novotna's endless appetite for upsets at this 100th anniversary of the ladies' final, their match took an abrupt emotional turn that can only be traced to Graf's unwillingness to lose her title and Novota's inability to deliver the death-blow to a champion who now holds 13 Grand Slam singles crowns.
It required a 2-hour-14-minute struggle -- the second-longest women's final ever played on Center Court -- before Graf finally commanded sufficient poise to smash the final shot, a winning overhead, in a contest she felt convinced she was going to lose once she fell behind, 4-1, in the third set.


Against the Odds


A Word or Two From Caterpillar
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Labor Draws the Line in Decatur" (June 13), Caterpillar Inc. has not implemented "tough new work conditions," nor has it implemented work rules that "are wreaking havoc with workers' lives." In fact, the terms under which Caterpillar's U.A.W.-represented employees are working are among the best in United States manufacturing -- not merely in the Midwest, as the article stated.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bridgewater  $340,000
3 Stonehenge Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old Tudor; over 1-acre plot, eat-in-kitchen, fireplace; taxes $4,663.
Clifton  $176,000
73 Cresthill Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 52-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace in living room, entertainment room; taxes $3,389.
Edison  $252,000
10 West Calvert  4-bedroom, 2.5-bath, 24-year-old colonial; family room, deck fireplace, full basement; taxes $4,172.
Port Reading  $125,000
123 Camelot Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; new siding and roof, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,545.
Warren  $485,000
31 Olsen Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old colonial; 1.5-acre plot, 2 fireplaces, pool; taxes $7,278.
West Windsor  $300,000
24 Park Hill Terrace  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; master bath with whirlpool tub, new furnace and hot water heater; taxes $5,800.
OTHER AREAS  Woodbridge, Conn.  $365,000
3 Rivers Edge  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; brick facade, marble foyer, sunken living room, 5.6 acres; taxes $7,120.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $305,000
51 Vernon Parkway  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 58-year-old Colonial; center hall, fireplace, French doors, screened-in patio; taxes $5,987.
Mineola, L.I.  $232,000
459 Macatee Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished attic; taxes $6,000.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
RADIO CONVERSATIONS TALK NPR's Susan Stamberg Considers All Things.
By Susan Stamberg.
Turtle Bay/Random House, $24.


Another Opinion On School Budgets
Regarding the Q. &amp; A. column of June 6, which quoted from an interview with Janet S. Walker, executive director of the Westchester-Putnam School Boards Association, I am deeply disappointed that you gave so much space to a paid lobbyist with vested interests in maintaining the stutus quo in terms of school budgets.
I formed a group in White Plains working to get the vote on the school budget here and in the other 56 small cities in New York State.
In White Plains, we face a 13 percent increase in school taxes after a 10 percent increase last year and a 13 percent increase the year before.
Our school taxes are consistently higher than our city taxes.
We average a $15,500 per student yearly expenditure when the state average is $7,500 and the national average is $4,000.
We have an overpaid, underworked group of teachers who instead of giving extra time for tutoring or counseling negotiate these functions as well as hall duty out of their contracts, and then blame the poor performance of their students in terms of standardized tests and ranking with their peer groups on the diversity of the student population.


Bright Idea Perks Up Single-Use Marketing
EASTMAN KODAK continues to invigorate the single-use-camera market.
This fall, the film in the company's Fun Saver, a pocket-size 35-millimeter single-use camera, will carry an exposed image.
People who buy the camera will get a free picture, and the process that makes it possible holds interesting possibilities for further applications.
As part of a standard manufacturing test for single-use cameras, the shutter is tripped to see if the film is loaded properly and if the shutter is working correctly.
Three years ago, two Kodak engineers, James Boyd and Doug Kucmerowski, began trying to find a use for this frame.
They exposed a picture onto the film; their process was called a pre-burn.


Mississippi Gets Another Casino
A new casino called the Casino Magic Biloxi has opened on a barge on Mississippi's Gulf Coast about 70 miles east of New Orleans.
The first phase of the casino, offering 700 slot machines and 40 table games, opened June 5.
When additional phases are completed, scheduled for the end of this summer, there will be 1,200 slot machines, 70 tables and a keno parlor for 35 players.


Pragmatic Protestants Winning Converts in Brazil
When the Rev.
Ernane Baptista de Lima moved to this working-class Rio de Janeiro suburb in 1966, the Protestant pioneer worried about finding a hall for his 40 worshipers in Santo Antonio, a district named for a Roman Catholic saint and dominated by a hilltop Catholic church.
Today, Pastor Lima's sermons echo electronically through his three-story Assembly of God, the largest church in town.
With his flock approaching 1,000, the pastor once again frets about keeping all his parishioners under one roof.


Good Old Bad Old South Africa
AMERICA will be extending more than a token of its admiration when it awards Nelson Mandela and President F.W. de Klerk the Liberty Medal this afternoon in a ceremony at Independence Hall in Philadelphia.
The medal is intended as an inducement to both men to continue on course toward democracy for South Africa.
Put more crudely, the award will be the latest demonstration of America's incurable compulsion to meddle in this country's affairs.
For Americans, South Africa has been the one enduring object of fascination on a continent that rarely commands their attention.
From disinvestment and cultural boycotts to "constructive engagement" to the current sugar-lump diplomacy, something about South Africa brings out Americans' missionary impulse.


In Ridgefield, Italian Style and Menu
THE stylish interior of Spagone Ristorante in Ridgefield belies the prosaic sign outside that suggests an ordinary shopping-complex eatery and might turn sophisticated diners away.
Spagone's dining space is tiny but Roman arches, Pompeiian red walls accented by cream-color trim, natural oak and framed abstract graphics, spot lighting and black chairs with rush seats, all provide a smart setting for the inviting menu that reflects the current popularity of Italian food.
The name Spagone means "enjoy yourself"; the surroundings make it easy.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
New Haven, Conn.  $123,000
67 Curtis Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; c/a, sunroom with skylight, ceiling fans, 0.25 acre; taxes $4,059.
Simsbury, Conn.  $535,000
12 Aspenwood  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, new colonial; hardwood floors, entry with columns, two-story foyer, 1 acre; taxes not yet assessed.
Woodbridge, Conn.  $365,000
3 Rivers Edge  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old ranch; brick facade, marble foyer, sunken living room, 5.6 acres; taxes $7,120.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $305,000
51 Vernon Parkway  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 58-year-old colonial; center hall, fireplace, French doors, screened-in patio; taxes $5,987.
Scarsdale, N.Y.  $71,500
453 Garth Road  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 58-year-old co-op; entry foyer, modern kitchen, hardwood floors, indoor garage; maintenance $385.
Yonkers, N.Y.  $250,230
49 Chester Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial; center hall, bay windows, dining room, porch, patio; taxes $4,900.
OTHER AREAS Bridgewater, N.J.  $340,000
3 Stonehenge Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old Tudor; over 1-acre plot, fireplace; taxes $4,663.
Albertson, L.I.  $215,000
25 Evans Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, covered patio, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Carle Place, L.I.  $260,000
329 Broadway  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, deck, cathedral ceilings; taxes $6,000.


Cone and Royals Put Sting on the Blue Jays
Royals 3, Blue Jays 2


By Windjammer
To the Editor: A fine article on sailing on a windjammer.
Betsy Wade must have a little more salt in her blood than the rest of us.
Two years ago one of my old classmates planned a reunion on the Victory Chimes.
We all throught he had shipped his brains out.
Were we ever wrong.
I have driven the coast of Maine many times.
Seeing it from a schooner leaves you in awe: the beauty of countless islands and endless seas, and the quiet.


Steven A. Conn, Emily Marie Resnik
August wedding plans have been announced by John and Lillian Resnik of Woodbridge, Conn., for their daughter Emily Marie Resnik and Steven Andrew Conn, the son of Dr.
Harold O. Conn and Marilyn Conn of East Haven, Conn.
Miss Resnik is a partner with her father in Resnik &amp; Resnik, a New Haven law firm.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received a law degree from Emory University.


Don Drysdale Is Dead at Age 56; Hall of Fame Pitcher for Dodgers
Don Drysdale, the Hall of Fame pitcher for the Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers whose hopping fastball and brushback pitches put fear into batters during 14 major league seasons, was found dead in a hotel room in Montreal yesterday.
He was 56.
His death was announced by the Dodgers' management.
A team broadcaster, Vin Scully, said during last night's broadcast: "He was found dead in his hotel room, obviously a victim of a heart attack."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the "What's Doing" column on June 6, about Lugano, referred incorrectly to an excursion to the village of Melide, Switzerland.
It was a boat ride of 10 to 15 minutes, not a 10-minute walk.


Dobbs Ferry
To the Editor:
I thoroughly enjoyed your article last Sunday on Dobbs Ferry.
We lived there with a glorious view of the Hudson and the Palisades during the years our children were growing up.
Back in New York now, they're all glad they had the experience of living in a small town with the freedom it offered.


In Ridgefield, Italian Style and Menu
THE stylish interior of Spagone Ristorante in Ridgefield belies the prosaic sign outside that suggests an ordinary shopping-complex eatery and might turn sophisticated diners away.
Spagone's dining space is tiny but Roman arches, Pompeiian red walls accented by cream-color trim, natural oak and framed abstract graphics, spot lighting and black chairs with rush seats, all provide a smart setting for the inviting menu that reflects the current popularity of Italian food.
The name Spagone means "enjoy yourself"; the surroundings make it easy.


New Rochelle's Fear: Sidetracked by Amtrak
AS Amtrak proceeds with plans to develop its Northeast Corridor for high-speed service between New York City and Boston, officials here fear that plans to revitalize the city's struggling downtown may get sidetracked in the name of progress.
For Amtrak, the stop at the busy station here, which it shares with Metro-North Commuter Railroad, has become a scheduling nightmare, a bottleneck at which trains meet frequent delays and Amtrak engineers often have to negotiate complicated track crossovers with Metro-North before continuing to the next destination.


Screens With Splines Are Easiest to Repair
REPAIRING torn or sagging window and door screens is easy and takes just a short time, making it an ideal summer project.
If you do not object to the cost of new screening -- material for a 3 x 4-foot window costs about $2.50 -- replacing some torn screens can be as easy as repairing them, and the finished result can be more attractive.
Screens held in place by a vinyl cord called a spline, pressed into a groove around the frame, are the easiest to replace.
Remove the frame from the window or door -- the frames are often found in metal combination storm and screen doors -- so that it can be laid flat.
Measure the opening covered by the screen and buy replacement screening that is at least two inches longer and wider than those dimensions.


Boom in Boating Crowds the Summer Sea
It was high noon last Saturday and weekend drivers who only hours before had jammed the New Jersey Turnpike or Garden State Parkway were hopping out of cars and into boats.
"They operate their vessels the way they drive their cars, only with less knowledge and skill," said Michael Yannuzzi, the New Jersey Marine Police officer at the helm of a 40-foot patrol boat cutting slowly along the Manasquan River near Point Pleasant.


3 More Victims of Serial Killer Are Identified
Two women who have been missing since 1991 and a third whose body was found on Monday were identified today by state police here as victims of a serial killer who the police say confessed to slaying 17 women.
The women came from varied backgrounds, with police saying that one was a methadone user who frequented Allen Street in Manhattan, a common haunt for prostitutes, while another was an unemployed accountant who lived at home with her family in Suffolk County.


Horror Stories
You may already have forgotten The Great Pepsi Scare of 1993.
It raged out of control for less than a week, though it did leave whole states and several major news organizations terrorized in its wake.
The facts, if they can be called that, were these.
On June 10, an elderly Tacoma, Wash., couple, Earl (Tex) and Mary Triplett, said a syringe had turned up in their can of Diet Pepsi.
Within days, dozens of other syringe sightings were reported by Pepsi drinkers -- the very health-conscious drinkers of Diet Pepsi in particular -- in 23 states.
Soon all three network evening news programs led with the crisis.
Jay Leno's monologue likened President Clinton's inoculation program to "the Pepsi challenge" while Ted Koppel countered with a Pepsi "Nightline." A big-eyed 9-year-old boy in the Bronx who said his gum had been pricked by a hypodermic needle posed with the accused Pepsi bottle in The New York Post.
USA Today published a front-page map showing the tainted Pepsi states in red, should readers wish to reroute their vacations.


Elizabeth Berger, F. M. Trobaugh
Elizabeth Ariel Berger, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin Berger of Brookfield, Conn., was married last evening to Frederic Mills Trobaugh, the son of Marjorie M. Trobaugh of Winnetka, Ill., and the late Dr.
Frank E. Trobaugh.
Rabbi Helene Ferris officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is a doctoral candidate in English at the University of Massachusetts.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University.


Of Elvis and L.B.J.
To the Editor:
Israel Shenker's article on "Missing Persons" ("Let Us Now Praise Famous Women and Pugilists," May 23), the latest volume in the esteemed Dictionary of National Biography, ends with a reference to the Dictionary of American Biography (D.A.B.).
We would like to make clear that new volumes of the D.A.B. are still being published (by Charles Scribner's Sons).
Two supplements on noteworthy Americans who died between 1971 and 1980 are in preparation.
D.A.B.
Supplement 9 (1971-75) is scheduled for publication in the spring of 1994, and Supplement 10 (1976-80) in the fall of 1994.
There will be entries on Harry Truman and Lyndon Johnson, Elvis Presley and Jimmy Hoffa (we assume that they did die and remain dead), and 1,000 other famous and infamous men and women.


Maestro


Corrections
A review on page 22 of the Arts and Leisure section today about U2's new album misidentifies the singer of the song "Numb" in some copies.
He is the Edge.


Deities, Dancing and Percussionists
THE third annual International Performing Arts Festival will be a nine-hour drumming marathon starting at 1 P.M. on Saturday in Bushnell Park in Hartford.
"This year we're taking the pulse of human expression on both sides of the Atlantic," said Tim Wolf, founder and a director of the festival, "celebrating rhythm makers and innovators who use the tool of rhythm to inspire deities, dancing and new worlds of sound."
Among the participating artists are Glen Velez, percussionist with the Paul Winter Consort (and before that a member of Steve Reich and Musicians), Samm Bennett, who improvises on an electronically enhanced drum set, the Ghanian ensemble Odadaa, and Virunga, a popular music group from Kenya.
Admission and parking is free, and should the weather fail to cooperate, all performances move indoors to Lincoln Theater at the University of Hartford.
For more information, call 956-5586.


'Spice of Life' And 'Artful Island' At Krasdale Sites
AS one of the largest distributors of comestibles in the Northeast, Krasdale Foods is probably entitled to see itself as the "spice of life." In any case, this is the title of the current show by Westchester artists at the gallery in the company's premises on Red Oak Lane in White Plains.
There is also a companion display at the company's Hunts Point headquarters in the Bronx, which is by Long Island artists and is named (for better or worse) "The Artful Island."
Both shows are presented by Sigmund R. Balka who, in an unusual combination, serves as both the company's general counsel and the director of its two galleries.
The White Plains exhibition, however, was chosen by Lucinda H. Gedeon, director of the Neuberger Museum at the State University of New York at Purchase.
All 13 of the artists represented are members of the Graphic Arts Council of New York.


On Sunday; An Ode to Joy: School Is Out, Yankees Aren't
COULD anything in the world feel sweeter?
It's July, it's wicked hot, the sun's pouring down, they finally let you out of school and New York's got a contender.
The experts up in the press box are writing, "Don't get too excited, it's too early, the Yankees are a pitcher away, maybe two pitchers . . .," but down on River Avenue in the Bronx on Wednesday morning, Peter Harney Jr., age 6, had his baseball mitt on, he was holding his father's hand and he was skipping to Yankee Stadium.
As the No. 4 train raced out of the tunnel toward 161st Street, Jay Misasi, a landscaper from Kingston, N.Y., whispered to his son Ryan, 7, "That's it, the stadium." Excited about the Yankees?
"Me? Very definitely," said the father.
Ryan had lost the use of his mouth; there were twice as many people at the park Wednesday afternoon, 47,091, as in all Kingston.


Base Closings Less Painful Than Feared
It was a disaster waiting to happen.
For a region already mired deep in recession, the Government's plan to aggressively shut down military bases seemed certain to shower more economic distress on New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
But by Friday, when President Clinton said he would support the recommendations of a Presidential commission to close 35 major bases across the nation, and sharply scale back others, some of the gloom in the New York region had begun to lift.


Sort Them Out
Now that the dog days have hit, it's a good time to assess the duds in your garden -- and get rid of them.
If you love hybrid teas, replace the diseased ones with varieties that are resistant to black spot and mildew -- which may mean ordering by mail.


Bonus Donated to Research
Paul Mellon said yesterday that the $1 million Triple Crown bonus won by his colt Sea Hero, the winner of the Kentucky Derby, would be donated to equine research.
And he called on the racing industry to double the size of the gift.
If so, $3 million would be given to the Grayson-Jockey Club Research Foundation, which supports research into horse medicine at a dozen universities.


Editorial Notebook; Apartheid on Campus, Continued
History and habit are tenacious forces.
By way of example, consider the horseless artillery men of World War II.
When some batteries were firing fewer rounds than others, an observer was sent to find out why.
The slowpoke crews were loading their guns swiftly enough, but, for unknown reasons, they paused for several seconds before firing.
This was filmed and shown to veterans of the previous war, who recognized instantly that the crews were pausing to "steady the horses." But there weren't any horses; jeeps and trucks had long since replaced them.
Not long ago, there appeared in this space an essay titled "Ending Apartheid at College," in which I argued that segregation on campus -- the system of separate dormitories, counselors and social settings for blacks -- corrodes the racial climate and precludes the broadening experience that college is meant to be.
By way of a cure, I suggested that colleges abolish segregated housing and make a serious effort to draw black students into mainstream campus life.


Date Rape Debate
Katie Roiphe's article will undoubtedly evoke the wrath of feminists (I used to think I was one).
Recent redefinitions of rape, much like the popular "discovery" of PMS a few years ago, have set the women's movement back 40 years.
We are being recast as fragile, powerless creatures, lacking not only the physical but also the mental capacity even to preserve our own sexual integrity.
Did he give you alcohol or drugs, indeed!
And just as we're making some slow progress convincing men that no really does mean no, there are those who are insisting that, well, uh, yes sometimes means no, too.
So how far have we come from the days when men regularly took no to mean yes?


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Construction Sites; 31 Accused of Extortion Over Minority Hiring
Since Federal and local laws were passed a decade ago requiring minimum percentages of minority workers on building sites, many "construction worker coalitions" have sprung up, purporting to gather black and Hispanic workers for those jobs.
Federal officials say some of those groups were actually shake-down operations that demanded payoffs in return for labor peace.
Last week the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn indicted 31 people on extortion and related charges.


Innocent Beauty
During the mid-15th century, a Dominican cleric named Fra Angelico was assigned the task of decorating the priory of San Marco in Florence.
In FRA ANGELICO AT SAN MARCO (Yale University, $60), William Hood, a professor of art history at Oberlin College, explores how the artist's piety was translated into a series of frescoes and an altarpiece that have long been cherished for their rich colors and innocent beauty.
Mr.
Hood argues that Fra Angelico brilliantly reconciled vastly different artistic influences.
Outside of the cloister, the Renaissance was developing in Florence, and with it a host of new artistic techniques.
However, Mr.
Hood writes, Fra Angelico was constrained by centuries-old Dominican artistic traditions.
With the aid of many well-chosen illustrations, more than 100 of which are reproduced in color, Mr.
Hood shows how the artist selected, altered and combined various stylistic conventions to create his work.
Fra Angelico's isolation from the artistic tumult of Florence gave him a certain independence, Mr.
Hood maintains; the artist incorporated only those techniques that furthered his own purposes.
With his careful research and vibrant, entertaining prose, Mr.
Hood explicates Fra Angelico's paintings so that they seem fresh and luminous, and the reader can view the frescoes as vehicles for spiritual transformation.


Health Agency to Track Illness Caused by Parasite
New York City health officials are seeking for the first time to track cases of an intestinal illness caused by a waterborne parasite in an effort to determine if there is any harmful contamination of the city's drinking water.
The officials emphasized that there is no evidence that New York's water supply has ever caused outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis, a flu-like illness characterized by diarrhea that sickened tens of thousands of people in Milwaukee in April.


Laying Claim To The Mantle Of Motown
With the release of Bell Biv Devoe's "Hootie Mack" late last month, there's a good chance MCA Records, specifically its black-music division, will have another hit.
The company has shipped 500,000 copies of the album, betting that young record buyers around the country will have fond memories of the group's 1990 debut, "Poison."
In that album, which helped establish new jack swing as mainstream pop, the group mixed soul music's vocal prowess and rap's harder beats.
"Poison" sold more than three million copies, a number that would be unreachable without the help of white fans.
It was, in the words that make every record company executive's knees weak with excitement, a crossover hit.


Despite U.S. Campaign, a Boom in Pornography
Since 1987, the Federal Government has been battling people like John Stagliano, who shoots, manufactures and distributes a new hard-core pornographic videotape every three weeks.
The Government does not seem to be winning.


Traveling Close, Very Close, to Home
THE first time I realized that it was possible to travel at home, I was 6 years old and standing in the linen closet of a rented house on Cape Cod.
It was an old drafty house by a bay, full of camphor-smelling eaves and corners and unexpected doorways, and one foggy afternoon I slunk about the shadowy upstairs picturing myself in the Black Forest.
My grandfather had been to the Black Forest, and from his description I envisioned a mossy, Grimm's-fairy-tale sort of place, not so different from the dark upper hall with its peeling fern-colored wallpaper.
That afternoon it had taken me an hour to reach the linen closet, which served as a remote Bavarian castle, and by the time I finally arrived after hiking through the hallway I was worn out.
When my mother found me recovering by the pillowcases a few minutes later she asked what I'd been doing, and I told her: "Traveling." She seemed to accept this statement at face value and, from that moment on, so did I.
What I discovered from those foggy afternoons was that home can be a wide and varied place, and that a person may be a seasoned traveler without necessarily leaving the backyard.
While some believe traveling means going far away -- imagining that a trip to Bangkok is travel while a trip to the park is not -- others recognize that travel, like relaxation, is mostly a state of mind.
The wanderer wanders wherever he is.
Naturally, the inverse must also be true.
Just as some people can't relax, some cannot travel, no matter where they find themselves.
Look at the commuter who drives 75 miles a day, then says he hasn't gone anywhere in months.
Or the business person who flies to Rome and then never leaves her hotel.
And what about the delicate soul who ventures forth only when the weather is clement, the accommodations posh, the sights acclaimed -- is this travel, or resting away from home?


Q and A
Air-Conditioner Fees Question: I have a question regarding a landlord's right to collect, in rent-regulated apartments, a $5 fee for installing air-conditioners if they protrude beyond the building wall or the outer edge of the windowsill, should that extend beyond the building wall.
Doesn't the law also state that the landlord must make a timely request to collect the $5 or, in effect, waives his right to do so later? . . .
Eugene A. Petrik, Queens Answer: Not really, according to Lou J. Ganim, a spokesman for the state's Department of Housing and Community Renewal in Albany, which oversees rent regulation in the city.
He said that as long as the landlord had been diligent in making inspections and notifications when he learned of an air-conditioner subject to the $5 fee, no set time deadline existed for the billing, provided the length of time that had passed was reasonable.
"Something like two and a half years would be considered not reasonable," he said.
Payment for Moving Question: I am a renter in a noneviction conversion co-op.
My landlord is offering to pay me to move out of my rent-stabilized apartment.
The purpose of the money would be to cover my moving costs.
Any excess I would apply to a down payment on a condo in another state.
Would this money be taxable by the Internal Revenue Service since it is not a gift and I plan to use any excess toward a first-time mortgage? . . .
Evelyn Laurie, Brooklyn Answer: Yes.
According to Ed Gurea, a spokesman for the Internal Revenue Service in Manhattan, payments received by a tenant for the cancellation or sale of the lease are treated as the sale or exchange of a capital asset.
He added that if the lease was for the tenant's home the gain would be taxed as a capital gain but that any loss would not be deductible.
Further information, he said, can be found in the Internal Revenue Service's Publication 544, "Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets." The publication is free and can be obtained by calling (800) 829-3676.
Rejection of a Sublessee Question: I own a co-op apartment in Manhattan.
In order to sublet my studio, I had to get permission from the board.
I explained to the board that the potential sublessee was a college student and that the parents would be financially responsible.
After the board received this letter it gave permission to sublet.
Later, comprehensive financial documents were submitted by the parents and they were accepted by the board.
An interview was also arranged by the board to meet the student and the parents.
After the meeting, however, the student was declined by the board.
When I spoke to the president of the board about the matter I was told that this person was rejected solely because of the person's status as a college student and for no other reason.
My question is this: Does the co-op board have the right to render a reject decision because the person is a college student?
Isn't this an example of illegal discrimination by the board? . . .
Alvin B. Olesh, East Hills, L.I.
Answer: Maybe.
According to Marc Luxemburg, a Manhattan lawyer and president of the Council of New York Cooperatives, the vast majority of co-ops can reject a sublessee for any reason or for no reason, unless, of course, some sort of illegal discrimination can be proven.
He added that under section 19a of the New York Civil Rights law, which specifically refers to co-ops, illegal discrimination entails not only race and religion but also lawful occupation, which might cover a college student.
Mr.
Luxemburg also said that a case like this showed why he and many other lawyers strongly urged co-op boards not to state the reasons for their rejection of an applicant.


Cigarette Machines And Sales to Minors
In the recent article "War Over Cigarette Machines," I read with dismay about the effort of cigarette machine vendors to block legislation that would have banned these machines from places where children could easily obtain cigarettes.
Despite stricter laws and fines, as stated in the article, minors were still buying cigarettes openly from these vending machines.
Although these sales are only 3 percent of total tobacco sales, they tempt minors, the fastest-growing group of new smokers.
These are the very people who will suffer the long- term effects of nicotine poisoning: heart disease, emphysema, cancer and death.
The businesses that complain about decreased sales hurting them are agents of the giant tobacco companies that still do not admit the link between tobacco and disease.


A Baldwin Bares Almost All
NAME: Stephen Baldwin.
IDENTITY: Actor.
At 27, the youngest of the acting Baldwin brothers, after Alec, Daniel and William.


Perspectives: Federal Subsidies; Fresh Money Cranks Up an Aid Program
A COUPLE named Vivian and Louis Hunter bought a vacant four-family house on Crotona Avenue in the South Bronx at a city auction in 1988.
They planned to renovate it, live in it with their daughter and her children, and rent out what they didn't use themselves.
But they could never get the project financed.
They have held it ever since, regularly making payments of $634 a month on the $78,750 purchase price, hoping the situation would change.
This year it has.


Leah Z. Portnoy, David Worenklein
Leah Z. Portnoy, the daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Hershel E. Portnoy of Larchmont, N.Y., was married last Monday to David C. Worenklein, a son of Jacob J. Worenklein of Englewood, N.J., and Marion Worenklein of New York.
The bride's father performed the ceremony in Larchmont at the Beth Emeth Synagogue, where he is the rabbi.
Mrs.
Worenklein, 22, graduated from Barnard College.
Her mother, Shirley Portnoy, is a teacher at the Westchester Day School, a private elementary school in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Dudley and Suns Hit a Snag
Talks aimed at bringing New Jersey Nets free-agent center CHRIS DUDLEY to Phoenix have hit a price snag and are on hold.
Suns President JERRY COLANGELO says he still wants the 6-foot-11-inch, 240-pound center, and Dudley's agent, DAN FEGAN, says his client will end up in Phoenix if the Suns want him enough.
"Enough" apparently means paying him something approaching an average of $4 million a year.
The Nets offered him $20 million over seven years, quite a jump from the $1.2 million he made with them last season.


Everyone Pitching In on San Francisco's Fast Start
The San Francisco Giants, like the Big Red Machine of Cincinnati, have been synonymous with offense, much like the Los Angeles Dodgers and New York Mets have been most often identified with great pitching.
So it was only natural that on Friday, when Dusty Baker brought his division-leading Giants into Shea Stadium for a weekend series against the Mets, that the Giants' manager answered a question or two about the obvious All-Star qualifications of Barry Bonds and Matt Williams.


Another Post-Soviet State Reassesses Post-Communism
HUMILIATED by military setbacks, its economy in tatters and its post-independence politics a corrupt mess, Azerbaijan did what many another Soviet republic in similar straits has done: It turned for help to a face from its Soviet past.
Here was Heydar Aliyev, now 70, who in his last incarnation had been the epitome of the Communist boss: a K.G.B. general, the republic's ruthless party chairman and a member of the Politburo.
Dumped by Mikhail S. Gorbachev in an internal shuffle in 1987, Mr.
Aliyev disappeared.
When he reappeared three years later, it was as a nationalist and anti-Communist.


A Chance for Clinton to Press for Jobs
More than anything else, President Clinton wants the Group of Seven to agree at its summit meeting on a strategy to speed global economic growth.
Faster growth abroad means more American exports -- and more American jobs -- and the United States is pressing Japan to do its part for world growth by stimulating its own economy and pledging to reduce its giant trade surplus.
Washington is taking a gentler attitude toward Germany, urging it to cut its budget deficit and give its powerful central bank more leeway to lower interest rates so other rate cuts will follow throughout Western Europe.
Germany is cooperating.


Emilie L. Kaulbach, Andrew Kendall
Emilie Louise Kaulbach, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Maximiliaan G. Kaulbach of Marblehead, Mass., was married there yesterday to Andrew Way Kendall, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Kendall of Marion, Mass.
The Rev.
Steven Crowson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Andrew.
Mrs.
Kendall, 33, is a marketing manager in North Reading, Mass., at Converse Inc., the footwear manufacturer.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the senior cardiologist at North Shore Cardiology Associates in Salem, Mass., and is the immediate past president of the medical staff at Salem Hospital.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
'A MONTH OF SUNDAYS'
Apollo Muses, celebrating its 10th anniversary of sponsoring cultural activities, will present "A Month of Sundays in July," featuring lectures, music, dance by the New Jersey Ballet and discussions with Celeste Holm and Ruth Warrick after a starring film by each.
The programs begin today in Pottersville.


In America; We Can't Turn Away
The middle-aged man in the wheelchair was perspiring in the midday heat.
He wore a loud print shirt and a loosely knotted tie.
"Excuse me, sir," he said to a passerby. "How do I get to the Statue of Liberty?"


Dominy Woodworking Enjoys a Family Gathering
Eight windmills made by the famous Dominy family of furniture makers still dot the landscape on the eastern tip of Long Island.
One of them, the Hook Mill, whirls in the wind in East Hampton, where the Dominys settled in 1669 and remained until their clapboard house on Main Street was torn down in 1946.
The family also left a less visible but equally impressive legacy of country furnishings -- Windsor chairs, clocks as minimal as those by the Shakers and tilt-top tea tables that look Boston-bred -- that are increasingly appreciated by collectors and museums.


Judith Kenny, C. A. Thatcher
Judith Ann Kenny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Kenny Jr. of Glen Cove, L.I., was married there yesterday to Christopher Alan Thatcher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Everett Thatcher of Santee, S.C.
Msgr.
John McCann performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Patrick.


What Price Glory?
TINA LOUISE, who played Ginger, the breathy-voiced, eyeglass-fogging starlet on "Gilligan's Island," stepped off a dock at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park on Monday night.
Dressed in a ginger-colored velvet minidress, she drew her long legs into a gondola and sat down in the stern.
A gondolier in nautical attire gently rowed her away from a noisy crowd of young executives and party animals who had gathered at a benefit for the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
As the boat drifted out onto the murky lagoon and away from the lights of the party, her face relaxed.
She had just subjected herself to yet another round of photo opportunities, and although she had carried it off with calm-faced charm, it was, as it always is, a little irksome.
A humid breeze combed through her long red hair, and the farther her gondola got from all those people who refuse to see her as anything but a television icon, the happier she seemed to become.


Free-Agent Ehlo to Atlanta
CRAIG EHLO and LENNY WILKENS won't be parting company after all.
The 6-foot-7-inch guard joined the former Cavaliers coach Friday night when he signed a three-year contract with the Atlanta Hawks as an unrestricted free agent.
Ehlo, a 10-year veteran, averaged 11.6 points in 82 games for Wilkens and the Cavs last season.
Wilkens stepped down as the Cleveland coach after the Cavs lost in the second round of the playoffs.
He then signed on as coach of the Hawks. (AP)


Corrections
An article on June 20 about Ceide Fields, a bog in Ireland that holds the remains of a Stone Age settlement, referred incorrectly to the architect of the visitor's center there.
She is Mary MacKenna.


Miss Goodspeed, Mr. Hobson
Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Donley of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of her daughter Mary Todd Goodspeed to Christopher R. W. Hobson, a son of Dr.
J.
Alan Hobson of Brookline, Mass., and Joan M. Harlowe of Boston.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Goodspeed, 26, and her fiance, 27, graduated from Connecticut College.
She is studying for a master's degree in art therapy at New York University.


Pardon Me, but About Managed Care . . .
To the Editor:
We read about Cigna's ambitious plans with interest.
Of course, many of us bet our farms, crops and livestock years ago to help create the managed care business.


Zap! Whang! Aieeee! Eat Phaser, Klingon! Er, Boss.
THE personal computer revolution was supposed to transform the office into a high-tech, high-efficiency web of concentration.
Maybe.
But it's also turning it into an electronic sandbox.
Computer games, bulletin boards and electronic message systems are creating countless new ways to goof off.


Results Plus
AUTO RACING Pepsi 400 to Earnhardt Dale Earnhardt dominated yesterday's Pepsi 400, holding off Sterling Marlin and Ken Schrader on a dramatic final lap at Daytona International Speedway.
Schrader, who started last in the 41-car field, got to the lead on Lap 51 of the 160-lap race and battled at or near the front the rest of the 400-mile event.
But Earnhardt, seeking his sixth Nascar Winston Cup championship, controlled the race, leading more than half the laps.
Earnhardt, who took the lead for the final time on Lap 132, was just ahead of Schrader, with Marlin close behind him, at the start of the final trip around the 2 1/2-mile oval.
As the leaders drove off Turn 2 and onto the backstretch, Schrader went to the high side and tried to get past the leader, but Earnhardt's car was loose and the two banged together, giving Marlin a chance to move up alongside Schrader.
That's the way it finished, with Earnhardt's Chevrolet Lumina crossing the finish line about two car lengths ahead and Marlin's Ford Thunderbird just in front of Schrader's Chevy.
Earnhardt averaged 151.755 miles an hour in the race, which was slowed by six caution flags for a total of 23 laps.
He won $75,940. (AP) BOXING Moon Defends Flyweight Title Sung-kil Moon of South Korea successfully defended his World Boxing Council super flyweight title yesterday by winning a split decision over Carlos Salazar of Argentina in a bloody 12-round bout in Seoul, South Korea.
Confusion marked the seventh round when a towel was hurled into the ring.
Moon's trainers denied they hurled the towel.
Moon was bleeding from a deep cut near his right eye, and the referee checked him and allowed him to continue.
Two judges scored the fight for Moon, 116-111 and 116-112.
Another gave it to Salazar, 115-114. (AP) GOLF Price Still in Control Nick Price retained a two-shot lead in the Western Open at Lemont, Ill., after the day-late second-round finishers posted their scores yesterday morning.
Price had a 135 total, nine under par, after a 71 on Friday.
Greg Norman, four times a runner-up in this event, gained a share of second place after 36 holes, but Grant Waite's bid collapsed under a final-hole double bogey.
Norman and Waite, a New Zealander and a recent winner of the Kemper Open in Maryland, were among the 51 players who were stranded by darkness Friday night after second-round play was interrupted by a 3 3/4-hour storm delay.
They marked their positions and returned to the still-wet Dubsdread course at Cog Hill shortly after daylight to complete their rounds.
Waite, who had three holes to play, was eight under par for the tournament and was only one back of Price's 36-hole pace.
Waite, however, bogeyed his first hole, the 16th, and chopped up the 18th.
He missed the green, chipped well short of the pin and three-putted for a double bogey.
That finished off a 71 and dropped him back to 139, four off the pace going into third-round play this afternoon.
Norman was seven under par with two holes to play when he returned, and he parred in for a bogey-free 68 that tied him for second at 137.
"I played solid, but I'm not making the putts I'd like," said Norman, who didn't make a putt longer than 10 feet.
Half his four birdies came on par-5's which he reached in two.
"The course is squishy," he said, "and the greens could be bad by the end of the third round." They could be much more squishy by that time.
The weather forecast called for more thundershowers. (AP) Player to the Rescue: Tara Fleming might not remember her 74, but she isn't likely to forget the opening round of the L.P.G.A.
Jamie Farr Toledo Classic in Sylvania, Ohio.
Fleming and her playing partner's caddie might have helped save the life of a spectator who suffered a heart attack Friday.
Fleming started chest compression and Jason Hamilton performed mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on Raymond Henzler, 63, when they found him lying in a fairway adjacent to the seventh green.
"I just reacted to a situation," Fleming said.
"The guy's helpless. It's not a question -- you just go out and do those things. It wasn't even a decision," she said.
Paramedics took Henzler to Flower Hospital, where he was listed in serious but stable condition. (AP)


A Roof for All, Made of Rulings and Red Tape
They shout out sad stories in rush-hour subways.
They beg for money outside bank machines.
They dig through the trash.
They talk to the air.
The homeless remain an indelible fact of New York City life.
Thousands still live on the streets.
And since Mayor David N. Dinkins took office four years ago, the number of homeless families in city shelters has swelled from 3,700 to 5,600.
Mr.
Dinkins himself faces contempt of court charges for leaving hundreds of these families to sleep for days at a time on chairs in dingy, smoky city offices, where gaunt men with AIDS huddle next to squalling babies and exhausted mothers.


Seeking Motive in the Killing of 8: Insane Ramblings Are Little Help
The deadly rampage in a law firm here appears to have been the irrational and desperate act of a deranged man.
That is the almost inescapable conclusion from a rambling semiliterate screed found on the man's body after he killed eight people, wounded six others and finally killed himself on Thursday at the law offices of Pettit &amp; Martin here.
The 55-year-old gunman -- variously identified by the authorities as Gian Luigi Ferri or Gianluigi Ferri -- carried a list of more than 30 names, apparently targets of his wrath, but no one on his list was among the victims.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
Selective Service: Vote on an amendment to an appropriations bill financing NASA and other Federal agencies that would continue funding for the Selective Service System.
Rejected 207 to 202, June 28.
2.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill financing NASA and other Federal agencies that would delete funds for the space station project.
Rejected 220 to 196, June 28.
3.
Abortion Funding: Vote on an amendment to a bill appropriating funds for the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services that would ban Medicaid financing of abortions except in cases of rape, incest or a threat to the life of the mother.
Approved 255 to 178, June 30.
4.
Jobs Bill: Vote on passage of a spending bill containing a far smaller version of President Clinton's original jobs bill.
Approved 280 to 138, July 1.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
N
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
N
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
8. Klein (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
A
A
N
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
A
N
A
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
11. Owens (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
14. Maloney (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
A
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Pardon Me, but About Managed Care . . .
To the Editor:
Regarding "Betting the Farm on Managed Care" (June 27), pardon my skepticism.
Wasn't it just a few years ago that Wall Street analysts and the media were hyping the can't-miss strategy of large hospital corporations, the Supermeds, reining in rising health-care costs?


In East Europe, Minimalism Meets Mysticism
The astonishing success of the Elektra Nonesuch recording of Henryk Mikolaj Gorecki's Third Symphony has thrust that diffident, rather puzzled Polish composer into the limelight.
The recording has been No. 1 for most of this year on the British and American classical sales charts, and for a time it was No. 6 on the British pop chart as well, outselling every sort of teen idol.
Mr.
Gorecki's "Symphony of Sorrowful Songs," as it is subtitled, consists of an hour's worth of slow movements with soprano solo -- hardly a likely candidate for the pop charts.
Yet the affecting emotions of the words and their singing, and the shining affirmation of Mr.
Gorecki's instrumental writing, have won mass approval, even as they alienated those composers for whom commercial success is a sign of capitulation.


Mystery Illness Slows in Cuba, but Cause Still Eludes Experts
An epidemic of a mysterious illness that has afflicted more than 46,000 people in Cuba apparently has peaked, with a decline in the number of new cases reported in the last month, a Cuban Government health official said here this week.
But the cause of the nonfatal disease, which impairs vision and damages nerves, continues to baffle delegations of international scientists who have gone to Cuba to investigate.


France and Its Farmers Are in No Mood for Compromise
GATT has become a four-letter word in France, where any world trade agreement is widely viewed as threatening the livelihood of farmers, exporting jobs to developing countries where labor is cheaper, and caving to pressure from the United States.
With more than three million unemployed, the economy in recession and further job losses expected this year, the three-month-old conservative Government of Edouard Balladur is acutely aware that any trade concessions could be politically costly.
France therefore opposes even a limited agreement in Tokyo.


Q and A
Getting to the Galapagos
Q.
We are planning a trip to the Galapagos Islands but do not know where to start in our arrangements.
How does one go about it? -- Margot F. Horwitz, Wynnewood, Pa.


Ronnell Williams Hasn't Answered All Questions
To the Sports Editor:
Ronnell Williams sold the drugs in order to pay for abortions for two girls he had impregnated.
I was really glad he got his scholarship and all, but what happened to the two girls?
I guess the pregnancies are the girls' problems.
SANDRA LaFAVE San Jose, Calif.


Clinton Asks Nuclear Powers to Join Test Ban
President Clinton today called on the other nuclear powers to join the United States in a moratorium on nuclear testing that he ordered extended for at least 15 months.
Mr.
Clinton said the worldwide halt would make it easier to reach a permanent agreement on a complete ban on testing and to persuade developing countries to extend the treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.


Less Endangered Species
KING LEOPOLD'S DREAM Travels in the Shadow of the African Elephant.
By Jeremy Gavron. 288 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $23.
DRUMS ALONG THE CONGO On the Trail of Mokele-Mbembe, the Last Living Dinosaur.
By Rory Nugent.
Illustrated. 248 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cloth, $21.95.
Paper, $10.95.


For Movies, It's Always Open Season
From Summer blockbusters like "Jurassic Park," now approaching the $175 million mark on about 2,400 screens, to small films like "Jack the Bear," which came and went fast this spring, Hollywood has adopted the broad-brush approach to movie distribution.
Studios these days prefer to release a film, whether it promises to be a hit or not, on at least 1,000 screens -- a practice known in Hollywood parlance as the wide release.
Even if a movie's prospects aren't good, a wide release is deemed more efficient and potentially profitable.
The thinking is basic.
"The studios want bulletproof movies that reach the broadest possible audience, like TV," says Laura Ziskin, the producer of "Pretty Woman," "No Way Out" and "The Doctor." Most often, though, such films don't last long.
According to Mike Kaplan, a producer who has advised the director Robert Altman on release plans for two decades, "Most movies are gone in two weeks. If a movie opens to $5 million, it's an instant flop."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THE BARD AT BOSCOBEL
With the lawn of the Boscobel Restoration in Garrison as a stage, the Hudson River as a backdrop, minimal props and costumes that rely heavily on old jeans, the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival has completed six successful seasons and embarks on its seventh with "The Merry Wives of Windsor."


JUNE 27-JULY 2: New Disability Standards; More People With H.I.V. Will Qualify for Benefits
The Clinton Administration discarded another legacy from the Reagan-Bush years last week when it issued new rules that will speed payment of Federal disability benefits to people infected with the AIDS virus.
People with the infection will be presumed to qualify for benefits if they also have conditions like bacterial pneumonia or tuberculosis.
The new criteria recognize that certain illnesses, like pelvic inflammatory disease and cervical cancer, may be disabling to a woman whose immune system has been suppressed because of an H.I.V. infection.


Emigre Achieves Goal of Bar Mitzvah
WHEN Alex Naumov softly read the Hebrew words from the Torah, the congregation was silent.
But a careful look around the synagogue revealed half a dozen people, straining forward in their seats and mouthing the ancient prayers, almost willing the words out of Alex's mouth.
In one sense, the bar mitzvah service of Alex Naumov was like any other, with traditional prayers and good wishes.
But the Jewish ceremony -- which usually marks the coming of age at 13 -- was also a unique passage for Alex, a 14-year-old emigre from Minsk, Belarus, who has battled a host of emotional and behavioral problems to practice a religion that was lost to several generations of his own family.


Ms. Castiglione, Mr. Carter
Jennifer Lynn Castiglione, the daughter of Tanya S. Castiglione of Jamaica, Queens, and P. Kent Spriggs of Tallahassee, Fla., was married in Tallahassee yesterday to Brinnen Stiles Carter, a son of Joan D. Carter of De Land, Fla., and the late Brinly Carter.
The bride, a graduate of Tufts University, received a master's degree in art education from Florida State University.
She heads the Chatham County visual-arts magnet-school program in Savannah, Ga.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist at Hillside Hospital in Glen Oaks, L.I.
Her father is a lawyer in Tallahassee.
Her stepfather, Lawrence V. Castiglione, is a professor of educational psychology at Queens College.


Overview of the Term; The Court's Counterrevolution Comes in Fits and Starts
AMONG the flood of opinions that ended the Supreme Court's term last week, two in particular underscored the complex and contradictory personality of a Court poised on the threshold of change.
On the one hand, the Court strode with surprising unanimity across a new constitutional frontier in a case about Government seizure of assets, announcing a new constitutional right grounded in the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against excessive fines.
Having only once before even examined the excessive fines clause, the Court turned it into a potentially powerful brake on the Government's aggressive use of its authority under the drug forfeiture laws.


Christopher Turner, Mary Beth Terry
Mary Beth Terry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick Terry of Middletown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Christopher M. Turner, a son of Helen Turner of Harwich Port, Mass., and the late George R. Turner Jr.
The Rev.
William Hanson performed the ceremony at King of Kings Lutheran Church.
Ms.
Terry, who is keeping her name, was until recently an economist at the Systems Research and Applications Corporation, a government-systems consulting company in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in economics from the University of Washington, from which her husband received a Ph.D. in economics.


Sagamore Hill Reopens After Extensive Repairs


On the Move


A Raucous U2 Moves Farther Out on a Limb
U2 has grown wary of anthems.
When it released "Achtung Baby" in 1991, the most earnest band of the 1980's remade itself as a noisy, wayward 1990's outfit.
But under the distortion and crunch of songs like "Who's Gonna Ride Your Wild Horses," there still lurked U2's old marches and hymns, with Bono's voice rising in his old heroic crescendos.
The Irish band's "Zoo TV" tour last year was split down the middle, with the newer, eccentric songs followed by the old arena anthems.
And with its new album, "Zooropa" (Island 314-518-047; CD and cassette), U2 announces there's no turning back: Even more than "Achtung Baby," the lyrics turn inward and the music grows willful, tangled, amorphous.
Cynical observers may have thought "Achtung Baby" was a calculated attempt to keep up with alternative rock, but "Zooropa" proves that U2 is a transformed band: raucous, playful and ready to kick its old habits.
The new songs seem destined not for stadiums (though that's where they will probably be performed) but for late-night radio shows and private listenings through earphones.


Nissan Lifts the Lid on Its 300ZX
THERE is a red convertible out there in the driveway, and I've just been walking around it, taking some pictures, remembering . . . .
The car is a new Nissan 300ZX, a Z-car in the parlance and a descendant of the first Japanese automobile that truly fired the American blood.
When it came to this country in 1970, it was called a Datsun 240Z, a taut and inexpensive two-seat hatchback that was a real sports car.


The Commuter Who's a Baseball Counselor
WEARING a business suit and tie and carrying a briefcase, Rick Wolff fits in nicely with other commuters waiting for the 8:21 A.M.
Manhattan-bound train from North White Plains.
But Mr.
Wolff, who lives in Armonk, is hardly a typical commuter.
Indeed, for about a week each month, from March through October, he switches from a business suit to a Cleveland Indians baseball uniform.


Laying Claim To The Mantle Of Motown
With the release of Bell Biv Devoe's "Hootie Mack" late last month, there's a good chance MCA Records, specifically its black-music division, will have another hit.
The company has shipped 500,000 copies of the album, betting that young record buyers around the country will have fond memories of the group's 1990 debut, "Poison."
In that album, which helped establish new jack swing as mainstream pop, the group mixed soul music's vocal prowess and rap's harder beats.
"Poison" sold more than three million copies, a number that would be unreachable without the help of white fans.
It was, in the words that make every record company executive's knees weak with excitement, a crossover hit.


Slur Patrol
I refuse to be a patsy for the Slur Patrol.
In a recent political harangue, I noted that focus had become the vogue word in criticism, including self-criticism, of the Clinton White House.
Everybody from pundits to politicians to press agents was into focusing.
To put a pin into the ballooning usage, I found a reduplicating rhyme and headlined the essay "Focus Hocus-Pocus."


Lilies to the Rescue When Color Is Needed
EVEN though summer is officially here, flower gardens have a common malady, the doldrums.
That is their bloom display is not up to the glory that was spring, and gardeners may even be impatient for fall.
Of course, the showy annuals do fill in the gaps, but sometimes they take several weeks to get going and provide colorful fill-in.
This is where the lilies come in.
Although these plants have been around for centuries, they are coming into their own.
July is their season and they supply dramatic color just when the garden needs a lift.
The best part is that these plants grow from bulbs that will multiply and become attractive clumps in a few years.


Tibetan Carpets of Nepal
IN the heart of the Hindu nation of Nepal, a community of Tibetan Buddhist exiles who fled the Chinese occupation of their homeland, taking with them little more than their abundant energy, a shrewd business sense and an eye for design, have created in just over three decades a major international center for hand-loomed woolen carpets.
The export of Tibetan rugs, most of them to Europe, now outranks tourism as a hard-currency earner for this poor Himalayan kingdom.
But because the making of these hand-knotted carpets is still almost entirely a cottage industry, supplying local retail shops as well as foreign importers, visitors to Nepal willing to haul away bulky bundles can pick up a deep-pile, richly patterned rug at no more than $100 for the traditional 3 foot by 6 foot size, the dimensions of a Tibetan bed or couch.


China's Peasantry Takes Measure of Its Prosperity
Ignoring a light drizzle, the women emerged from their houses carrying small plates of potatoes, goose livers and pickled cucumbers, and placed them on tables clustered outside a shiny white three-story house.
The focus of attention was a tiny boy bundled up like a bushy red ball and cradled in the arms of his new mother.
He had just turned one month old, a magic age in the hardscrabble Chinese countryside, traditionally signifying that a baby is likely to survive, and nearly a hundred peasants had come with gifts of little red packets bulging with money.


Ms. Manchester, Mr. Barrett
Mr. and Mrs.
Eli Manchester of Cohasset, Mass., and Davidson, N.C., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Diana Bennett Manchester and C. Redington Barrett 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Barrett Jr. of Englewood, N.J.
Ms.
Manchester, 29, is a candidate for a master's degree in public and private management at Yale University.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is the chief executive of the Kewanee Scientific Corporation, a manufacturer of laboratory furniture in Statesville, N.C.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, and a correction in this space yesterday, about a discount to be offered by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company for collect calls on July 4, described the discount imprecisely.
State-to-state collect calls placed today will be charged at a flat rate of 10 cents a minute, and the ordinary service charges will not apply.


Volunteers in Hard Hats Put Their Hearts Into a Playground
THE work crew was not made up of the usual construction types, although by the end of the weekend most of its members could speak knowingly of T-nuts and impact wrenches.
Clad in hard hats and work boots, more than 75 volunteers worked under flawless June skies, from early morning until late afternoon for two days, transforming a pile of wood into a sophisticated playground for children aged 2 through 12.
The scene was Webb Field, adjacent to the Highview School here, and the "barn raising" project, as its planners called it, was proceeding without a hitch.
The idea was to gather people from the entire town of Greenburgh -- of which this village is a part -- to change a scruffy play area into a first-rate playground like the one that Grace Rapkin, the project leader, saw in Chicago last summer.
"It was the most phenomenal playground I'd ever seen," said Ms.
Rapkin, the mother of two small children.
"When I found out that it was a community project, I knew we could do the same thing here. So I got together with my neighbors, and we went to the town's Department of Parks and Recreation. They immediately said yes."


He Does Radio And Windows
AS his celebrity sprouted this spring, David Sedaris was visited in New York by a fan from Dallas, who asked him excitedly, "What's it like to wake up in the morning and be David Sedaris?"
On a recent hot summer morning, being David Sedaris (pronounced seh-DAR-iss) meant sticking your hand into the toilet in the Gramercy Park apartment of a personal trainer and doing a vigorous scrub.
It meant washing the man's dishes and cleaning his cat's litter box, changing the sheets and vacuuming the worn carpet.
Then it meant going to another apartment and doing roughly the same thing.
Most mornings, Mr.
Sedaris said, with his high-tech retractable feather duster sticking from his back pocket, "I'm a maid."


House Democrats on Stampede
No, it's not a cattle drive.
That loud rumbling noise coming from the halls of Congress is House Democrats stampeding away from the biggest chance in years to clean up campaign financing.
The House Democratic leaders, Thomas Foley and Richard Gephardt, have to stop this stampede if they are to have any credibility left on this issue.
They still resist strict curbs on the political action committees that now dominate fund raising by House incumbents.
They say their members won't support a bill that reduces the amount a PAC may contribute.
In a trade-off of principles, the House leaders at least supported partial public financing of campaigns.
Now they may be getting ready to give that up too.
Possible result: a House leadership that is all trade and no principle.


Gov. Weld Asks Schools to Aid Gay Students
In an effort to make Massachusetts high schools safer for homosexual students, Gov.
William F. Weld has announced what is believed to be the first statewide effort to train teachers to help those students.
Each school will have the option of adopting the program, which calls for training teachers to prevent violence and harassment against homosexuals and to prevent suicide.
Schools are asked to adopt anti-discrimination policies to protect gay students and to form support groups to promote communication between gay and heterosexual students.


Jennifer Douglas and Curtis Cravens
Jennifer Lynne Douglas, a freelance video producer, was married yesterday to Curtis Lockwood Cravens, a photography editor at Newsweek magazine and a sculptor, both in New York.
Lois Kellerman, the senior leader of the Brooklyn Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at Gill St./Bernard's School in Bernardsville, N.J.
Ms.
Douglas, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of William K. and Andrea M. Douglas of Short Hills, N.J.


Judith K. Schlossberg, Philip C. Crosby
Judith Kay Schlossberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin Schlossberg of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Philip Christopher Crosby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Crosby of San Antonio.
The Rev.
Michael Bolesta, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Israel Wolmark officiated at St.
Agatha-St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Crosby is a summa cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She will enter the Harvard Law School in September.
Her father is a radiologist in New York.


On the Job


Ohio Orders New Public Review of Hazardous-Waste Incinerator
In an action that may spell trouble for the nation's newest hazardous-waste incinerator, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency has concluded that the ownership and control of the plant changed in the 1980's and that the current owners violated state law by not properly disclosing the change when it occurred.
The agency said on Wednesday that it was ordering the incinerator's owner, Von Roll America Inc., the American subsidiary of a Swiss engineering company, to undergo a new public review of the state permit that allowed the $160 million plant to be built and operated in East Liverpool, Ohio.
A review could take six months or longer, state environmental officials said.


Date Rape Debate
I am not sure how women taking more control over their language, their bodies and their neighborhoods -- seizing for themselves the right to determine what happens, and what happened, to them -- translates, in Roiphe's thinking, to passivity and denial of sexual agency.
Roiphe should realize the company she keeps: those men who have always told women, "You were not raped."  JONATHAN GILL New York, N.Y.


At the Remainder Table
To the Editor:
Clive James's poem "The Book of My Enemy Has Been Remaindered" (June 6) was apt.
Bittersweet are the remainder files -- the brutal reminders of unfulfilled promise.
Curious about the expatriate life of a fellow Australian, some years ago I picked up Mr.
James's "Falling Towards England": my first encounter with his work was at the remainder table!
A mixed blessing for the author, but a delight for the reader.
SARAH EIGEN New York


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TRUE CRIME LOVERS OF DECEIT Carolyn Warmus and  the "Fatal Attraction" Murder.
By Mike Gallagher.
Doubleday, $20.


Strong U.S. Teams Must Avoid Slowness
WHEN the 1993 world open team championships begin in Santiago, Chile, in September, the United States will be very strongly represented and will have a good chance of taking the Bermuda Bowl title in the face of experienced teams from Europe and elsewhere.
The Number One American team will consist of Michael Becker, Ron Rubin, Peter Weichsel and Bob Levin, all of whom have won the Bermuda Bowl title, and Ron Sukoneck and Russ Ekeblad, who will be making their debut in this competition.
They qualified a week ago in Memphis along with some players who have been knocking at the door for many years -- David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen, Sam Lev, Cliff Russell and Marty Bergen -- plus a player who has won three world titles, Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill.


After $166 Million Was Paid for 10 Free-Agent Pitchers, One Stands Out
Last winter, nine clubs committed a total of $166 million over 37 years for 10 free-agent starting pitchers.
Halfway through the pitchers' first season with their new teams, only Jimmy Key has made his signing economically and artistically worthwhile.
Threatening to put together the kind of season he long has seemed capable of producing, Key has compiled a 10-2 record and a major league-low 2.30 earned run average.
The nine other members of the most expensive collection of pitcher signings in the history of free agency have a combined 44-56 record and a 4.26 e.r.a.


It's Cal and Calcium
Those athletes with cereal tie-ins now may invite CAL RIPKEN to breakfast.
The Baltimore Orioles shortstop can bring the milk.
Ripken is promoting a calcium-rich milk known as "Cal's Choice" -- whether Cal is for Ripken's first name or calcium or both was not clear.


Laura Ayres, Norman Brennan
Laura Joan Ayres, the daughter of James and Joan Laurain Ayres of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday to Norman Michael Brennan, a son of Kathryn Brennan of Minersville, Pa., and the late Robert Brennan.
The Rev.
Jay Serafin, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Hampton Mansion in Towson, Md.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She is a writer-researcher at Maryland Public Television in Owings Mills, Md.
Her father, a retired naval captain, is the scientific adviser for hydrography to the United States Defense Mapping Agency in Merrifield, Va.


Dickerson Deal Not Quite Done
ERIC DICKERSON thought it was a done deal.
Once a Raider, he thought he was now a Falcon.
But the deal hasn't been completed.
Dickerson believes the Raiders' owner, AL DAVIS, "is dragging his feet on this thing."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson  $215,000
25 Evans Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, covered patio, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Carle Place  $260,000
329 Broadway  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, deck, cathedral ceilings; taxes $6,000.
Mineola  $232,000
459 Macatee Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; dining room, finished attic; taxes $2,900.
New Hyde Park  $230,000
1019 Whittier Avenue  5-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room, finished basement; taxes $4,300.
West Islip  $370,000
66 Davison Lane East  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 42-year-old waterfront ranch; dining room, fireplace, 0.75 acre; taxes $10,600.
Williston Park  $255,000
188 Meadowsweet Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old Dutch colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, sunroom, family room, patio; taxes $4,600.
OTHER AREAS Woodbridge, Conn.  $365,000
3 Rivers Edge  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 14-year-old brick ranch; marble foyer, sunken living room, 5.6 acres; taxes $7,120.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $305,000
51 Vernon Parkway  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 58-year-old colonial; center hall, fireplace, French doors, screened-in patio; taxes $5,987.
Port Reading, N.J.  $125,000
123 Camelot Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; new siding and roof, h/w floors; taxes $2,545.


Race and the Workplace
To the Editor:
As an African-American and the senior executive responsible for the Miller Brewing Company's manufacturing operations encompassing nearly 10,000 employees throughout the United States, including the plant that was the subject of "Race and the American Workplace" (June 20), I would like to comment on your article.


Indurain Sends Tour A Message In a Hurry
Nobody said it would be easy to beat Miguel Indurain in the Tour de France.
That was the lesson today as the Spaniard began defending his title in the world's greatest bicycle race by once again mauling his opponents in a time trial.
For the sixth successive time in three years, Indurain coasted home an easy winner in a race against the clock.


A Change in G.O.P. Would Win Black Voters
To the Editor:
Brent Staples properly chides Bill Clinton and the Democratic Party for their cavalier treatment of African-Americans in "Wanted: A Million Black Republicans" (Editorial Notebook, June 21) and urges Republicans to compete for black votes.
He implies that the problem is essentially one of commitment and suggests that if G.O.P. heavyweights like Robert Dole led the campaign, African-Americans would respond positively.
This view overlooks, however, the historical rationale behind African-American political loyalty.
From Reconstruction to the New Deal, African-Americans voted solidly Republican in recognition of the party's use of Federal power to end slavery and insure their political rights.
Since the New Deal, Democrats have received the overwhelming majority of African-American votes, precisely because they have been perceived as more willing to intervene politically for racial justice.


A Hair-Driven Administration
To the Editor:
Shame, shame, shame on you.
The Sunday Stylers are the last people I'd expect to throw shade on President Bill's hair pursuits ("Who Was That Barber?" May 23).
Get with the program: this is a hair-driven Administration.


Venturing Uptown
A young downtown crowd traveled north on June 24 for the unveiling of "Visionaire," a portrait portfolio, at Stubbs Books and Prints, 153 East 70th Street.


Long in the Shadows, a Massine Ballet Shines Anew
AN IMPORTANT BIT OF DANCE history has passed New York by.
Because economic difficulties made it impossible for the Joffrey Ballet to perform here this season, local dancegoers have not been able to marvel at and, possibly, argue over its revival of "Les Presages," the remarkable allegory that Leonide Massine choreographed in 1933 to Tchaikovsky's Symphony No. 5.
Other cities have been luckier, for the Joffrey has included "Presages" in its touring repertory.
Thus it will be offered during the company's 11-day stay in San Francisco that begins on Wednesday.
The Joffrey also danced the work last month in Washington, where, despite some rough edges, it generated considerable excitement.


Yanks Fold as A's Draw to Pair of Homers
Crowd noise still ringing in their ears as they left New York, the Yankees have entered an abyss and found the silence deafening.
Winners of four straight and inching up on first-place Toronto, the Yankees arrived here with a pennant race on their itinerary.
But in Oakland, they have encountered just another baseball truth: It is not a pennant race everywhere.


Where the Santa Fe Style Runs Deep
IF restaurants were movies, Jackstraw's Cafe would be titled "Violet's Goes West." The rambling old frame building in East Hampton was most recently home to Violet's.
Before that it housed the Spring Close House, the Ball Park and the Beach Plum.
In its incarnation as Violet's the old dowager was bedecked with antiques.
Many of the charming period pieces are still there under a thin overlay of Southwestern mementos.


New Terminals At Paris Airports
Two new terminals were inaugurated last month at Paris's Orly and Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airports.
At Orly, the new $105 million, 236,814-square-foot Hall 1, which is an extension of the airport's Orly Ouest terminal, is expected to increase the number of passengers the airport can handle annually from about 25 million to about 31 million.
The wing is intended for domestic air traffic, primarily on Air Inter.
Hall 1 has four gates, a restaurant-bar, six shops and an underground parking lot.
At Roissy-Charles de Gaulle, the 250,807-square-foot Terminal 2C, a fourth addition to the airport's Terminal 2 complex, Air France's major passenger hub, is designed to handle more than four million international passengers a year (last year some 25 million travelers passed through Charles de Gaulle airport).
The new crescent-shaped, $157 million terminal has six gates, four restaurant-bars, 14 shops and a children's play area.
The two-level design reduces passenger congestion by separating arriving and departing passengers.
A computerized luggage dispatching system, which identifies baggage with bar codes, synchronizes baggage loading with passenger boarding.
Passengers can check their luggage at any one of the wing's 62 counters, several hours before the flight or even the night before their departure.


TV Violence Gets a Warning
Television producers have always known that violence can be a hot-selling product.
But this week they faced up to the political corollary: attacking television violence is also a crowd-pleasing political cause, embraced as easily by liberal Democrats as by conservative Christian groups.
With pressure building in Congress for a rating system or even time restrictions, the four commercial networks ran for cover and announced that they would run a new parental warning in advance of violent shows.
The warning -- "Due to some violent content, parental discretion advised" -- will also be used in advance promotions and available for program listings.
It will appear this fall.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
COWBOY ED.
By Bill Grossman.
Illustrated by Florence Wint.
Laura Geringer/HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 3 to 7) In Cowboy Ed's middle-of-the-night dream world, the horses ride the cowboys, the farmers hatch the eggs, the umbrellas are made of cactus, and a hero is needed so things can be done differently.
Richly detailed illustrations.


Noreen Conway, Robert Raymond
Noreen Conway, a special-education teacher at the United Nations International School in New York, was married yesterday to Robert Raymond, a lawyer for the New York City Legal Aid Society in the Bronx.
The Rev.
Edward Murphy performed the ceremony at SS.
Peter and Paul Roman Catholic Church in Jamestown, N.Y.
Ms.
Conway, who is keeping her name, graduated from Nazareth College of Rochester and received a master's degree in special education from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Donald and Carol Conway of Jamestown.
The bride's father is the principal of Falconer (N.Y.) High School.
Her mother teaches music at Lakewood (N.Y.) Elementary School.


Dorothy Paschal, Mark Henderson
Dorothy Iselin Paschal, a daughter of Guy and Helen Paschal of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Mark Henderson, a son of Douglas Henderson of Weston, Mass., and the late Dorothy Henderson.
The Rev.
Dr.
Susan E. Crane, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's father and stepmother, Marion J. Henderson.
Mrs.
Henderson is an assistant manuscript editor in Boston for the Houghton Mifflin Company.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.


On the Prowl


Women's Work
To the Editor: For more years than I can remember I have been proud of the fact that a relative of mine, Lenora Hamlin, the wife of my father's double cousin, had managed to have women recognized as people, with their own exhibits in their own building at a World's Fair.
Now I read in a Times article, " 'Grand Illusions' in Chicago" (Travel Advisory, April 25), that "the segregation of women's work in the 'women's building' " is a "troubling aspect" of the 1893 World's Fair in Chicago.


Two Scripts for Talking in Tokyo
THE Japanese love meetings.
Just ask anyone who has worked in a Japanese-run office.
And they are particularly fond of precisely managed meetings designed to come to a preordained result, which is why they usually thrive at summits.
So months ago they roughed out a script for the Tokyo summit meeting that opens here Tuesday: President Clinton would be welcomed by the unshakable leaders of Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party, which came to power four decades ago as the symbol of the American alliance.
After some tough talk with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa about the trade surplus (some things cannot be avoided), the two would emerge with a "framework" for the next several years of trade talks.
There would be talk of progress on the Uruguay Round of global trade talks, and of more aid to Russia.
They would agree to call each other Bill and Kiichi.
And Japan would go on to serve as host to the rest of the Group of Seven, using the moment (discreetly, of course) to make its case for a permanent seat on the Security Council.


Cherokee Run Dominates in the Dwyer
Cherokee Run came storming out of the confusion and the debris of the Triple Crown series yesterday and opened the second season of the racing year with a six-length victory in the Dwyer Stakes at Belmont Park.
For some extra drama, this was also the day of reunion for the 3-year-old colt and his regular rider, Pat Day, who missed the Belmont Stakes because of a five-day suspension that the jockey refused to appeal as a matter of principle.
But there they were again yesterday, Pat Day back in the saddle and Cherokee Run flying over the main course, stalking the lead early, taking charge turning for home and then far outrunning the hometown heroes, Miner's Mark and Silver of Silver.


Date Rape Debate
Katie Roiphe's very important observations about the dangers of creating a victim culture in the name of feminism are weakened by faulty reasoning, as well as by her mischaracterization of my own views ("Date Rape's Other Victim," June 13).
As someone who has publicly advocated female sexual autonomy, I was astonished to find myself in the camp of "rape-crisis feminists" who are allegedly inventing a date-rate epidemic in order to roll back the sexual revolution.
My book "The Beauty Myth" celebrates sexual pleasure throughout, with passages like: "Let's be shameless. Be greedy. Pursue pleasure . . . seek out the sex we want and fight fiercely against the sex we do not want." In national magazines, I've admired the female erotic subculture and defended erotic obsession.
If anything, my enthusiasm for the female sexual yes borders on the fulsome.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  AGREEMENT BY HAITIANS


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
COWBOYS AND INDIANS
"Visions of the West: Art and Crafts from Montana," is the new exhibition to be seen at the Silo in New Milford through Aug. 15.
Echoing the glory days when cowboys and Indians roamed the plains, a group of Montana artists has interpreted the region in landscapes of the Missouri River, photographs of Bitterroot Valley, rustic pine and bent willow furniture, paintings textured with native sand, ceramics featuring grizzly bears, and still lifes of boots, canoes, teepees and other icons of the Old West.


Haitians Remain Skeptical of Accord
As details of an accord intended to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power emerged here today, the cautious optimism that met the announcement on Friday that an agreement was near quickly turned to suspicion and skepticism.
In the gas lines that have sprung up as a result of a United Nations embargo against Haiti, and in the markets where poor residents of the capital lined up for rice or to try to sell charcoal, mangoes and empty bottles, there were doubts that Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the military commander, and his officers would keep their word.
And among the nation's business and political elite, some expressed fear that the country could see a return to politics based on class divisions if Father Aristide returns to the presidency on Oct. 30, as called for in the agreement.


When a Dog or a Cat Needs a Filling
I read with great interest the story about zoo medicine dentistry ("The Man to Call When a Lion or a Tiger Breaks a Tooth," June 6).
However, Dr.
Edward Shagam's statement that "I don't know any veterinarians who do fillings or root canals -- they often just take the tooth out," while undoubtedly true to his experience with exotic zoo animals, does not reflect how veterinarians in general practice in this state.


Canada Clamors for Progress at GATT Talks
Although Canada's economic growth is expected to outpace that of the other six major industrialized nations this year, its chief goal at the summit meeting will be a global stimulus package to help cut its 11 percent-plus unemployment rate.
The new Prime Minister, Kim Campbell, an avid supporter of free trade, is expected to work with President Clinton for a breakthrough in the stalled talks on the issue.
Canada has a less enviable record among the seven nations, as the country with the fastest-growing debt.
At the summit meeting, Ms.
Campbell will try to convince other leaders of Canada's "determination" to eliminate a $28.4 billion deficit within five years and begin repaying about $505 million in public-sector debt.


No Headline
Because of holiday production requirements, the main news pages are printed today in one section.
The Metro Report begins on page 21.


Drive-By Shooting Kills Bronx Woman
A 20-year-old Bronx woman was shot to death and her friend critically injured in a drive-by shooting that occurred on a street corner near her home, the police said.
The woman, Jessica Martinez of 783 Southern Boulevard in Hunts Point, died at 12:45 A.M. yesterday at Lincoln Hospital 30 minutes after she was shot in the stomach, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a department spokesman.


Business Diary/June 27 - July 2
THE ECONOMY One Swallow Can Be Ignored; a Flock of Them Can't


Junior R.O.T.C. Works To Foster Citizenship
To the Editor:
"Junior R.O.T.C.? Who Needs It?" (Op-Ed, June 26), the question posed by Eugene J. Carroll Jr., has a simple answer: millions of American youths need the Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps, a program that has a record of building character and citizenship since its creation by Congress in 1916.


M.I.T. Professor Is First Woman Chosen as Secretary of Air Force
President Clinton has said he will nominate an aeronautics professor as Secretary of the Air Force, a choice that would make her the first woman to head one of the military services.
The professor, Sheila E. Widnall, 54, is associate provost at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where she is also professor of aeronautics and mathematics.
In a statement on Friday, Mr.
Clinton praised her as "a woman of high achievement, a respected scientist, a skilled administrator and a dedicated citizen."


By Windjammer
To the Editor: Your article "By Windjammer Around Penobscot Bay" (May 23) brought back fond memories of what was called a "dude cruise" that I joined over 50 years ago.
In September 1939, I spent a delightful six days aboard a 64-foot gaff-rigged 19th-century converted fishing schooner.
The amenities were minimal: no running water, no electricity and only wind for power.
Fresh water was available on deck in two large barrels and each of the 16 dudes was issued a 10-inch basin with dipper.
All washing was done on deck out of the basin or in the bay.
The three daily meals were plentiful and delicious; we could work or not depending on what one wished to learn about sailing.
Nobody checked out early and at least three of us stayed for another six-day cruise.


Fact Not Fiction
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding the possibility of a move from the Bronx by Steinbrenner, I too, happen to be an old Yankee fan who won't be caught anywhere near that place for a night game.
But article after article in The Times refers to the "perceived" crime in that area, to its "portrayed" element of crime.


JUNE 27-JULY 2: New Disability Standards; More People With H.I.V. Will Qualify for Benefits
The Clinton Administration discarded another legacy from the Reagan-Bush years last week when it issued new rules that will speed payment of Federal disability benefits to people infected with the AIDS virus.
People with the infection will be presumed to qualify for benefits if they also have conditions like bacterial pneumonia or tuberculosis.
The new criteria recognize that certain illnesses, like pelvic inflammatory disease and cervical cancer, may be disabling to a woman whose immune system has been suppressed because of an H.I.V. infection.


The Way We Were?
IN SEARCH OF THE NEANDERTHALS Solving the Puzzle of Human Origins.
By Christopher Stringer and Clive Gamble.
Illustrated. 246 pp.
New York: Thames and Hudson. $29.95.
THE NEANDERTALS Changing the Image of Mankind.
By Erik Trinkaus and Pat Shipman.
Illustrated. 452 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
WHAT THE BONES TELL US By Jeffrey H. Schwartz. 292 pp.
New York: A John Macrae Book/Henry Holt &amp; Company. $25.


At Work; Women Pay More for Success
WOMEN in the upper ranks of big companies are doing better than they were a decade ago, but they are paying a price, according to a new study sponsored by Korn/Ferry International, the executive search firm.
"They're making it, but there's blood on the floor," said Carol Scott, a professor of marketing at U.C.L.A.'s graduate school of management, who conducted the study and presented its results in New York and Washington last week with Korn/Ferry executives.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Late-June auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.6
6.9
Wednesday
May wholesale trade, percent change
0
0.3
May consumer credit, change, billions
$2.3
$2.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
340
345
Monday: All weighty business prohibited  Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting begins  Wednesday: Group of Seven meeting begins in Tokyo  Thursday: Department stores release June sales data Sentencing of Charles Keating in Los Angeles  Friday: May F.O.M.C. minutes released


NOTES
Maya Angelou is writing a new children's book, due out next spring from Clarkson N. Potter.
The illustrations will be done by Margaret Courtney-Clarke, a resident of Namibia and the author of two books on African art.
"It's about a girl learning the South African painting tradition of ndebele," said David Chalfont, Ms.
Courtney-Clarke's agent.


'I Would Not Want My Murderer Executed'
DEAD MAN WALKING An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United States.
By Helen Prejean. 278 pp.
New York: Random House. $21.


Ronnell Williams Hasn't Answered All Questions
To the Sports Editor:
Reference is made to Ronnell Williams, who has been awarded a basketball scholarship by American University.
Of course, this sterling youth isn't "a criminal." He only sold a "little cocaine." At age 18, he is responsible for two girls being pregnant.
Certainly, he had to sell drugs to pay for the two abortions.
You can understand that, can't you?
Drug-dealing and amoral conduct are immaterial.
This man must have "a chance to dream," according to American University and The Times.
ELENOR F. DANCKWERTH Clifton, N.J.


A Tainted 'Blue Circle'
To the Editor:
The article "To Fake It Well on the Set, It Pays to Be Genuine"  [ May 16 ]  -- about the carefully controlled faking of two Kandinsky paintings for the film version of John Guare's play "Six Degrees of Separation" -- made me remember another occasion when a Kandinsky painting was faked for a movie with perhaps less technique but considerably more panache.


Jaguar Takes Lumps With Goosebumps
Last April at the New York auto show, Benny Parsons, the former Winston Cup champion, took a look at one of the $750,000 Jaguars that would be raced this summer by drivers 50 and older -- including himself -- on ESPN's Fast Masters Championship series.
He shook his head, and was only half joking when he said quietly: "I don't think they realize what they're getting into here."


Screens With Splines Are Easiest to Repair
REPAIRING torn or sagging window and door screens is easy and takes just a short time, making it an ideal summer project.
If you do not object to the cost of new screening -- material for a 3 x 4-foot window costs about $2.50 -- replacing some torn screens can be as easy as repairing them, and the finished result can be more attractive.
Screens held in place by a vinyl cord called a spline, pressed into a groove around the frame, are the easiest to replace.
Remove the frame from the window or door -- the frames are often found in metal combination storm and screen doors -- so that it can be laid flat.
Measure the opening covered by the screen and buy replacement screening that is at least two inches longer and wider than those dimensions.


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Breakthrough in Beach Reading; After 8 Years of Bad Drafts, A Computer Writes a Novel
She once wrote a page-turner called "The Love Machine," but the glitzy romance writer Jacqueline Susann didn't have in mind "Hal," a computer programmed to write like the pulp queen herself.
But "Just This Once," a new book published last week, is the product of the collaboration of Scott French, a self-taught programmer from Silicon Valley and Hal, his computer.
Mr.
French spent eight years on the project, laboriously writing thousands of computer-coded rules using so-called artificial intelligence, an advanced form of programming that tries to emulate human thought.


It's All in the Family
Two sets of twins and the daughter of an Olympic gold medalist were selected to the United States team that will compete in the Pan American Junior Track and Field Championships July 15-17 at Winnipeg, Manitoba.
The twins are CALVIN and ALVIN HARRISON of Salinas, Calif., and SEAN and MARK McGEHEARTY of Providence, R.I.
The Harrisons will compete in the men's 400 meters and the McGeheartys in the hammer throw.
VONDA NEWHOUSE, the daughter of FRED NEWHOUSE, a member of the 1976 Olympic men's 1,600-meter relay team, will compete in the women's 1,600 relay.(AP)


Present Dangers; The Slow Awakening to Terrorism Here
THE White House had no trouble last week declaring that a foiled Iraqi assassination plot against former President George Bush was "a direct attack on the United States." But it has been unable to offer anything like so neat an accounting of the terrorism that has struck closer to home.
In response to the World Trade Center bombing and evidence of schemes to blow up other New York targets and murder officials, the Administration has renewed its vigilance.
But without a clearer definition of the problem, it has left itself without a guide for decisions about what else to do.


Surprise! English Turn Backs on a Gentleman
Pete Sampras's reputation as the Michael Dukakis of tennis was reconfirmed this weekend when the results of a London radio station contest about Wimbledon players were published.
One thousand listeners responded by phone or by fax to the question "With whom would you like to take strawberries and cream?" Only one person chose the phlegmatic 21-year-old Sampras.


New Terminals At Paris Airports
Two new terminals were inaugurated last month at Paris's Orly and Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airports.
At Orly, the new $105 million, 236,814-square-foot Hall 1, which is an extension of the airport's Orly Ouest terminal, is expected to increase the number of passengers the airport can handle annually from about 25 million to about 31 million.
The wing is intended for domestic air traffic, primarily on Air Inter.
Hall 1 has four gates, a restaurant-bar, six shops and an underground parking lot.
At Roissy-Charles de Gaulle, the 250,807-square-foot Terminal 2C, a fourth addition to the airport's Terminal 2 complex, Air France's major passenger hub, is designed to handle more than four million international passengers a year (last year some 25 million travelers passed through Charles de Gaulle airport).
The new crescent-shaped, $157 million terminal has six gates, four restaurant-bars, 14 shops and a children's play area.
The two-level design reduces passenger congestion by separating arriving and departing passengers.
A computerized luggage dispatching system, which identifies baggage with bar codes, synchronizes baggage loading with passenger boarding.
Passengers can check their luggage at any one of the wing's 62 counters, several hours before the flight or even the night before their departure.


Bavarian Fete
To the Editor: Olivier Bernier's article on Landshut in Bavaria ("A German Town's Past Is Gemutlich and Gothic," June 13) did not mention one of the town's past moments, which makes it even more gemutlich, Gothic and interesting to visit this summer.
Every three years, Landshut holds a pageant re-enacting the wedding in 1475 of Jadwiga, daughter of the Polish king, to Georg, son of a Bavarian duke.
Citizens enact the bridal party, the clergy, servants, knights, soldiers, workers, musicians, clowns, beggars, and children -- the whole population of medieval Landshut.


World Markets; In Canada, Diamonds Are a Rush
INVESTORS are betting heavily that a region of caribou lands and lakes about 200 miles northeast of Yellowknife in northern Canada is about to join southern Africa, eastern Siberia and western Australia as a major diamond production center.
In a rush for claims reminiscent of the Yukon gold days of a century ago, hundreds of mining enterprises, including some of the big names like De Beers, Kennecott and Broken Hill Proprietary, have scoured the tundra and staked claims on about 10,000 square miles.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 26  MANHATTAN  Carnagie Hill  $400,000
40 East 94th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,312-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, dining area, 2 exposures, Central Park view; common charge $585, taxes $6,348 (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Chelsea  $376,500
10 West 15th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 2 terraces; maintenance $1,504, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Chelsea  $925,000
344 West 22d Street  6-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, attached, 4-story Greek Revival townhouse; dining room, library, 7 fireplaces, original moldings and detail; 20- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $5,450 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Gramercy Park Area  $273,500
145 East 15th Street  (Gramercy Arms)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining el; maintenance $871, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  Upper West Side  $530,000
176 West 87th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, family room, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,944, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Klara Madlin Real Estate-Halstead Property Co.)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area  $165,000
3327 Paulding Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick Ranch; dining area in upper unit; eat-in kitchen in other; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,385 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Williamsbridge  $150,000
948 Magenta Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- ny 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/Metro Star Realty)  BROOKLYN  Carroll Gardens  $255,000
29 Third Street  2-family, 3-story, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; full basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $768 (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Ditmas Park West  $180,000
501 Marlborough Road  5-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Victorian; Center Hall, dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, original oak trim and detail;, 54- by 91-ft. lot; taxes $1,584 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  College Point  $170,000
5-05 Schoor Drive  (Silver Point)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, 1-car garage, pool and health club; common charge $221, tax abated (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills  $218,800
67-85 Groton Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND  St.
George  $55,000
50 Fort Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,008-sq.-ft. co-op in a postwar building; dining el, communal terrace aand garden plot, N.Y.
Harbor view; maintenance $624, includes gas and electricity, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)  Tottenville  $367,000
82 Jacob Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, 6-year-old, detached Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, jacuzzi in master bath. fireplace, 2-car garage, 66- by 160-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Ward Hill  $125,000
16-18 Willis Avenue  4-family, detached, frame house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit, 4 garages, 40- by 65-ft. lot; taxes $1,771 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Japan Is Said to Ease Stand On Opening Markets to U.S.
Japan has proposed a compromise to the United States in an effort to break a deadlock in trade negotiations before next week's Group of Seven summit meeting, officials said today.
In letter to President Clinton on Friday, Prime Minister Kiichi Miya zawa partly agreed to Washington's demand that goals be set for opening Japan's markets and that progress be precisely monitored.


Holiday Weekend
Independence Day will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules.  NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, all others closed.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with extra trains tonight for people who attend the fireworks.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on Sunday schedule, buses on Saturday schedule.
PATH trains on a Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with extra trains tonight for people who attend the fireworks.
Traffic Alert TODAY
MOST HOLY CRUCIFIX STREET FESTIVAL Mott Street between Hester Street and Canal Street will be closed from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
INTERNATIONAL IMMIGRANTS PARADE Madison Avenue between 35th and 57th Streets, will be closed from 1 P.M. until completion.
WATER STREET FESTIVAL Water Street between Fulton Street and Whitehall Street will be closed from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
West Street between 14th Street to the Battery will be closed from 6 P.M. to 2 A.M. for fireworks.


Photographers Find Strength in Unity
WHEN times are tough, the tough band together.
The tough business climate is what led two photographers, Robert Buchanan and John O'Donnell, to form a trade organization -- the Commercial Photographers of Westchester and Fairfield -- to bring commercial photographers together to deal with the changing marketplace.
"Commercial photographers don't normally communicate with each other," Mr.
Buchanan said.
"It's a fiercely competitive business we're in. We tend to be loners who during hard times especially guard our contacts jealously."


How Shame and Fear Take a Toll on Men Who Are Raped
THE most devastating aspect of being raped 11 years ago was the loss of innocence, the feeling, 26-year-old Charles Meyer, said, "that part of me had been ripped away." Six years after being raped, Andre Lee, 22, remains haunted by shame and confusion.
Recently the two men talked about their ordeals and the aftermath at Connecticut College in New London where Mr.
Meyer works as an assistant technical director for Palmer Auditorium and Mr.
Lee is a recent graduate.
Like many men who have experienced the trauma of rape, they said for years they hid their ordeals behind a wall of silence.
Experts point out that because most sex offenders are male, many men feel that if they tell someone about being raped it is tantamount to admitting to homosexuality.


'Compulsory Happiness'
To the Editor:
In her otherwise favorable review of Norman Manea's "Compulsory Happiness" (May 30), after pointing out that "the translation is from Romanian into anonymous French and then into the English of Linda Coverdale," Lore Segal suggests that any awkwardness in the text may thus safely be laid at my door.
"But it doesn't matter." Ah, but it does.
I deeply resent having all my hard work unjustly dismissed as if it were a dingy film through which the author's light somehow bravely manages to shine.


Florio's Vetoes Inspire Thoughts of Future Battles
Gov.
Jim Florio and Republican leaders of the Legislature avoided the nasty partisan free-for-all this year that characterized last year's budget battle, but a test of wills still looms over who holds the reins of power.
The mood was in sharp contrast to last year, when the Republicans slashed more than a billion dollars from the Democratic Governor's request and eliminated $600 million in revenues by rolling back the penny increase in the sales tax that the Governor pushed through the then-Democratic Legislature in 1990.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 4, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
50
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
75
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
20
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
27
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
5
2
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
6
64
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
7
2
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.50.) Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
8
3
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
9
4
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
10
2
THE HEIRESS BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The last volume of "The Bride Trilogy," set in Regency England.
11
10
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
12
7
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
13
1
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
14 *
1
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store.
15
1
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A television star encounters shades of her past on a visit to Napa Valley.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
2
1
THE MAKING OF "JURASSIC PARK," by Don Shay and Jody Duncan. (Ballantine, $18.) An account of the production of the current hit film.
3
10
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
4
504
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
5
9
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
6
90
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
7
20
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8
8
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9 *
1
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
10 *
3
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
11 *
111
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
12 *
1
LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL, by Bill Geist. (Dell, $5.99.) The story of one team's Little League baseball season in New Jersey.
13 *
21
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
14
1
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
15
16
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the former head of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
99
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
13
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
124
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
140
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Always an England
If you want to truly appreciate the Byzantine mysteries of the British class system -- where the mere color of a sock, the style of a lapel braid, the direction of a tie's stripe, the initials on a brass button or the combination of hues in the band around a straw boater can instantly raise or dash one's social standing -- come to the Henley Royal Regatta, the loveliest, snobbiest Edwardian garden party on earth.
The Henley Stewards, the ultra-exclusive club of white men who run the regatta and zealously maintain the Gatsbyesque standards, say it is not as starchy as it was in the old days, when Grace Kelly's father was not allowed to row in the Diamond Sculls at Henley because he was a bricklayer.


Lilies to the Rescue When Color Is Needed
EVEN though summer is officially here, flower gardens have a common malady, the doldrums.
That is their bloom display is not up to the glory that was spring, and gardeners may even be impatient for fall.
Of course, the showy annuals do fill in the gaps, but sometimes they take several weeks to get going and provide colorful fill-in.
This is where the lilies come in.
Although these plants have been around for centuries, they are coming into their own.
July is their season and they supply dramatic color just when the garden needs a lift.
The best part is that these plants grow from bulbs that will multiply and become attractive clumps in a few years.


Mets Needs? How High Can You Count?
Games will be monitored by satellite.
Deals will be debated by telephone.
The fax machine will hum nonstop.
"A western White House," Joe McIlvaine said of his house in San Diego.


At the Remainder Table
To the Editor:
Clive James appears to be a mean spirited, conceited, petty, egotistical, immature poetaster, who rejoices with indecorous and deplorable Schadenfreude at the misfortunes of others.
EDWARD QUONBOROUGH Stamford, Conn.


RUSSIAN ECONOMY BEARS GOOD NEWS
Invited as the extra man at the annual meeting of leaders of the Group of Seven major industrial nations, President Boris N. Yeltsin will come bearing news that Russia's wrenching economic transformation has made notable progress since a Western aid package was assembled three months ago in Tokyo.
Inflation, which was running as high as 30 percent a month last winter and looked as if it might be hurtling toward the hyperinflation rate of 50 percent, has cooled to less than 20 percent, and Finance Minister Boris G. Fyodorov predicted that the figure could fall below 15 percent in the near future.


Men In Skirts
Was it a mirage, a fashion revolution or a one-day protest against the bondage of male fashion?
At last Sunday's gay pride parade on Fifth Avenue, hundreds of young men appeared in plaid skirts, an evolution from last year's plaid shirt tied at the waist.
These were not marchers in costume, but young men watching the parade.
The short kilt on men started appearing at discos this spring.
Skirts for men surfaced as a far-fetched idea in the 70's, when most wearers lacked the brawn to carry it off.


Joyce E. Levowitz, James Maffezzoli
Joyce Eden Levowitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Levowitz of Brooklyn, was married last evening to James Andrew Maffezzoli, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Maffezzoli of Towson, Md.
Rabbi A. Allen Block and the Rev.
Ray Chase, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 29, was until recently an associate at the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers.
In August she will become a law clerk to Judge Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received a law degree from Washington University in St.
Louis.


Abuse at School Is Called Common
On a street corner in New Rochelle, two 15-year-old girls stood waiting to cross the street and listened to the chatter of a couple of guys on bicycles who had stopped to talk to them.
"Do you have a boyfriend?" one of them asked Julisse Cabrera.
"No thanks, I don't use one," she shot back, laughing.
Ms.
Cabrera and her friend, Laura Contreras, said they frequently have to field much more forceful advances, the kind that cannot be dismissed with a quick comeback.
Both said boys regularly fondle girls on a dare or to impress their friends as they pass them in the hallway at school.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
May 93
Apr. 93
May 92
New York
2,931
2,236
2,662
New Jersey
1,503
1,413
1,442
Connecticut
789
686
747
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.47
7.51
8.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.64
4.68
5.84
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.35
7.41
8.50
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.49
4.54
5.60
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.34
7.39
8.54
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.25
4.43
5.59
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.56
7.63
8.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.38
5.38
6.43
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.53
3.49
4.14
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.08
7.06
8.20
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Wall Street; Where the Money's Been Going Since the Crash
INDIVIDUAL investors had $8 trillion in liquid financial assets by the end of 1992, the biggest chunk of which -- $2.9 trillion -- was in bank deposits and certificates of deposit.
But the raw numbers don't show which investments have gained and lost popularity over the years -- particularly since the 1987 stock market crash.
Mutual funds have enjoyed the largest percentage increase of household money -- up 121 percent.
Corporate bonds, snubbed by small investors, who prefer tax-free bonds, gained the least -- up 11 percent.
Right after corporate bonds, bank deposits and certificates of deposit gained the least, up only 11.7 percent.


Marital Spats With Your Roses
A ROSE garden is kind of like a marriage.
That first heady rush of blooms in early June is wonderful.
The flowers are perfect.
The leaves are deep green.
The fragrant ones, like Chrysler Imperial, make you want to bury your nose in their faces and never leave.
But now it's July.
The hot, humid days of midsummer lie over the garden like a sticky blanket.
Those little black spots are starting to appear and you begin to doubt that plain old baking soda will work. (It does, and I'll tell you how.) Not to mention spider mites, aphids, Japanese beetles and mildew.


Czechs Gear Up to Resume Weapons Exports
REVERSING a policy of Vaclav Havel to end arms exports, the Czech Government has announced that it will reactivate its industry and sell weapons abroad.
Mr.
Havel's pledge, made when he became President after the collapse of Communism in 1989, was described by officials here as naive and costly at a time of economic difficulties.
"Other countries are trying to fill our former markets and we have factory capacity that is not being fully used," said Pavel Slejskal, director of engineering in the Ministry of Trade and Industry.
"Western countries as well as other Central European countries are taking our place in the market."


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Construction Sites; 31 Accused of Extortion Over Minority Hiring
Since Federal and local laws were passed a decade ago requiring minimum percentages of minority workers on building sites, many "construction worker coalitions" have sprung up, purporting to gather black and Hispanic workers for those jobs.
Federal officials say some of those groups were actually shake-down operations that demanded payoffs in return for labor peace.
Last week the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn indicted 31 people on extortion and related charges.


Muted Reaction in District That Court Opposed
From its vantage point, the Supreme Court defined the racial politics of North Carolina's 12th District, redrawn to elect a black member of Congress, in dire terms, likening it to "political apartheid." But those who live and work in the long and skinny district in the Carolina Piedmont view the issue in far more muted terms.
From the pungent-smelling tobacco warehouses to the rusty textile mills, people of both races joke about their amoeba-shaped district, which follows Interstate 85 linking predominantly black neighborhoods of Charlotte, Winston-Salem, Greensboro and Durham.
What is termed "racial gerrymandering" in Washington, they call "the ketchup spill" here.


Alison Finn, J. M. Bogert Jr.
Alison Gallagher Finn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Finn 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Plymouth, Vt., to Jeremiah Milbank Bogert Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bogert of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
John C. Harper performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Union Christian Church.
Mrs.
Bogert, 24, is a cum laude graduate of Yale University and received a master's degree in history from Columbia University Teachers College.
She was a history teacher at the Marymount School of New York.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Finn Dixon &amp; Herling in Stamford, Conn.
The bride is a granddaughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilford R. Young of Greenwich.
Mr.
Young retired as vice chairman and general counsel of Texaco.


The Buck Stopped Here. Briefly.
THERE'S nothing like an impending summit to get a President to clear his desk.
Bombing Iraq's intelligence headquarters last week was the first of a series of rapid-fire decisions on long-simmering issues, from the fate of Northwestern forests to the future of American ties with Vietnam.
Documents signed "William Jefferson Clinton" seemed to be sailing out of the Presidential OUT box as he prepared to fly off to Tokyo for his first economic summit.
If there was a closing line to the week, it would be: "I'm outta here, folks.  Al, you mind handling the complaints?"
Journalists are in a quandary.
It's hard to know where the most interesting seat will be next week.
Will it be in Tokyo, where leaders of the seven major industrialized democracies are gathering, and Japan and the United States are expected to clash over trade issues?  [ Articles, page 2. ]


When Getting There Isn't Half the Fun
MORE vacationers will be traveling on Connecticut's highways and back roads this summer than last, but with construction scheduled or already in progress on most of the state's major highways, how will motorists get from one place to another?
"Very slowly. Cautiously," said an engineer with the State Transportation Department, Thomas Mangan.


Goldstein and Cashman in Hall
JOHN CASHMAN JR., president of the Pompano Park, Fla., harness racing track, Castleton Farm and The Red Mile in Lexington, Ky., and publicist JOE GOLDSTEIN will be inducted into the harness racing Hall of Fame in Goshen, N.Y. today.
Goldstein was publicist for Roosevelt Raceway in Westbury, L.I., in the 1950's and 1960's, before opening his own public relations firm.(AP)


Inner Landscape
To the Editor: While reading Elizabeth Benedict's article "Exploring an Inner Landscape" (May 30), I felt it had a very familiar ring.
Every time my husband and I travel to a foreign country, we visit the old Jewish section or a syanagogue.


Bucolic Village Contemplates a Prison's New Inmate
Down the hill from the Federal prison where Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman is being held, three World War II veterans shared an early morning cup of coffee today at Frank Gambino's squat little convenience store.
They were not happy that the man they considered the mastermind of the bombing of the World Trade Center and of the foiled attempt to bomb four other places in New York City had been brought into their backyard.


States Take Steps To Regulate Travel Business
A series of purported travel schemes and swindles has legislatures in at least a half-dozen states considering laws to curb abuses.
Hoping to avoid a repeat of recent incidents that involved almost $400,000 in claims, Florida recently passed a law, effective Oct. 1, requiring travel agencies in business three years or less, or which have not had the same owership during that time, to be registered and bonded.
And this month Virginia, seeking to curb high-pressure telephone solicitations promising "free" vacations, will begin regulating operators of travel clubs.
"Travel is a fertile field for scams and fly-by-night operations," said Dick Knodt, chief operating officer of the American Society of Travel Agents, noting that most deceptive practices involve spurious giveaways via toll-free or 900 telephone numbers.
Such giveaways, Mr.
Knodt said, often require the unwary to buy a companion ticket at an inflated price, or tack on more in arbitrary fees and taxes than the cost of a legitimate ticket.


Art of Decision Making In Each School
In response to "State's Schools Mandate Joins Parents and Staffs"  [ June 6 ] , I would like to state the position of the New York State Federation of Schools Administrators on school-based decision making.
The federation clearly recognizes the positive elements of school-based decision making.
Research indicates the value of collaboration in the school buildings among all staff members, parents and supervisors.
Faculty participation in decision making continues to be a successful practice in New York State.
Progressive school supervision, which involves school constituencies, has long been recognized as a cornerstone for all successful school-improvement plans.
The federation's position on school-based decision making is outlined in the following seven points.


State Department Issues an Alert
In the wake of recent political events, including the United States' attack on Iraq's intelligence headquarters late last month, the State Department has issued a travel advisory for all United States citizens traveling abroad.
The warning, dated June 26, says travelers "should exercise greater than usual caution in light of the tension likely to follow such recent events as the June 26 U.S. military action against Iraq, the arrest of eight terrorists in New York and the bombing of the World Trade Center in February." The advisory suggests that travelers obtain the State Department's Consular Information Sheets, regional travel brochures and/or travel warnings for specific countries.
The telephone number for recorded information is (202) 647-5225.


Untrue Then, Untrue Now
To the Editor:
Leon Wieseltier, in his May 23 essay, "Remembering Irving Howe (1920-93)," tells us that he and Howe agreed about "the philistinism of the American Jewish community." What philistinism?
Jews are highly represented among creative artists, performers, supporters of the arts and, most important, audiences and readers.
Jewish philistinism is a myth.


Miss Stephens, Dr. Ellsworth
Elizabeth Wade Stephens, who will start graduate studies in history at Duke University in September, was married yesterday to Dr.
Scott A. Ellsworth, a historian at the National Museum of American History at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
The Rev.
Dr.
Bryant M. Kirkland performed the ceremony at the National Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Ellsworth, a graduate of Mount Holyoke College, is a daughter of Mrs.
Wade C. Stephens of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Dr.
Stephens.
Her father was the director of studies at the Lawrenceville School.


Holland Cleared for Contact
Green Bay Packers linebacker JOHNNY HOLLAND has been cleared for full contact by the neurosurgeon who performed cervical fusion surgery on him six months ago.
Holland's next go-ahead rests with the Packers, who must determine if he is in peak physical condition.
The Packers must also sign Holland, who is an unrestricted free agent.


Mia R. Freund, Ramsey R. Walker
Mia R. Freund, a daughter of Dr.
Myron E. Freund and Winifred S. Freund of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening to Ramsey R. Walker, a son of Beth Walker of Stonington, Conn., and the late Samuel S. Walker Jr.
Rabbi Judith Lewis officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Walker is a story developer at "20/20," the ABC News program.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is an attending urologic surgeon at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., and an assistant clinical professor of surgery at Cornell University Medical College in New York.
Her mother is the project director at the Center for Family Resources in Mineola, L.I., which serves teachers and social workers.


Miss Kittredge And Mr. Irving
Deborah Whittier Kittredge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Kittredge of Cumberland Foreside, Me., was married yesterday to Bruce Alan Irving, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Irving of Kennebunk, Me.
The bride's brother, Robert B. Kittredge Jr., officiated at the Chebeague Island Inn in Maine.


Focus: Seattle; Transforming a Rundown Lake Shoreline
HIGH-TECH and research companies are transforming a neglected industrial area on the southern shores of a 6,718-acre lake a mile north of the downtown into a desirable workplace.
One of them, the fast-growing ZymoGenetics, planning to expand its biomedical research, is spending $25 million to restore the landmark Lake Union Steam Plant, Seattle City Light's first powerhouse, which produced electricity until 1983.


Reclaiming Whitney Treasures
Nancy Whitney's paternal great-grandmother Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney founded the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Now Ms.
Whitney wants to reclaim some family heirlooms.
When the Whitney moved from its first home at 8 West Eighth Street (once Gertrude Whitney's studio) in 1954, the elaborate front doors went, too.
Now Ms.
Whitney, a jewelry designer who is a patron of the current owner of 8 West Eighth Street -- the New York Studio School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture -- is determined to get the doors back.


Is Your Car Safe At Airport Lots?
"AN airport is just like a candy store to crooks," said Vincent Bonaventura, general manager of Newark Airport.
Indeed, travelers bring to airports an impressive array of valuables: suitcases full of new clothes, and possibly jewelry; cameras, wallets, credit cards and checkbooks; keys to houses that may be empty, airline tickets, vouchers and passports.
And, perhaps most valuable and often vulnerable, automobiles that travelers leave in parking lots for days or weeks.
Carjackings are almost unknown in airport lots; of eight major airports that were surveyed for this column, only Atlanta reported one, in 1992, and that took place in a rental-car lot.
It's the unattended car and, even more often, its contents and parts, that thieves target.


Say: Hold Your Nose and Open Wide
Americans were given some unsettling news about chemical residues in their children's food last week.
There are too many pesticide residues still in the food, said a report by the National Academy of Sciences that was endorsed by the Federal Government.
But the report left a fuzzy impression about children's vulnerabilities: it said they may or may not be more sensitive to chemicals than adults are.


Your Home: Repair Rip-Offs; Looking For Signs Of a Scam
THE infinite ways in which home-improvement contractors have cheated property owners over the years is as old and varied as history.
So it is no surprise that this summer has its own brand of scams.
In addition, homeowners should be warned that the favored victims are are changing.
The elderly used to be the targets.
No longer.
Consumer protection officials are finding that the victims are increasingly foreign-born homeowners of any age and means.


Where Independence Is Not a Virtue
To the Editor:
In her June 6 front-page article on the Kate Moss fashion spread ("So Weak, So Powerful"), Elizabeth Kaye blames the inadequacy of feminism for the contemporary woman's retreat into fantasies of weakness and childishness.
It is more accurately the sexist society that American women and girls are still reared in that has taught them that independence is not a virtue, that some basic components of happiness -- love, intimacy, family -- are attainable only by playing a submissive role with their male partners.


Elmsford's 'Grand Hotel' Is on a Human Scale
FOR a dinner theater that specializes in populist fare, "Grand Hotel" is a long shot.
Even though the musical ran more than two years on Broadway, it never seized hot-ticket status.
It has no hit songs, no identifiable logos on T-shirts or marquees and no message of uplift, only one that informs us, assaultively and instantly: "Time is running out." The final ensemble concedes that "life goes on." Worse yet, the show violates a couple of basic precepts of restaurant and theater management.
Trips to the restrooms and additional sales of beverages are curtailed because there is no intermission.
It's no wonder that, in parody, the name of this show is "Grim Hotel."
All of which makes the Westchester Broadway Theater production a triumph of artistry over commercialism.
With Niki Harris and Kenneth Tosti's graceful, faithful, just-so re-creations of Tommy Tune's original nonstop movement (direction and choreography are one), the musical is fluidly accommodated to a boxy thrust stage.


Pioneer Feminists Get a Shrine
To the Editor:
Lynn Sherr and Jurate Kazickas lament in their delightful "Put More Women on a Pedestal" (Op-Ed, June 14) that there are now so few.


What You Have to Do for a Green Card; Phantom Resident
To the Editor:
Readers might be interested in a postscript to "Doctors, Spaghetti and My American Wife" (Op-Ed, June 7), my Immigration and Naturalization Service saga.
My green card finally arrived in the mail last week, the issuing process having perhaps been speeded by my article.


Date Rape Debate
In 1977, the year I was raped, the concept of date rape was not discussed.
I told only a few close friends.
I did not press charges or tell my family for fear of the same judgments that Roiphe so blithely pronounces on rape victims.
Contrary to her assertion that the current focus on date rape harms women by assigning them the passivity of the 1950's, this openness finally allows women to assert control over their own bodies without shame.
CAROLYN NOEL CHRIS New York, N.Y.


The Cinematic Law Firm of Greedy, Vain &amp; Immoral
Comfortably ensconced atop his class at Harvard Law School, sexy and clever and cocky to boot, Mitch McDeere can go to any law firm he likes.
Instead, seduced by a bloated salary, a shiny new Mercedes, a plush office, the taste of Memphis barbecue and a low-interest mortgage on a ranch house with a big backyard, he opts for the ritzy but obscure firm of Bendini, Lambert &amp; Locke.
Had McDeere, played by Tom Cruise, followed the well-trodden path from Ivy League law school to a real-life law office like Hale &amp; Dorr or Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, he would have quickly been forgotten.
In nearly a century of cinema, few film makers have seen movie material in these strait-laced, straitjacketed operations.
But in joining the Bendini firm, McDeere joined something else -- the ever-lengthier list of lawyers in American movies.


Bomb-Plot Suspects' Lives Emerge in Sharper Detail
Amir Abdelgani was only a few weeks away from a happy court rendezvous with America -- his citizenship ceremony -- when his immigrant's life fell into chaos and he stood pleading not guilty in Federal court last week to the accusation of being a conspirator intent on bombing and terrorizing his adopted homeland.
Victor Alvarez, another suspect in the plot, was similarly apprehended in a mundane life of work, mixed opportunity and, said his girlfriend, loudly zealous Islamic prayer that she found excessive.
"Whenever he did it, it made me so angry I turned the radio up or shut the door," the Christian woman recalled, requesting anonymity as she described a lifestyle that had more intimations of a melting-pot sitcom than a fanatic plot.


Refugees Repulsed And Repressed
To the Editor:
In the Supreme Court decision on returning Haitian refugees (front page, June 22), Justice John Paul Stevens, writing for the Court, displays a characteristic sensitivity to language.
He discusses not only the English wording of Article 33 of the United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees -- "expel or return" -- but also the word used in the French version: "refouler."


5 of 9 Principals Reinstated In South Bronx School District
The acting superintendent of a scandal-plagued school district in the Bronx, operating under guidelines set forth by former Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, has temporarily reinstated five of the nine principals the Chancellor had ordered removed six days before he left office.
Mr.
Fernandez, whose tenure ended Wednesday, had ordered the superintendent of School District 12, Robert Henry, to remove the nine principals and one assistant principal because the process by which they were selected may have been tainted.


How Shame and Fear Take a Toll on Men Who Are Raped
THE most devastating aspect of being raped 11 years ago was the loss of innocence, the feeling, 26-year-old Charles Meyer, said, "that part of me had been ripped away." Six years after being raped, Andre Lee, 22, remains haunted by shame and confusion.
Recently the two men talked about their ordeals and the aftermath at Connecticut College in New London where Mr.
Meyer works as an assistant technical director for Palmer Auditorium and Mr.
Lee is a recent graduate.
Like many men who have experienced the trauma of rape, they said for years they hid their ordeals behind a wall of silence.
Experts point out that because most sex offenders are male, many men feel that if they tell someone about being raped it is tantamount to admitting to homosexuality.


CRIME
"I was supposed to handle death better than anyone," reflects Dr.
Kay Scarpetta, whose job as Chief Medical Examiner for the state of Virginia gives her an unusual vantage in Patricia D. Cornwell's morbidly entertaining forensic mysteries.
In CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL (Scribners, $21), the cool Dr.
Scarpetta is unnerved by gruesome events follow ing the execution of a killer.
She no sooner finishes her autopsy of the criminal than she spots signs of his handiwork on the mutilated body of a dying boy.
More fresh corpses with the dead killer's signature are soon stacking up at the morgue, where someone on the doctor's staff is sabotaging her investigation into these bizarre homicides.
The elaborate plot of Ms.
Cornwell's fourth novel shows expert engineering, and the lucid descriptions of those forensic procedures that make her story so grimly fascinating are delivered in the authoritative voice you'd expect of someone who has worked in a medical examiner's office and studied at the F.B.I.
Academy.
Although her dispassionate style doesn't always do for characterization, it works just fine when the author is in the lab or going over a crime scene with the latest high-tech gear.
The style also suits Dr.
Scarpetta, whose prickly personality and professional aloofness cause some people to misjudge her as "arrogant, ambitious and strange" -- qualities prized in scientific detectives since Sherlock Holmes.


Why It Pays To Achieve Immortality
Music, like everything else human, pits dreams of everlasting life against a natural order by which all things die.
The word "immortal" permeates musical rhetoric, as in "Beethoven's immortal masterpiece" or "Mozart's immortal genius." Keeping 200-year-old musical organisms alive -- often by artificial respiration -- may be humanity's symbolic swipe against the unavoidable, a small comfort derived from knowing that what is in our ears this morning will live on in future ones.
Immortality is also, of course, a way of making money.
When classical-music customers come nigh, waving their entertainment dollars uncertainly, concert presenters know that immortality -- music's Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval -- will help them decide.
If the Ninth Symphony lives on 168 years after Beethoven wrote it, tickets to hear it must be guilt-edged investments.
With prices the way they are, why take chances?


Mona R. Stevens, James M. Loeb
Mona Robin Stevens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Stevens of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to James Matthew Loeb, a son of Mrs.
Donald Dworken of Greenwich, Conn., and Peter K. Loeb of New York.
Cantor William R. Walton performed the ceremony at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Loeb is the managing accountant for Fidelity Auctioneers, an auction house in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


American Crafts Festival Opens at Lincoln Center


10 Inches Of Chills And Thrills
The last ride on the Parachute Jump at Coney Island was in 1968.
It had been rusting for 20 years and was in danger of falling down when it was declared a landmark in 1988 as Brooklyn's funkiest piece of vernacular architecture.
Workers are nearing the end of a $1 million restoration.
To commemorate the geyser-shaped structure, Valerie Haller, design director of Coney Island U.S.A., has created a plaster model painted in red, yellow and green.


Chaos of Children Kicks Off Fresh Air Fund Summer
It took 350 children only an instant to transform a quiet corner of the Port Authority Bus Terminal into a scene of crescendoing chatter last week.
The children, ages 6 to 18, were about to leave New York City to take part in the Fresh Air Fund's Friendly Towns Program.
For the several weeks, they will go fishing, horseback riding and camping in rustic places like Middlebury, Vt.; Southbridge, Mass., and Dowingtown, Pa.
They will go to sleep serenaded by chirping crickets and wake up to morning dew.


Lori A. Windolf, Giuseppe Crispo
Lori Anne Windolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Windolf of Montclair, N.J., was married on Thursday to Giuseppe Alexander Crispo, a son of Marina Crispo of New York and Alfonso Crispo of Rochelle Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Sears, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Mayflower, an inn in Washington, Conn.
Mrs.
Crispo, a cum laude graduate of Smith College, is a vice president of the C. W. Bollinger Company, a Montclair insurance agency founded by her family in 1933.


Vermont Debates Value of Saving a Rural Image
Marjorie Pierce sat on the porch of her 158-year-old general store, gazing upon her garden of blue lupines, the lush meadow and the Green Mountains against the evening sky.
"It doesn't look endangered from here," said Miss Pierce, a former high school French teacher who celebrated her 90th birthday in May at the Town Hall with several hundred neighbors, including Senator James M. Jeffords.


Plane Geometry
All of us know this myopia: even after we've lived in a city for years, we often lack a real sense of how its road networks are laid out.
It's enough to memorize the routes to work and to the mall.
And even on those roads we often have no idea what is behind the familiar blocks of stores and homes -- the size of that woods, or where the marsh beside the parking lot drains to.
This lack of information was what first drew Alex S. MacLean to the sky.
As a graduate student in design at Harvard in the early 1970's, when community planning was becoming a hot topic, he was expected to construct models of towns and neighborhoods to see how new development might fit in.


Poached Peaches, No Cream
POACHED peaches make a superb low-calorie summer dessert -- provided you leave off the ice cream.
Since France produces some of the best peaches in the world, it is hardly surprising that French chefs have come up with some of the best ways to cook them: in wine.
Georges Blanc of La Mere Blanc in France poaches white peaches in cabernet sauvignon and serves them with a syrup thickened with raspberry puree.
Raymond Blanc (no relation) of Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons at Great Milton near Oxford, England, cooks peaches in white wine with slices of orange and lemon.


Croats Take Final Pilgrimage in Tribute to Petrovic
The stretch of highway looked like any other stretch of highway except for one thing: the new section of guardrail.
It was at that place, less than an hour's drive north of here, that the Croatian national basketball team laid down flowers and lighted candles.


This Folk Rocker Has a Penchant For the Divine
Mike Scott is thinking about God.
It's something he does often.
On a drizzly, gray New York City afternoon, Mr.
Scott, the 34-year-old lead singer and songwriter for the Waterboys, sits in a small, European-flavored cafe on the Upper West Side.
A pale, frail fellow with a shock of dark hair, a thick Scottish brogue and a slightly suspicious look in his sunken blue eyes, he wears a black leather jacket, black jeans and a navy-blue polka-dot shirt that is unbuttoned to reveal a straggle of chest hair.
For most of the interview, Mr.
Scott hasn't said much, but suddenly his reticence gives way to a little outburst.
"I've thought a lot about God and spirituality in the last three years," he says earnestly.
"It's very important to me. I think about it all the time. What am I doing here? Why was I born? I want answers to those questions!"


FLORIDA EXAMINES ERA OF SUSPICION
The release of more than 25,000 pages of secret documents this week sheds light on a notorious Florida legislative panel that zealously sought out suspected Communists, civil rights leaders and homosexuals from the mid-1950's to 1965.
The records of the infamous "Johns Committee" -- named for a one-time Governor and State Senator, Charley Johns -- were to have been kept sealed until 2038.
But a state constitutional amendment enacted last year directed the opening of most legislative records, including the Johns files, on Thursday.


Pardon Me, but About Managed Care . . .
To the Editor:
Your article describes with clarity the desire of the mega-insurance companies to colonize medical care not only in New York but throughout the nation.
Under their system, physicians get more by denying services than rendering them to patients -- an interesting reversal of traditional values in our society.


JUNE 27-JULY 2: Breakthrough in Beach Reading; After 8 Years of Bad Drafts, A Computer Writes a Novel
She once wrote a page-turner called "The Love Machine," but the glitzy romance writer Jacqueline Susann didn't have in mind "Hal," a computer programmed to write like the pulp queen herself.
But "Just This Once," a new book published last week, is the product of the collaboration of Scott French, a self-taught programmer from Silicon Valley and Hal, his computer.
Mr.
French spent eight years on the project, laboriously writing thousands of computer-coded rules using so-called artificial intelligence, an advanced form of programming that tries to emulate human thought.


Teddy Roosevelt Home Reopens
Sagamore Hill, President Theodore Roosevelt's house in Oyster Bay, L.I., is scheduled to reopen to the public today, after being closed for six months for restorations, mostly outdoors.
Roosevelt conducted official White House business at Sagamore Hill in the summers from 1901 to 1909.
In a pilot landscape restoration project, the National Park Service, which now administers the property, has restored a large area of the grounds to their original appearance with an eye to minimizing environmental impact.
For example, dead trees were converted into wood chips for new trails.


A Family Rallies to Rescue
This evening at about 6 o'clock, the jump shooters and jammers who normally convene at "Baby Rutgers" park here will yield the basketball court to Jerry Walker, his nephews, cousins and in-laws.
It's time for their annual "family game."


Phoenix Company: Uncommon Repertory
"I DO not want to be predictable," said the artistic director of the Phoenix Theater Company, Bram Lewis.
The company's sixth season opened last week at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase.
"Everyone expects us to do delightful summer comedies," Mr.
Lewis said.
Well, not exactly, even though the Phoenix did a delightful "Noises Off" three years ago.
But everyone expects the Phoenix to do Shakespeare too.
And a classic, be it Ibsen or an obscure Restoration comedy, as well.
Who remembers "The Rover" in 1988?


Lorenzo's New Flight of Non-Fancy
HE'S fit, he's rested and he's back.
Yes, Frank Lorenzo -- hero to bargain-hunting travelers, Darth Vader to organized labor -- is again launching an airline.
With the major carriers losing pots of money and the unions baying for his blood, conventional wisdom suggests that the man who flew Continental and Eastern Airlines into bankruptcy will not keep his planes aloft for long.


HAITIAN MILITARY AND ARISTIDE SIGN PACT TO END CRISIS
Ending a week of uncertainty and bitter recriminations, Haiti's exiled President and the army commander who ousted him signed an accord yesterday providing for the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to return to power and for democracy to be restored to the country by Oct. 30.
After Father Aristide signed the accord last night on Governors Island in New York Harbor, he made a brief statement, saying: "To all of the international community, peace and love. Peace and love to the Haitian people."


Indian Point 3 on Federal Watch List
THE Nuclear Regulatory Commission has added the Indian Point 3 installation here to its list of problem-plagued plants.
The Federal regulatory commission on June 22 cited a problem with declining performance at Indian Point 3 and its August 1992 report card on the 17-year-old plant, which showed inadequate management controls.


Oliver North's Next War
It was raining when Oliver North arrived at the Virginia state Republican convention in Richmond last month.
He went to a reception organized by the party chairman and worked the room.
He hugged one old friend and reached out with sudden passion toward another, shouting throatily, "Hey, John!" He didn't drink.
He signed autographs and said "God love you" when people told him stories.
"I've taken this line from Schwarzenegger -- 'I'll be back,' " he said.


Stockholm
A Sleeping Beauty for much of the year, Stockholm comes into its own in the summer, when the water that surrounds it turns from forbidding gray to inviting blue.
The city is built on islands at the point where Lake Malaren empties into the Baltic Sea, and its buildings -- the massive, tawny-colored Royal Palace, slender church spires, old merchant's houses in yellow and ocher and slate gray banks -- are reflected in blue water so clean that there are bathing beaches in the city proper.
The best way to see the city is by boat.
In addition to sleek sightseeing boats, there are ferries from the center of town to outlying islands.
A large fleet of white steamboats serves the towns on Lake Malaren and the villages of the archipelago that Stockholmers love with a passion.


L.I.R.R. Like a Turtle In Adding Officers
In "Car Thefts Increase Sharply at Train Stations"  [ June 20th ]  we are told that nine additional officers will be hired to put off car thefts at L.I.R.R. parking lots.
According to Chief Flynn, head of the 200-member police department at the railroad, these officers will not be on the street until early next year.
The need for more protection is obvious from the article.
If that is the case, why must it take so long to get the extra help on the job?


With Its Pockets Turned Out, Germany Spurns Pressure
After reductions last week in two key German interest rates, Chancellor Helmut Kohl will be prepared to resist pressure for further cuts to stimulate European growth.
He is similarly expected to shrug off appeals for increased Government spending and new money to the former Soviet Union.
Germany will be economically and politically weaker in Tokyo than it has been at any Group of Seven summit meeting in the last four years.
Driven up by colossal Government and private borrowing to finance the costs of German unification, the nation's inflation rate is 4.1 percent, above that of Britain or France, and Mr.
Kohl will have to call a general election by the end of 1994.


Laura S. Glick and Neil E. Meyer
Laura Sybil Glick, the daughter of Doris Glick and Dr.
Alvin J. Glick, both of New York, was married yesterday to Neil Ettin Meyer, the son of Evelyn Meyer of New York and the late Kurt Meyer.
The Rev.
Carl Sword, an Episcopal priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Calamingos Ranch in Malibu, Calif.
Mrs.
Meyer, a graduate of Columbia University and the Fordham University Law School, is a lawyer in the Los Angeles law office of Neal Raymond Hersh.
Her father is the director of addiction medicine at Montefiore Medical Center-Rikers Island Health Services and is the chief psychiatrist for the Correctional Health Services of the New York City Health Department.
Her mother is a librarian at the New York Society Library.


Boston Mayor Wants Fisk Back
You can go home again, CARLTON FISK.
That's what Boston Mayor RAY FLYNN seems to be telling the recently released White Sox catcher.
In a letter to Boston Red Sox General Manager LOU GORMAN, Flynn, soon to become the United States Ambassador to the Vatican, asked the team to consider bringing the 45-year-old Fisk, Boston's catcher from 1972-80, back to Fenway Park.


Stacey Thompson, R. Scott Rogers
Stacey Anne Thompson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Thompson of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married there yesterday to R. Scott Rogers, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Rogers of Stamford, Conn.
Msgr.
William C. Capik performed the ceremony at St.
James Church.
Mrs. Rogers, 22, graduated cum laude from the University of Colorado at Boulder.


Ms. Marks, Mr. Grufferman
Barbara Hannah Marks, the senior vice president and group publisher of The National Enquirer and The Star tabloids, was married last Monday in Italy to Howard S. Grufferman, a senior managing director of Julien J. Studley Inc., a real estate brokerage.
The couple work in New York.
Mayor Salvatore Attanasio officiated at the Positano town hall.
The bride, 36, is also the publisher of Soap Opera Magazine and True Story magazine.
She graduated from St.
John's University and received a master's degree in social anthropology from New York University.
She is a daughter of Pauline Chou of Fresh Meadows, Queens, and the late Marshall Hannah.
Her stepfather, Dr.
Ya-lun Chou, is a professor of quantitative analysis at St.
John's University in Jamaica, Queens.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


U.S. Parks Retrench After Budget Cuts
IT was one of the busiest days of the year at one of the busiest national parks in the country, but the sign at our planned campground declared: Closed.
Because of budget cuts, rangers explained, the camp is not open this year.
We had hoped to establish a comfortable base at the Mathews Arm Campground in Shenandoah National Park, in the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia, for a Memorial Day weekend of hiking.
Instead, with every open campground in the park full, we had to park at the edge of the park's spectacular Skyline Drive and haul our gear deeper than we had planned into the woods to strike a camp.


Beloved Infidel
When the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned to Iran in triumph after the 1979 overthrow of the Shah's monarchy, Googoosh, the country's most popular vocalist, promised to sing him the song that had become an anthem of the Islamic revolutionary movement.
But the Ayatollah announced that he did not want to hear Googoosh sing "My Dear, Lovable Sir." In fact, he promptly ordered all female singers to be silenced, condemning them as temptresses.
Records, cassettes, movies and posters featuring Googoosh, and every other female artist, were rounded up by Islamic militants and destroyed.
The clubs and cabarets where they sang were closed.


Wall Street; A Battle Over Securities-Fraud Cases
Slurping and grunting noises are rising from both piggish parties engaged in a heated debate over securities-fraud class actions.
In one pen, meet the hogs who pull such shenanigans as filing class actions against corporate managements within hours of a stock drop, sometimes on scant evidence that any fraud was committed.
This group of lawyers and investors has resorted to paying bounties to stockbrokers who can supply names of investors harmed in such cases.
The investors frequently settle for pennies on the dollar, raising the question of whether they were simply holding up management on a meritless case.
A good case, some lawyers believe, would be taken farther and demand a higher settlement.


Empire Blue Cross Can Make a Person Long for Italy's Chaos
To the Editor:
Further to your articles about Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield: I'm not a doctor.
I'm not a hospital.
I'm just one of the thousands "covered."
I moved to New York in 1989 from Italy and immediately got health insurance with Empire Blue Cross.
I was about to get married and chose the most comprehensive (and expensive) program to cover all possible maternity costs.
In August 1991, I gave birth to a daughter in Lenox Hill Hospital and immediately after submitted claims for obstetrician and anesthesia.
The hospital submitted its bill directly to the company.


What You Have to Do for a Green Card
To the Editor:
"People of European origin can obtain a green card with ease," complains D. P. Devanand (letters, June 28).
Oh, really?
I am British, of Anglo-Saxon ancestry.
I came to New York on a working visa dated 1986.
My wife came to join me the next year.
We are still waiting for our green cards.
Indeed, we are still waiting for labor certification so that we may apply for green cards!


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
108.58
106.25
124.41
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6878
1.7065
1.5080
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2873
1.2820
1.2011
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5080
1.4757
1.9230
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$386.00
$375.75
$346.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball Midwest League  BELOIT BREWERS -- Activated Kenny Felder, outfielder, from the disabled list.
Reassigned Brad Gay, catcher, to Helena of the Pioneer League.
Southern League  CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Placed K.C.
Gillum, outfielder, on the disabled list.
Acquired Motorboat Jones, outfielder, from Winston-Salem of the Carolina League.
Soccer American Professional Soccer League  MONTREAL IMPACT -- Signed Folorunso Okenla, midfielder.


Date Rape Debate
Discernment is too rare in a society in which Sally Jesse, Geraldo and now "rape-crisis feminists" promise the sense of belonging that comes with membership in a victimized group.
But while such identification is sometimes exhilarating, it can muddy perceptions and prevent effective forward movement.
As feminists, we must recognize that to be so facile is to cancel out the more demanding and interesting subtleties of individual experience.


New Terminals At Paris Airports
Two new terminals were inaugurated last month at Paris's Orly and Roissy-Charles de Gaulle airports.
At Orly, the new $105 million, 236,814-square-foot Hall 1, which is an extension of the airport's Orly Ouest terminal, is expected to increase the number of passengers the airport can handle annually from about 25 million to about 31 million.
The wing is intended for domestic air traffic, primarily on Air Inter.
Hall 1 has four gates, a restaurant-bar, six shops and an underground parking lot.


Corrections
A cabaret listing in the Arts and Leisure guide today misstates the schedule for the club Judy's in some copies.
Shelia Weiler will perform on Wednesday, Martha Loren on Thursday and Vickie Phillips on Saturday.


Sarah H. McPeck, John R. H. Shaw
The engagement of Sarah Hamilton McPeck to John Read Hulme Shaw has been announced by the future bride's parents, Deborah McPeck and Howard McPeck Jr. of Perrysburg, Ohio.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McPeck, 27, is an associate editor at House Beautiful magazine in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Williams College.
Her father is the assistant headmaster of the Maumee Valley Country Day School in Toledo, Ohio.


Disney's 'Old Men' Savor the Vintage Years
Ollie Johnston, Ward Kimball, Frank Thomas and Marc Davis have at last become what Walt Disney named them more than 40 years ago -- old men.
The oldest, Mr.
Thomas, turned 80 last September.
The youngest, Mr.
Kimball, is 79.
They are all that remain of Disney's Nine Old Men, the group of brash young animators who cut their artistic teeth on the 1937 film "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," put goldfish in the water cooler at lunchtime and drew the first sketches of Bambi, Pinocchio and Cinderella.


Coco Myers, Daniel Rowen
FEW people believed that Daniel Rowen would ever marry.
A talkative, analytical architect in his late 30's who races vintage cars, he has for the past five years been the host of a men-only party in celebration of bachelorhood.
"I saw myself as holding up this wonderful tradition of being a single man," he said.
"Then I got lucky. I met Coco."


Sheik Enters Prison
On his first day behind bars at the Federal prison at Otisville, N.Y., Mr.
Abdel Rahman -- who is blind, suffers from diabetes and speaks no English -- telephoned two friends and said that he was comfortable and that his medical and religious needs were being met, according to one of his lawyers.
"So far so good," said the lawyer, Barbara Nelson.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES HERE'S YOUR HAT WHAT'S YOUR HURRY Stories.
By Elizabeth McCracken.
Turtle Bay/Random House, $20.


Shades of 'La Dolce Vita'
Kenar, a company that may be known more for its provocative advertisements than for its clothing, plans to unveil its newest billboard in Times Square on Tuesday.
The ad features a model, Helena Christiansen, standing behind a line of freshly washed white clothes.
Another billboard will show her breast-feeding a wooden cherub.


Correction
An article on June 20 about movies and guns misstated a term for the Colt.
It was called the Peacemaker, not the Peacekeeper.
A brief adjoining report also described firearms sequences in two movies incorrectly.
At the end of "All Quiet on the Western Front," it is a butterfly, not a flower, that alights on a rifle.
The child baptized in "The Godfather" was Michael Corleone's nephew, not his first child.


Miss Prades, Mr. Martynek
Montserrat Prades, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan Prades of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Barcelona, Spain, to Raul K. Martynek, a son of Dolores Martynek of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and the late Arthur Martynek.
The Rev.
Rossend Ametller performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Parroquia de Sant Eugeni.
Mrs.
Martynek, a graduate of Marymount Manhattan College, is the assistant to the general counsel of the Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein Organization in New York, which oversees the estates of the musical collaborators.


Inner Landscape
To the Editor: Elizabeth Benedict's article probably touched a hot button on many seasoned travelers.
Although culturally Jewish, I also attend synagogue services only on the High Holy Days and for social events (i.e., weddings and bar mitzvahs).
But upon arrival in any country, my list of sites always includes a synagogue or Jewish community center.


Why Uncle Sam Isn't A Better Landlord
FOR anyone trying to get a grip on the dimensions of the Federal Government's property-management problems, two related and disturbing events of last month are especially instructive.
In the first, the Department of Housing and Urban Development proved to be to urban development roughly what Dutch elm disease is to elms.
Trying, shotgun-style, to boost housing construction, the agency guaranteed private loans for apartment complexes nationwide, then forgot to monitor its investment.
The economy soured, the complexes went bust, drug addicts moved in and buildings started to fall apart.
Last month HUD said it may hold the bag on $11.9 billion in bad loans.
Taxpayers, of course, will foot the bill.


When Getting There Isn't Half the Fun
MORE vacationers will be traveling on Connecticut's highways and back roads this summer than last, but with construction scheduled or already in progress on most of the state's major highways, how will motorists get from one place to another?
"Very slowly. Cautiously," said an engineer with the State Transportation Department, Thomas Mangan.


American Airlines Wins a London Route
American Airlines, seeking to expand its trans-Atlantic routes, has been awarded the Philadelphia-London route that USAir was forced to give up as a result of its recent link with British Airways.
The route will expand American's presence at Heathrow airport in London, the busiest in Europe.
The new route will also introduce London service to American's hub in Raleigh-Durham, N.C., where flights will originate before stopping in Philadelphia en route to London. 'Very Important to Us'
"We were eager to get this route, and we're excited to have it," said Al Becker, a spokesman for American, which is based in Fort Worth.
"It's very important to us."


IRT Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


High School Lasts Longer Than 4 Years for Many Students
Judith Aguilar is 18 years old and graduated from high school after only four years.
In her midtown Manhattan school, Park West High, that achievement alone places her among the elite.
Veronica Lopez is 17 and desperate to complete her senior year.
Just over a week ago she marched with her class to the strains of "Pomp and Circumstance," but when the graduates picked up their diplomas last Monday, Miss Lopez stayed home.
To graduate, she still must pass three courses, including an economics class she has already failed twice.


Dance in Review
Zen Dance Company  La Mama E.T.C.


Dance in Review
Stephen Coleman Dance Company  Hudson Guild Theater


. . . 8 . . . 9 . . . 10: Garden Boxing, Hit Hard by Casinos, Is Counted Out
In other days, with other fighters -- with Muhammad Ali, Sugar Ray Robinson, Jake LaMotta, Joe Louis and Henry Armstrong -- it was called the Temple of Fistiana.
But now, with the real fights going to casinos and the biggest headlines coming from allegations that someone named Jesse Ferguson was bribed to take a dive on an undercard, Madison Square Garden is shutting down its boxing business.
In 1971, the Garden was the site of what was billed simply as The Fight: Ali versus Joe Frazier.
The live gate brought in $1.35 million, by far the highest at the time.
Beyond that it probably was the greatest night for scalping in sports history, with ringside seats peddled at more than $1,000 apiece.
More than 1,500 fans flew in from Italy, thanks to scalped tickets.


July Fourth Fireworks Light Up Skies Over Central Park


Joshua H. Landes and Bryna Shuchat
Bryna Shuchat, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Wilfred Shuchat of Montreal, was married there yesterday to Joshua H. Landes, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Aaron Landes of Philadelphia.
The fathers of the couple jointly officiated at Congregation Shaar Hashomayim, where the bride's father is the senior rabbi.
The bride is the corporate communications manager of Positron Inc., a manufacturer of emergency telecommunications equipment in Montreal.
She graduated from McGill University.
Her mother, Miriam Shuchat, is a professor of humanities at Vanier College in Montreal.


Restoring Stability to Haiti Is Seen as the Next Big Test
Now that an agreement has finally been signed to restore Haiti's first elected President to power on Oct. 30, diplomats say they face a more critical test: building a viable economy and political stability in a desperately poor country with virtually no tradition of compromise.
The tortuous talks in New York that culminated in the signing of the accord on Saturday by the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide and the military leader who overthrew him in September 1991, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, exposed the fractious nature of Haiti's politics and the skills and limits of its foreign partners.


Devil His Due Leads Parade in Suburban
Was that the Horse of the Year racing down the homestretch at Belmont Park on the Fourth of July?
Well, it was certainly the horse of the moment, Devil His Due, winning the 107th running of the Suburban Handicap over Pure Rumor and West by West, and winning his fourth stakes race in five starts in four months.


Greg Manning Auctions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Scheib (Earl) Inc. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fran Packman, Lawrence Waxman
Fran S. Packman and Lawrence D. Waxman, both partners in Farbstein, Waxman &amp; Packman, a New York law firm, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman officiated at Temple Israel of Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Waxman graduated from Northeastern University and received a law degree from the University of Toledo.
She is the daughter of Doris and Louis Packman of West Hempstead, L.I.


Mets Sign Off on Another Declaration of Incompetence
The clubhouse door remained closed after the 10-8 defeat.
The manager was inside screaming.
The players, some of whom were in the showers while the manager yelled again about "not going back to the old ways," finished dressing.
Then, one by one, the culprits in the afternoon's debacle against the Giants emerged and walked off without speaking.
Chico Walker, whose error in the eighth opened the way for San Francisco's final three runs, came first.
Mike Maddux, who allowed four hits and three runs in one inning of work, came next.
Mike Draper, his line loaded with three hits and a run, brought up the rear.


Intermetco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Dena Val Driver, Gregory Morcroft
Dena Val Driver, a railroad reservations manager, was married yesterday to Gregory Bryan Morcroft, a financial correspondent for Reuters, both in New York.
The Rev.
Benjamin Thurber, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the United Church of Craftsbury in Craftsbury, Vt.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Sweet Briar College.
She works for Brit Rail Travel International Inc., the American subsidiary of British Rail.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse W. Driver Jr. of Dallas.


INSIDE
For Haiti, More Big Hurdles
With an agreement on restoring democracy, diplomats say, Haiti must build an economy and support political stability in a place with virtually no tradition of compromise.
Page 4.
U.S.-Japan Talks to Resume
After a compromise proposal by Japan's Prime Minister, American and Japanese trade negotiators will resume talks.
Page 37.
Car Trips' Full-Speed Return
Gasoline is cheap and plentiful, so Americans, many of whom put off vacations the last few years, are hitting the road again.
Page 37.
An Official With Big Ideas
After five months in Washington, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich is finding that theorizing about policy is the easy part.
Page 7.


Review/Music; A Moth, a Bat, a Plane And a Concert Unfazed By the Great Outdoors
The Caramoor Festival kicked off the holiday weekend this evening with fireworks of a distinctly understated sort.
The Mozartean Players, a piano trio that uses soft-voiced period instruments, anchored by Steven Lubin's fortepiano, set off charming little sparklers by Mozart, Haydn and Beethoven under the big tent of the Spanish Courtyard.
A goodly crowd turned out, but an advantageously placed listener had to wonder how much may have been audible at the fringes.
The oppressively damp weather militated against crisp delivery and strong projection, although the rain held off until the very end.
In fact, the evening offered a virtual compendium of the distractions of outdoor concerts, both benign and damaging.


Temtex Industries (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. Might Halt Its Active Stand In Mideast Talks; Rabin Criticizes U.S. Plan
In an unusual attack on United States policy, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel today accused the Clinton Administration of yielding to Palestinian pressure with its latest proposals in the Middle East peace talks.
Mr.
Rabin was reacting unhappily to an American draft paper that the Administration hopes can become the basis for agreement on the principles for future Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Joseph Wishy, 59, Producer of Programs on the Performing Arts
Joseph R. Wishy, a producer in the performing arts and television who presented Jiri Kylian's early choreography in the United States, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was amoebic dysentery, said Frederick Wildfoerster, his personal assistant in Wishupon Productions.


Ice Cream Brings Call Of Foul Play
What started out as a campaign gimmick -- the distribution of discount coupons for Dairy Queen treats -- has turned into a criminal investigation.
For some Democrats here, the episode, which has naturally been labeled "Ice Cream-Gate," is providing the sort of tasty summer fare the name connotes.
For others, it's another setback in their party's efforts to gain strength in Republican-dominated Orange County.


U.S. TO COOPERATE ON CAIRO'S REQUEST FOR SHEIK'S RETURN
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that the United States would act swiftly on Egypt's request for the return of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Islamic cleric who was detained on Friday in New York on immigration charges.
Mr.
Christopher's comments followed intense diplomatic discussions in Cairo over the fate of Mr.
Abdel Rahman, who has been accused of inciting violence among his followers in Egypt and whose followers in the United States include suspects in a plot to set off bombs across Manhattan and the bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26.


Cherry Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Supervalu Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Sports of The Times; Drysdale Could Laugh At Himself
I saw Don Drysdale for the last time two months ago at a formal baseball dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
He was still looking very large at 6 feet 6 inches, about 220 pounds, large enough, strong enough, young enough, even at age 56, that in the mind's eye I could see him back on the mound, alone under the stadium lights as cool in his black tuxedo as he had ever been in his Dodger blue.
There he was, winding up, wheeling and coming in sidearm with his fearsome fastball that sizzled over a corner of the plate, when it wasn't rattling the beak of the batter's cap, or bouncing off his shoulder.
"The trick against Drysdale," Orlando Cepeda once said, "is to hit him before he hits you."


A Gershwin's Album of Heady Family Memories
Frances Godowsky has a way with a Gershwin tune.
It's not so much the voice, which is sweet and a little frail.
It's a feeling for the lyrics and a vocal style that goes straight back to the 1920's and 30's.
She sings the music from the inside out, so to speak, which is not really surprising, considering that she is the sister of Ira and George Gershwin.
The Gershwins and their era give off a romantic luster that seems to brighten with time.
There are at least a dozen books in print, including a new biography, "The Memory of All That" by Joan Peyser (Simon &amp; Schuster).
A collection of Ira's lyrics is on the way.
"Crazy for You," subtitled "The Gershwin Musical," has been a bright spot on Broadway for the last year and a half.
The Gershwin machine is humming along nicely.
Mrs.
Godowsky knows exactly how all the pieces fit together.


TMS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Renegades Help Bosnia By Helping Themselves
A man living in the center of Sarajevo could scarcely believe what he saw when he was awakened before dawn on Saturday by armed men in the street outside.
Setting up mortar tubes, the men, in uniforms of the Bosnian paramilitary police, fired several volleys toward the mountains that ring the city.


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ilana M. Gordon, David Goldhaber
Ilana Michal Gordon and David Joshua Kress Goldhaber, both Harvard University students, were married yesterday in Highland Park, Ill.
Rabbi Michael Balinsky officiated at the North Suburban Synagogue Beth El.
Mrs.
Goldhaber-Gordon, 20, is a daughter of Evelyn R. Gordon and Dr.
Robert J. Gordon of Skokie, Ill.
Her mother is a teacher at the Ida Crown Jewish Academy in Chicago.
Her father is a professor of physical chemistry at the University of Illinois at Chicago.


Alton Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Don Drysdale, Hall of Fame Pitcher, Dies at 56
Don Drysdale, the Hall of Fame pitcher for the Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers whose hopping fastball and brushback pitches put fear into batters during 14 major league seasons, was found dead in his hotel room in Montreal on Saturday.
He was 56.
The cause of death was a heart attack, the Dodgers said.


Ordinary Women Receive a Tribute From Feminists
At the 27th annual National Organization for Women convention here this weekend, there was naturally much celebration over Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Carol Moseley Braun, Janet Reno, Donna E. Shalala and, among others, Patricia Ireland, who was overwhelmingly re-elected as NOW's president on Saturday night.
But the 1,000 feminists who packed a ballroom at the Boston Sheraton on Saturday afternoon were also on their feet and cheering for Marilyn Jancsy and Sally Bartolo, former school cafeteria workers from nearby Everett, Mass.
After 19 years on the job, earning $5.35 an hour, Mrs.
Jancsy, 61, and Mrs.
Bartolo, 56, were denied a raise, and they fought back, along with 29 other cafeteria workers, all women.


Unitel Video reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Beth E. Metzger, Ross Evan Gruber
Beth Ellen Metzger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Metzger of Stony Brook, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Ross Evan Gruber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Gruber of Annapolis, Md.
Rabbi Eugene J. Lipsey performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Gruber, 25, is the coordinator of government and community affairs at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield in New York.
She is a graduate of Pennsylvania State University.


Beeba's Creations (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Monitek reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mission West Properties reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Walgreen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** Walgreen Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1993
1992
Sales
2,085,255,000
1,885,968,000
Net inc
64,395,000
56,571,000
Share earns
.52
.46
9mo sales
6,257,806,000
5,632,715,000
Net inc
188,866,000
169,169,000
Share earns
1.53
1.37
Shares outst
123,741,000
123,673,000


Lisa Schiffren, Jay Mann
Lisa Michael Schiffren, a former speech writer for former Vice President Dan Quayle, was married yesterday to James Brooks Mann, a tax consultant at Deloitte &amp; Touche in New York.
Rabbi Barry Freundel officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Mann, 33, is a senior fellow at the Center for Social Thought, a nonprofit public-policy research center in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
She is a daughter of Rita Schiffren of New York and Alan Schiffren of North Salem, N.Y.
Her father is an investor in New York.


Food Lion Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Mandela and de Klerk Receive Liberty Medal in Philadelphia
Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa joined President Clinton at the birthplace of American democracy today, capping a day of pointed remarks on the distance each nation must travel to guarantee the fruits of freedom to all their citizens.
Mr. de Klerk and Mr.
Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress, were given the Liberty Medal in a ceremony at Independence Hall.


Joseph Gruss, 91, Philanthropist Who Supported Jewish Schools
Joseph S. Gruss, a financier and philanthropist who supported Jewish education and other Jewish causes, died on Saturday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91.
The cause of death was heart failure and he had been in declining health, said his son-in-law, Kenneth Lipper.


Of Alms and the Playwright: Shaw's Legacy Revives a Debate
In a war of words that George Bernard Shaw would no doubt have relished, a group of writers and Shavians has accused the British Museum of thwarting Shaw's last wishes by keeping money that the group says he intended for what is now the British Library.
Over the last several months, on television and in print, Shaw's authorized biographer, Michael Holroyd, has been challenging the director of the British Museum, Dr.
R.
G.
W.
Anderson, to reveal precisely what the museum has done with its share of the Shaw legacy.


Holiday Weekend
Independence Day is being observed today. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK


Many New Yorkers Pitch In to Keep Their City a Livable Place
To the Editor:
The virtues of New York City are seldom extolled, particularly not by New Yorkers themselves.
When I moved from Tulsa, Okla., to the city in May, a former New Yorker said that I would dislike it, and it would become uninhabitable in 40 years.
I don't believe it.


Dean Foods Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. and Japan will resume negotiations for a comprehensive trade agreement, brightening the outlook for President Clinton's meeting this week with Prime Minister Miyazawa.
Officials said the Clinton Administration had decided that a Japanese compromise proposal, delivered to Washington on Friday, was substantive enough to merit further discussion.
It is still unclear whether an agreement on the so-called economic framework can be reached this week, the original deadline.  [ Page 37. ]
The Group of Seven summit meeting in Tokyo is becoming something of a giant campaign-time annoyance for Japanese leaders.
An election two weeks from today seems certain to end nearly four decades of rule by the Liberal Democrats.
And the President, as he prepared to leave Washington, made it clear that he hoped the political turmoil would produce a Japanese Government more willing to open its markets.  [ 1. ]


Ryan to Return to the Mound
NOLAN RYAN, who has been on the disabled list since May 17, is tentatively scheduled to pitch for Texas against Milwaukee on July 19 at Arlington Stadium.
Ryan has been on the disabled list with a strained left hip.
Earlier in the season, he had arthroscopic surgery to repair damaged knee ligaments.
Ryan has worked out daily at Arlington Stadium with TOM HOUSE, formerly the Rangers' pitching coach and now a consultant for the team.
Ryan went through another throwing session off the mound Friday. (AP)


Scholarship Program Has No Link to C.I.A.
To the Editor:
I respond as a former vice chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence to your June 18 front-page article on the House Intelligence Committee's attempt to cut the White House intelligence budget request by abolishing the National Security Education program.


Again, Iraqi Babies Bear Washington's Fury
To the Editor:
While I was enjoying a few hours of weekend leisure on June 26, 23 United States cruise missiles were launched at the intelligence complex in a residential area of Baghdad.
My house happens to be a couple of hundred yards away from the complex.
I was fortunate to get through to my family in Baghdad and was comforted with the news of their survival of yet another attack.
Some of my neighbors were not so fortunate; they don't need to worry about future attacks.


Fresh Choice Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Results of Study on Pesticide Encourage Effort to Cut Use
With the release last week of a five-year study of agricultural chemicals and how they affect children, it appears that there is momentum for a major change in Federal policy on pesticides.
Just before the release of the report, from the National Academy of Sciences, came the announcement by three Federal agencies, which in the past had often clashed on the subject, that they would now work together to try to reduce the use of pesticides.
That, in turn, came a few months after the Supreme Court strictly interpreted a law on food additives, forcing Congress to act on pesticide policy.


World Economies


Once Fears Are Deflated, Scene Takes Comical Turn
It was a sticky, steamy Fourth of July.
Daniel Hadel looked into the sky and realized, quite glumly, that he was stranded in Manhattan.
So the 24-year-old advertising executive grabbed his black shorts, bottled water and baseball cap and headed for the asphalt roof of his apartment building, where he could at least catch some rays and think wistfully about the Hamptons, where friends had retreated for the weekend, or Kansas City, where he had spent last Independence Day water-skiing with high school buddies.


Benihana National Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Sampras's Wimbledon: Serve. Volley. Title.
It was a case of destiny fulfilled, and it moved Wimbledon's newest champion, 21-year-old Pete Sampras, to a state of elation that hovered between incredulity and hyperventilation.
Left in prime position to seize his second career Grand Slam with the stroke combination that has become his signature, a thoughtfully placed serve and a decisive volley, Sampras was so overcome by the moment that he prefaced both match points he served with a sobering deep knee-bend.


TesCorp Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Haitian General Begins a Selling Job; Haitians in U.S. Hopeful
Haitian immigrants in New York spoke with great caution about the latest sign that democracy would be restored to their homeland.
But in the end, there was more hope than misgiving in their voices.
Haitians around the city went about their normal routines yesterday, gathering in churches, barber shops and restaurants, where they eagerly exchanged news from back home.


Puri Journal; After 600 Years, a Hindu Juggernaut Is Still Rolling
With her palms pressed together in prayer, Kumidini Padhi stood rapt in the crowd, peeking from the folds of her turquoise silk sari at a wooden Hindu chariot looming above 16 huge, spoked wheels.
With sweat flowing over their torsos, dozens of bare-chested priests shoved and pulled a six-foot wooden pillar painted with enormous black, lidless eyes and a red slash of a mouth, up a rough log ramp onto the chariot.


CHRONICLE
Strangers often approach BOBBI C. STERNHEIM to tell her how much she resembles LINDA DANO, a star of the soap opera "Another World." So when Ms.
Sternheim, a criminal lawyer and former president of the New York Women's Bar Association, spotted a casting call notice in a recent newspaper article for a Linda Dano look-alike, she thought why not try.
"The article said that Linda Dano was on a leave filming a Perry Mason movie, but the producers of 'Another World' wanted to keep her character alive so she can return," Ms.
Sternheim said.
She juggled her clients and her schedule, went to the casting call and the next day learned the role, in which there are a few lines, was hers.
Last Monday, she taped the show that will be seen on July 14.


Miss Fisher, Mr. McRae
Cori Lynn Fisher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip H. Fisher of Ada, Okla., was married there yesterday to Roderick McRae 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McRae Jr. of Madison, N.J.
The Rev.
Guy O. Langston performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church.


Uproar on TV Violence Frustrates the Networks
Despite the criticism of broadcast networks heard in Congressional hearings during the last several weeks, and the campaigns by interest groups to censor programming deemed too violent for young viewers, there is strong evidence that network series are less violent now than in decades.
Executives of ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox Broadcasting say the shows that people are most upset about are not even on the networks but on cable or independent stations.
Still, the executives realize that they are the ones on the political hot seat, and they are concerned that their business will be significantly hurt.


Blimp Crash-Lands on Roof of a Building in Manhattan
A commercial blimp porpoising along above an urban scene of office towers, tenements and busy streets began to deflate and crash-landed on the roof of an apartment building on Manhattan's West Side yesterday in a spectacular Fourth of July mishap that left its two crew members injured and a neighborhood agape.
The cause was not immediately determined, though the pilot and Federal aviation officials said a piece of the tail assembly apparently broke off and punctured the nylon skin of the helium-filled airship Bigfoot, which bore the Pizza Hut logo and arrived in New York from Boston yesterday afternoon on a summerlong tour that was its maiden voyage around the nation.


Koger Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; Tales of Hollywood, Good, Bad and Ugly
Just Tell Me When to Cry  A Memoir  By Richard Fleischer  Illustrated. 349 pages.
Carroll &amp; Graf. $21.


Enjoying the 4th Despite the Heat
Fireworks thundered over the Hudson, music floated gently in the parks, hot dog eaters bulged to bursting at Coney Island and millions of people flocked to beaches and greenswards across a sultry metropolitan region yesterday, marking Independence Day 1993 with an old-fashioned American medley of fun, frivolity and fanfare.
Just across the threshold of summer, on a day of vivid beauty, New Yorkers, tourists and suburbanites were all but indistinguishable in uniforms of shorts, t-shirts and dark glasses, turning out for family picnics, parades and backyard cookouts on the nation's 217th birthday.


Sarah Weinstein, Stuart M. Falber
Sarah Rachel Weinstein and Stuart Marc Falber, both lawyers in Boston, were married yesterday in Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Joshua Elkin officiated at Temple Emanuel.
Mrs.
Falber is an associate at the law firm of Lee, Levine &amp; Bowser.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received a law degree from Boston College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Weinstein of Newton.
Her father is a senior partner in the Boston law firm of Burns &amp; Levinson.


Adelphia Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Dairy Queen (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Janet E. Eck, Eliot F. Bloom  Janet Elaine Eck, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Norman E. Eck of Helena, Mont., was married there yesterday to Eliot Frank Bloom, a son of Louis Bloom of Canton, Mass., and the late Mildred Bloom. The Rev. Randall Olson performed the ceremony at St. John's Lutheran Church.   Mrs. Bloom is the director of quality assurance at Teledyne Electro-Mechanisms, an engineering concern in Hudson, N.H. She graduated from Harvard University.


Michele Fein, Mark Weinman
Michele Hillary Fein, the daughter of Bernard and Carol Fein of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Dennis Weinman, the son of Sidney and Helene Weinman, also of Fair Lawn.
Rabbi Simon Glustrom performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Tikvah in Wayne, N.J.


Game. Set. Sampras.


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Geographics reports earnings for Year to March 31


Foreigners Frame America


Command Security Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Allwaste Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. TO ANNOUNCE NEW RUSSIAN PLAN
The Clinton Administration is planning to use the economic meeting in Tokyo this week to announce the successful conclusion of talks among European allies and Japan on providing new aid to Russia for economic reforms.
The $500 million that the allies have agreed to provide includes a $125 million commitment from the United States, $120 million from Japan and $80 million from Germany, Administration officials said.


Plymouth Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


JetForm Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Ready to Put Theories Into Action, Secretary Finds Ideas Are Not Allies
Not many Cabinet secretaries arrive in town with a billing like that of Robert B. Reich when he showed up to take over the Department of Labor.
A friend of the President for 25 years, author of many Clinton campaign promises and a force behind some of the liveliest economic policy debates of the last decade, Mr.
Reich (pronounced reish) was leaving Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government, where he taught political economics, to come into Government and do nothing less than reorganize labor and industry using the theories he conceived in academia.


Keep the Aid Flowing to Russia
Economic reform in Russia is alive and surprisingly well.
Finally, the West is taking notice and moving to provide real help.
Last week the International Monetary Fund handed Russia $1.5 billion.
The World Bank has approved a mammoth $660 million loan to develop Russia's oil industry, and dispersed hundreds of millions to pay for medicine and other needed imports.
President Clinton deserves credit for persuading his allies to aid Russia.
He pressured the I.M.F. to provide money before Russia could complete key reforms; he orchestrated the West's offer of a $28 billion package in April and pushed a $2.5 billion bilateral aid bill through the House.


U.S. Might Halt Its Active Stand In Mideast Talks
Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned today that the United States might halt its active role in the Middle East peace talks, saying that all sides "have to want peace."
Despite the failure of the latest round of talks, which ended in Washington last week, to move the Israelis and Palestinians closer to a settlement, Mr.
Christopher said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press" that he still believed that the Arabs and the Israelis wanted American participation.


Franklin Quest Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Random Access Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Marseilles Official in Custody
The general manager of the Olympique Marseilles club will be transferred to northern France so he can be charged by the judge investigating bribery and match-fixing allegations.
JEAN-PIERRE BERNES, the team's second-ranking official behind the owner-politician BERNARD TAPIE, was detained Friday after being released from a Marseilles hospital, where he spent a week being treated for exhaustion.


Comnet Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Japanese Stocks Flat
Stocks were trading virtually unchanged here today.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 1.20 points, or one-hundredth of a percent, at 19,620.26.


Two Hairy Weeks With the Prince of Tights: a Wimbledon Review
MOST INTERESTING SAMPRAS REMARK
Asked how it felt to have had Princess Di in the Royal Box sitting on the edge of her seat and clapping for him madly during the last two games as he won Wimbledon, Sampras grinned and replied: "Maybe she has a crush on me." MOST INTERESTING COURIER REMARK
Asked, after he lost to Sampras, about the nature of their relationship, Courier deadpanned: "We're friends. Just friends."


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Prost Wins French Grand Prix  Alain Prost won his sixth French Grand Prix yesterday as he and Damon Hill led a 1-2 finish for the Williams-Renault team.
Hill started from the pole position at Magny Cours and held the lead for the first 26 laps.
Prost grabbed a lead he would never relinquish during a tire change and finished less than a second ahead of Hill.
It was Prost's fifth victory of the season.
Prost completed the 72-lap, 190.1-mile race in 1 hour 38 minutes 35.241 seconds, averaging 115.718 miles an hour. (AP) BASKETBALL  European Title to Germany  Germany, behind center Christian Welp's 3-point play with 3.9 seconds left, upset Russia, 71-70, yesterday in Munich, Germany, to win its first European Championship title.
Welp, a former National Basketball Association player who once starred at the University of Washington, drove for a dunk, drew a foul and made the winning free throw.
Germany had never finished better than fifth at the European Championships -- in 1985, also at home. (AP) GOLF  Price Hotter Than the Weather  Nick Price easily turned back Greg Norman's late challenge and scored his second consecutive victory yesterday, winning the Western Open in Lemont, Ill.
Price, who won last week at Hartford, led all the way, opening the tournament with a 64, closing it with a 67 and winning by five strokes at 269, 19-under-par on the Dubsdread course at Cog Hill.
Price, now challenging Nick Faldo of England as the outstanding player in the world, became the first player on the American PGA tour to win three tournaments this season.
Price, who grew up in Zimbabwe and now lives in Orlando, Fla., also became the first $1 million winner of the year and the first since Davis Love 3d to win consecutive tournaments. (AP) South African Captures Senior Event: Simon Hobday of South Africa shot a five-under-par 66 to win the $850,000 Kroger Senior Classic in Mason, Ohio, by one stroke, his first victory on the senior tour.
The former cattle farmer and car salesman in Zambia finished the three rounds in 11-under 202, one stroke better than that of defending champion Gibby Gilbert, Bob Reith and Mike Hill. (AP) SOCCER  Argentina, Argentina, Argentina  Argentina won its second straight America Cup, beating Mexico, 2-1, yesterday in Guayaquil, Ecuador, on Gabriel Batistuta's second goal of the game with 16 minutes left.
After not having won an America Cup since 1959, Argentina has now claimed the title in 1991 and 1993.
Mexico was trying to become the first non-South American nation to win the South American championship since it began in 1917. (AP) Zambia Returns With a Victory: Zambia's revamped soccer team, wearing black armbands in memory of comrades killed in a plane crash, returned to the field yesterday and beat Morocco, 2-1, in an African Group B qualifying game for the 1994 World Cup, at Lusaka, Zambia.
It was Zambia's first international game since 18 players and 12 others were killed April 28 when their plane plunged into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Libreville, Gabon. (AP)


Bridge
The European Championships, which ended nine days ago in Menton, France, included one American player.
Bill Russ, who learned his bridge in New York and now lives in Zurich, qualified to represent his adopted country.
He and his team of young stars -- Luciano Caroni, Alain Gaschen, Yvan Calame, Cedric Thompson and Francois Aubry -- finished 23d out of 30 in a strong field.


Shorewood Packaging (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Discount Auto Parts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 1


Japan Factory for Making Chip Material Destroyed
Semiconductor industry officials were scrambling this morning to assess the impact of an explosion that destroyed a factory that produces more than half the world's supply of a key material used in making computer chips.
Although the repercussions were not clear, some industry executives suggested that the overall impact would not be that great.


Foodarama Supermarkets reports earnings for 13wks to May 1


Son Kills His Mother, Then Kills Himself
An 89-year-old woman was fatally shot in Washington Heights yesterday by her son, who then killed himself, the police said.
The woman, Graciel Fernandez, had been bedridden with terminal cancer, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Shortly before 5 P.M. yesterday, when a nurse who was caring for the woman left the bedroom to go to the toilet, August Fernandez, 59, shot his mother in the head.


Whitman Medical Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Setbacks and Surprises Temper a Mayor's Hopes to House All
Mayor David N. Dinkins recently told of a late-night visit he made to one of the clamorous, chaotic city offices where throngs of homeless men, women and children apply for shelter.
There, he said, he met "a big fellow, healthy, strapping guy, looked terrific," who had refused two different shelters that night because they did not suit him.
"Some of the people there know the system real well," the Mayor said, with obvious disapproval.


Walgreen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** Walgreen Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1993
1992
Sales
2,085,255,000
1,885,968,000
Net inc
64,395,000
56,571,000
Share earns
.52
.46
9mo sales
6,257,806,000
5,632,715,000
Net inc
188,866,000
169,169,000
Share earns
1.53
1.37
Shares outst
123,741,000
123,673,000


Curly Joe DeRita, 83, Last of the Three Stooges
Curly Joe DeRita, the last surviving member of the Three Stooges team of hard-edged slapstick comedians, died on Saturday in Los Angeles.
He was 83 and had been living at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif., for two years.
The cause was pneumonia, and he had previously suffered a series of strokes, said a stepson, Robert Benjamin.


Torotel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Adrienne Weiss, Steven Jonas
Adrienne Weiss, a psychiatric social worker in Amityville, L.I., and Dr.
Steven Jonas, a professor of preventive medicine at the medical school of the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Philip Bentley officiated at the Port Jefferson (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Weiss-Jonas graduated from Hofstra University and received a master's degree in social work from Adelphi University.
She is the daughter of the late Samuel Liebman.


Bassett Furniture (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


South African Leaders Receive Liberty Medals in Philadelphia


The Race Against Father Time
Athletes in their 40's who find it difficult to sustain the pace of their youth should pay attention to a couple of middle-aged masters who this evening will attempt to make history in the mile.
Competing in Stockholm's Olympic Stadium, Eamonn Coghlan of Ireland and David Moorcroft of Britain will try to become the first runners age 40 or older to break the four-minute mile.


Block Island Rallies To Save Historic Lighthouse


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


On West 42d, Evictions Mark Way of Progress
For years, West 42d Street has been caught in the bleakest of time warps.
A massive redevelopment plan has been bedeviled by bureaucratic delay and hammered by economic adversity, while the condemnation of businesses to make way for the plan has pushed relentlessly forward.
The most visible changes so far have been the closing of 270 businesses, though those conversant with the area would surely point to the cleaner, safer sidewalks.
Suddenly, though, 42d Street is blossoming like the weirdest, most colorful garden imaginable.
With support from the project's sponsor, the 42d Street Development Project, avant-garde artists are transforming the street into figments of their imaginations.


Dr. Ian Karol and Dr. Nina Simon
Dr.
Nina Rochelle Simon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Simon of Lawrence, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Ian Gilbert Karol, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Karol, also of Lawrence.
Rabbi Stanley Platek performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Dr.
Simon-Karol and her husband, both 26, received medical degrees from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Both are residents, she in internal medicine at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital, and he in radiology at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


Sports of The Times; Men's Final: Fast Points, Slow Match
"JACKETS off." In the Royal Box, these are the kindest words of all.
It means that by royal decree, all gentlemen and ladies are free to doff their jackets on a hot afternoon at the All England Croquet &amp; Lawn Tennis Club.
Diana, the Princess of Wales, making her first visit to Center Court in two years, kept on her peach-colored jacket throughout the long, and one might even say interminable, men's final yesterday.


How World Stock Markets Fared in the Second Quarter


Again, Iraqi Babies Bear Washington's Fury; Might Makes Right
To the Editor:
In "The Missiles' Message," your news analysis of President Clinton's missile attack on Baghdad (front page, June 28), you invoke the bombing of Libya in 1986, comparing the likely effects of the two events.


Remember 'Don't Play With Your Food'?
To the Editor:
Shame on you, General Mills, for introducing "tick-tack-toe" Cheerios ("How to Play With Cereal, but Without the Milk," Business Day, June 23), yet another product that encourages children, and adults, to play with their food. (It was General Mills that brought us chewy fruit snacks in the shape of fighter bombers, sharks and racecars just begging to be entered into fierce combat or competition.)


When Saving Navy Money Costs Jobs
When Terry Melan ponders his prospects for surviving the military cuts that will cost him his job at the Charleston Naval Shipyard, he thinks of the last disaster to hit the South Carolina city.
It does not brighten his mood.
"They talk about defense conversion, and I think about FEMA," said Mr.
Melan, a 39-year-old boiler plate equipment mechanic, referring to the Federal Emergency Management Agency's widely criticized performance after Hurricane Hugo tore Charleston apart in 1989.
"My personal opinion is we've been sold down the river."


Credo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Finish Line Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Doubts Emerging on Miami Project
Just a stone's throw from the fashionable Art Deco district of South Beach lies a real estate developer's dream.
It is a triangle of land at the southern end of the Miami Beach peninsula next to the sherbet-colored Deco buildings that draw the young and the beautiful in their Rolls-Royces to the beachfront night spots on Ocean Drive.
Yet the peninsula's tip seems forgotten by time and fashion: a lone apartment tower stands over a park, some empty land, a few parking lots and a desultory scattering of commonplace one- and two-story buildings and low-rise apartments.


Markets Closed
The nation's financial markets will be closed today in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.
Government offices, most banks and many businesses will also be closed.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Suspicions of Hatred in a Family of Artists
Telling a tale of parental envy and murderous spite, two scholars say they have found evidence that Charles Willson Peale, one of the fathers of American art, induced his eldest son, Raphaelle, also an accomplished artist, to poison himself.
Raphaelle Peale died in 1825 at age 51.
The report has stirred up a scholarly hullabaloo even before its publication, scheduled for later this summer, in the quarterly journal Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.
On one side are Phoebe Lloyd, a professor of art history and a resident fellow at the American Philosophical Society, a research library in Philadelphia, and her co-author, Gordon Bendersky, a clinical professor of medicine at Hahnemann University School of Medicine in Philadelphia.
They have been researching the lives of the Peales, and particularly the death of Raphaelle Peale, since 1986, and they believe they have uncovered foul play.


In Multimedia Storm, Text Thrives
Wired, a magazine dedicated to the "Digital Generation," made its debut this year promising frontline reports on the communications revolution "whipping through our lives like a Bengali typhoon" and creating "social changes so profound that their only parallel is probably the discovery of fire." Then, in its second issue, it published a truly unexpected revelation from a futurist in Silicon Valley.
There, tucked sedately among neo-psychedelic layouts celebrating laser disks, high-definition television and virtual-reality headsets, was a headline announcing a "hot new medium." This hot medium, known as "text," was extolled in the accompanying article by Paul Saffo, a fellow at the Institute for the Future in Menlo Park, Calif.


Dreco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Security Official Guides U.S. Aims at Conference
Every Wednesday, three men gather around the conference table in a spacious corner office in the West Wing of the White House to share sandwiches and talk.
Their conversation is anything but casual, for they are the backbone of President Clinton's foreign policy team.
W.
Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser, Les Aspin, the Secretary of Defense, and Warren Christopher, the Secretary of State, are the people who have drafted the President's speeches and policy statements as Mr.
Clinton prepares to go to Tokyo this week to meet with the leaders of the world's wealthiest nations.
They have spent weeks in close negotiations with representatives from the other countries, trying to resolve differences over economic policies and aid to Russia.


Officer Killed By Man Trying To Steal Bike
An off-duty housing police officer who was celebrating an anniversary with his girlfriend was fatally shot yesterday morning in Brooklyn by a man who wanted the victim's motorcycle, the police said.
Before being shot, Rudolph Thomas, 27, told the gunman, who approached with another man, that he was a police officer and tried to calm them, said a housing police spokeswoman, Amanita Duga-Carroll.
Officer Thomas was the first housing police officer killed this year.


John S. Santelli, Jennifer S. Hirsch
Jennifer Sue Hirsch, a doctoral candidate at the Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health, and Dr.
John Stephen Santelli, a medical epidemiologist, were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi Dennis Math officiated.
Ms.
Hirsch, who is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of David and Ellen Hirsch of New York.
Her father, formerly a managing director at Wert heim Schroder &amp; Company, the New York brokerage house, is an investor.
Her mother is a psychoanalyst in New York.


Two Hairy Weeks With the Prince of Tights: a Wimbledon Review
MOST INTERESTING SAMPRAS REMARK
Asked how it felt to have had Princess Di in the Royal Box sitting on the edge of her seat and clapping for him madly during the last two games as he won Wimbledon, Sampras grinned and replied: "Maybe she has a crush on me."


Sunshine-Jr Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 1


G.O.P. Making Gains Among Hispanic Voters
The photographs of Robert F. Kennedy posing with Cesar Chavez during a hunger strike three decades ago are no longer living room fixtures in the barrios here.
"Viva Bush" placards were popular last year.
Now, some Hispanic households proudly display photos of Richard Riordan, this city's new Republican Mayor, who won a surprisingly large portion of the Hispanic vote.
Hispanic voters have historically been in the Democratic camp, and most still are.
But they are not the reliable Democrats they once were.
They are increasingly less willing to cast votes for an all-Democratic ticket.
Hispanic support for Republican candidates in recent elections here and in Texas suggest that some of these voters are slowly, yet unmistakably, changing sides.


VSI Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Marcy G. Miller, Jonathan A. Schaffir
Marcy G. Miller, a senior buyer for the Ann Taylor clothing-store chain, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan A. Schaffir, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at Mount Sinai Hospital, both in New York.
Rabbi David S. Wolfman officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.


Most Mutual Funds Report A Sluggish Second Quarter
The second quarter was a period of dull returns for most mutual funds.
But gold funds, funds invested in Japanese stocks and some aggressive growth funds that guessed right did very well.
Over all, according to calculations by Morningstar Inc., the average equity fund showed a gain of 2.96 percent for the quarter, while the average taxable fixed-income fund rose 2.18 percent.
Neither did as well as municipal bond funds, which showed an average gain of 3.18 percent.
All figures are total return, before taxes, and do not include sales charges.


Astro Sciences reports earnings for Year to March 31


Barrister Information Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


Sizzler International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New Jersey Steel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cardiac Control Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


No Headline
The motoring public has decided that 55 miles an hour is not a reasonable speed.
Historically the public has always responded to unreasonable highway traffic control by simply ignoring it.
TOM CULPEPPER, manager of safety for the American Automobile Association.  [ 39:3. ]


Compromise On Rent Law Is Criticized
Lawmakers found themselves on the defensive today as the compromise they fashioned on Saturday night to extend rent-stabilization regulations came under attack from tenants.
Throughout the afternoon, more than 100 tenants who took buses to Albany from New York City confronted Democratic lawmakers asking why they had abandoned a vow made just two weeks earlier to keep rent protections intact.


Giveaways a Cottage Industry in Maine
Arthur Leach is $11,000 poorer since he sponsored an unsuccessful contest last year to "give away" his waterfront house to the best essayist.
But that has not stopped him from starting another contest, only now he wants to give away the house for a song -- in fact, a jingle of 41 words or less.


Canonie Environmental Services Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Juno Lighting (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Early Risers Reawaken a Revolution in Moonlit Manhattan
At 3 A.M. yesterday under a full moon near City Hall, Ann Insler and her husband, Mel, said they could all but see George Washington, reading the Declaration of Independence to a noisy crowd of Colonial New Yorkers.
The crowd was actually more than 150 present-day New Yorkers who had gathered for the start of the 12th annual Independence Day historical walking tour, and the noise for the most part was coming from the stereo of a black Camaro at a stop light.


A Reach Beyond the Strike Zone
Sandy Koufax was the maestro on the mound, Maury Wills the catalyst and captain.
But to members of the championship Los Angeles Dodgers teams of the 1950's and 60's, the undisputable leader was Don Drysdale.
The Hall of Fame pitcher, who died of a heart attack Saturday, was remembered yesterday as a man who was towering and intimidating on the field and a formidable presence off it.


Temco Service Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stacey Levy, David Topol
Stacey Alane Levy was married yesterday to David Hillel Topol.
Rabbi Robert Carroll officiated at the Radisson Hotel at Newark Airport.
The bride, a graduate of Rutgers University, is a personnel-management specialist in Silver Spring, Md., for the United States Department of Commerce.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Zachary E. Levy of Bayonne, N.J.


Technology Solutions Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Election Campaign In Japan Shadows the Summit Talks
This week was supposed to be the crowning moment in Kiichi Miyazawa's political life: a chance for Japan's urbane, English-speaking Prime Minister to welcome the leaders of the industrialized world -- and Boris N. Yeltsin -- to an economic powerhouse that he helped to rebuild from rubble.
But Mr.
Miyazawa could not spare the time this morning to review the giant briefing books for the summit meeting or inspect the work of the 36,000 police officers who have turned Tokyo into a barricaded camp.


Beth Anne Powell, Albert P. Moras
Beth Anne Powell was married yesterday in New York to Albert Patrick Moras.
The Rev.
Kevin Barry performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Trinity.
Mrs.
Powell-Moras, 34, is a national sales manager in New York for Four Seasons-Regent Hotels and Resorts.
A graduate of the University of California at Los Angeles, she is a daughter of Dr.
Malcolm R. Powell of Belvedere, Calif., and Constance Powell of Washington.
The bride's father is an endocrinologist and a specialist in nuclear medicine in San Francisco.
Her mother is a supervisory financial analyst for the Federal Reserve Board in Washington.


Norris Communications Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Harry's Farmers Market Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 28


Alkermes Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


No Headline
Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
SportsMonday begins on page 29, Business Day on page 37.


Hunter Environmental Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Air-Cure Environmental Inc.  (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


At Home Abroad; Skeletons Of Apartheid
Like any tyranny, the apartheid system in South Africa was maintained by force and fear.
Now that the system is crumbling, some of the facts of past official criminality are beginning to come out.
The silence is cracking.
A judicial inquest going on in the city of Port Elizabeth has been particularly suggestive.
It is looking into the 1985 murder of Matthew Goniwe, a young anti-apartheid leader.


Karen Rosewater, S. Aubrey Stoch
Karen Michele Rosewater, a medical student at Yale University, was married yesterday to Dr.
S.
Aubrey Stoch, an intern in internal medicine at Faulkner Hospital in Boston.
Rabbi Eric Nigel Kaye officiated at the Hall of Springs, a catering hall in Saratoga State Park in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The bride, 24, graduated magna cum laude from Yale.
She is the daughter of Sondra and Lewis Rosewater of Delmar, N.Y.
Her father is an examiner for the New York State Department of Civil Service in Albany.
Her mother, now retired, was an owner of the former Woodstream Preschool in Delmar, where she also taught.


Vacationing by Car Makes Its Comeback at Full Speed
With gasoline cheap and plentiful, and expected to stay that way through the summer, Americans who put off trips during the economic doldrums of the last few years are hitting the road again.
The American Automobile Association, based on a survey of 1,500 drivers, predicted last week that travel during the Fourth of July weekend would be up 4 percent from the holiday weekend in 1992, with 30 million Americans planning to make trips of 100 miles or more.


A Magic Formula for Cutbacks
Representative Dick Armey's magic formula for closing military bases has proved itself again.
For the third time in five years, a nonpartisan commission has agreed on a list of bases to be closed, shrunk or, in some cases, expanded.
By bucking this job to outsiders, Congress ducks its duty to make tough choices.
But independent, nonpolitical decisions are clearly better than the stalemate that existed before.
President Clinton has already approved the new list.
Assuming Congress will do the same, as expected, more than 70 major bases will be closed by this process -- and billions of dollars saved.
With those results, it's an idea worth testing on redundant civilian facilities, too.


Dance in Review
Balanchine'  Winter Garden World Financial Center


Jill Humphrey, John McMullen
Jill Patricia Humphrey, the daughter of Sandra Humphrey of Highland Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Lieut.
John Warrick McMullen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. McMullen 2d of Stella, Neb.
The Rev.
Richard Spalding performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the World's End Reservation in Hingham, Mass.
Mrs.
McMullen, 26, is an ensign in the Medical Corps of the United States Naval Reserve.
In the fall she plans to study medicine at Duke University.
The bride was until recently an administrative secretary with the Dohrs Program, a technology-policy research project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University.


Salick Health Care (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


AutoInfo Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Haitian General Begins a Selling Job
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, Haiti's military chief and de facto ruler, today began the difficult process of selling an accord to restore democracy to his reluctant colleagues in the armed forces and to a public suspicious of his intentions.
In a televised address early today, General Cedras assured Haitians, who several times in the last decade have seen the military sabotage deals intended to reduce its political dominance, that he would keep his word and hand power back to the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the elected President deposed in a September 1991 coup.


Morrison Restaurants (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 5


BUSINESS DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  COOPERATION VOWED ON RETURN OF SHEIK
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said that the United States would act swiftly on Egypt's request for the return of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Islamic cleric who has been accused of inciting violence among his followers in Egypt and whose adherents in the United States include suspects in the bombing of the World Trade Center.
Page 1.
HOPES TO HOUSE ALL BECOME TEMPERED
Increasingly, Mayor David N. Dinkins has found himself in the unexpected role of stern rule-maker for the homeless.
The Dinkins administration's path from what some might term naive idealism to unsentimental pragmatism is at heart a story about the clash between the city's traditional liberalism and its unforgiving fiscal realities.
Page 1.


Transactions
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Paul Carey, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
Sent Anthony Telford, pitcher, to Rochester.


U.S.-Japan Trade Talks To Resume
The United States and Japan will resume negotiations on a new comprehensive trade agreement, officials said today, brightening the outlook for President Clinton's meeting this week with the Prime Minister of Japan, Kiichi Miyazawa.
The Clinton Administration has decided that a Japanese compromise proposal, delivered to Washington on Friday, is substantive enough to merit further discussion, according to officials familiar with the negotiations.


G.O.P. Making Gains Among Hispanic Voters
The photographs of Robert F. Kennedy posing with Cesar Chavez during a hunger strike three decades ago are no longer living room fixtures in the barrios here.
"Viva Bush" placards were popular last year.
Now, some Hispanic households proudly display photos of Richard Riordan, this city's new Republican Mayor, who won a surprisingly large portion of the Hispanic vote.
Hispanic voters have historically been in the Democratic camp, and most still are.
But they are not the reliable Democrats they once were.
They are increasingly less willing to cast votes for an all-Democratic ticket.
Hispanic support for Republican candidates in recent elections here and in Texas suggest that some of these voters are slowly, yet unmistakably, changing sides.


To Owens, Most Blacks Don't Seem Anti-Semitic
WHEN Representative Major R. Owens returned to his predominantly black district in Brooklyn after visiting Israel 10 years ago, he proudly published a photograph in his Congressional newsletter of himself with Menachem Begin.
"The No. 1 issue in my district that year was that picture," Mr. Owens recalled.


Coming From Ahead, Yanks Lose a Stunner
The Yankees are beginning to play like first-place Toronto -- and that is not a compliment.
The Blue Jays stalled in Kansas City this weekend, where the Royals pulled off a sweep, but meanwhile New York finds itself at an interminable red light.
The Yankees led, 5-0, and then by 6-2 here tonight until Oakland's pair of Hendersons scared Manager Buck Showalter into removing his ace starter, Jimmy Key, in the seventh inning.
An inning later, the A's treated relievers Bobby Munoz and Steve Farr like lighter fluid and rallied for five runs and a 7-6 victory over New York.


Vitalink Pharmacy Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


William Beizer and Lori Kaplowitz
Dr.
Lori Ellen Kaplowitz and William Lewis Beizer were married yesterday at Congregation Ohr Torah in North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Morton Green performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hy Kaplowitz of Woodmere, L.I.
She is a resident in psychiatry at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass.
She and her husband are magna cum laude graduates of Harvard University, where the bride also received a medical degree.


Two Hairy Weeks With the Prince of Tights: a Wimbledon Review
MOST INTERESTING SAMPRAS REMARK
Asked how it felt to have had Princess Di in the Royal Box sitting on the edge of her seat and clapping for him madly during the last two games as he won Wimbledon, Sampras grinned and replied: "Maybe she has a crush on me."


Review/Music; Summergarden in a Latin-American Mood
On Saturday night the Summer garden concert series once again took up its dual mission: presenting fresh repertory played by young musicians and finding a way to make it heard above the din of mid-Manhattan.
Latin-American music, this year's theme, will occupy eight more free weekend programs in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art.
Battling the scarcely muffled roar of the city, chirping birds, La Guardia-bound jet planes and nearby police activity requires a lot of electricity.
Heavy amplification rose to repel sonic intruders clamoring outside the Sculpture Garden's walls on Saturday.
Even its victories were defeats of a kind.


Seattle Times Places a Ban On Tobacco Advertisements
The Seattle Times, a dominant newspaper in the Northwest, has added its name to the short list of American newspapers that refuse advertisements from tobacco companies.
The decision puts the newspaper firmly on the antismoking side of a long-running debate in American journalism.
Most American newspaper publishers have argued that their duty to assure a free flow of information requires that they adopt as few restrictions as possible on the advertising of legal products. 'Almost No Redeeming Value'
Critics have said that newspapers are concerned most about the loss of revenues.
Frank Blethen, publisher of The Seattle Times, said the issue was a matter of conscience.
"Just as we refuse advertising for legal products such as handguns, escort services and X-rated movies," Mr.
Blethen said, "we have concluded that tobacco advertising has almost no redeeming value."


Dynamics Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 12


Premier Choix reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Family Dollar Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


President Riverboat Casinos reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Wheatley TXT (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cyber Digital Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Scimed Life Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Community Psychiatric Centers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Todd McCarthy, Sasha Alpert
Sasha Alpert, a documentary film maker in New York, was married yesterday in Pagosa Springs, Colo., to Todd McCarthy, a film critic in Los Angeles for Variety, the show business newspaper.
Judge Bert Hyde of the Archuleta County (Colo.) Court officiated at a ranch owned by the bridegroom's parents.
Ms.
Alpert, 33, is keeping her name.
Her films about poets and poetry have appeared on "Voices and Visions," a PBS series..
She graduated from Wesleyan University.


185 Hits in 11 Years = 2,000
RYNE SANDBERG got the 2,000th hit of his career Saturday in the Chicago Cubs' 5-4 loss to the Colorado Rockies.
Predictably, he dismissed the importance of the milestone.
"Basically, it's another hit," the Cubs All-Star second baseman said.
"I've played 11 1/2 years and put up 185 hits or so a year. It adds up to 2,000."


New Budget Looks a Lot Like 1990's
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 2, 1990, editorial on the 1990 budget deal stated: "The budget agreement between Congressional leaders and the Bush Administration cuts defense too little. It increases energy taxes too little. It taxes rich families too little. Even so, the coarse compromise would cut the deficit by half a trillion dollars in five years. . . . The best part of the package is what it will not do. It won't throw the economy into recession."


CHRONICLE
A historical home run: LIZABETH COHEN,an associate professor of history at New York University, has won three prestigous grants for her work on consumerism and its political meaning in the United States.
She has been awarded fellowships by the American Council of Learned Societies, the National Endowment for the Humanities and the John Guggenheim Foundation, the three major grantors for historical research.
"The standard procedure is to apply for all of them and see what happens," Professor Cohen said the other day.
"I am honored and pleased that my peers looked at my project as worthy of support. I was very lucky, but I will never have anything to apply for again."


Anne Blumberg, Jonathan Dorfman
Anne Francesca Blumberg, a health-policy analyst in Boston, was married yesterday to Jonathan Michael Dorfman, a principal in the Connoisseurs Products Corporation in Woburn, Mass.
Rabbi Izan Caine performed the ceremony in Oxford, England, at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Blumberg, 36, is keeping her name.
She works for the Massachusetts Rate Setting Commission, a state agency that sets Medicaid reimbursement rates.
The bride graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in public health from Boston University.


Schools and Churches Close, Angering Catholics
Discrimination among the thousands of poor European immigrants who arrived on America's shores from the mid-19th century to the early 20th drove each of the ethnic groups to build its own Roman Catholic church, often within sight of other Catholic churches.
But 75 years later, many Catholics are accusing the denomination of abandoning its educational mission to the poor, particularly here and in nearby Philadelphia, where the archdiocese recently closed 14 churches and 8 parish schools in predominantly black areas.


RehabCare Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Editorial Notebook; 'We Hold (Some) Truths . . .'
Americans deem it self-evident that men and women everywhere are created equal, with the same universal right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, just as the Declaration of Independence says.
But third-world countries like Indonesia say otherwise, claiming that human rights vary in place and time, and that enforcement is "the competence and responsibility of each government."
Decoded, that seems to say that human rights are what local police say they are -- which is ridiculous and reprehensible.
Yet having proclaimed universal principles, Americans once indulged in the same shameless reasoning.
Americans not only permitted slavery at home, but with bolder effrontery resisted an international effort to end the slave trade at sea.


Oracle Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Information Management reports earnings for Year to March 31


On Fast Wheels to a Bright Future
Lance Armstrong has made it to what he calls "the big show, the big deal, the Super Bowl" and what everybody else calls the Tour de France.
Armstrong can be excused for his excitement because he is 21 years old and hardly anybody else in the bicycle race, including the youngster who distributes soft drinks at the finish line, is even close to being that young.
"This is my style, this is what I like," Armstrong said with a beatific smile a few days ago.
"From what I've seen, this is my type of race." At that point, he was reminded, he had seen nothing more than the perfunctory medical examination that all riders pass through.


Again, Iraqi Babies Bear Washington's Fury; Now Bomb Bosnia
To the Editor:
If President Clinton is the least bit serious about slowing the slaughter in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he will do to Serbian river crossings what he did to the Iraqi intelligence building.
It would be a simple, risk-free operation to send Tomahawk cruise missiles or Stealth-delivered smart bombs to destroy the Drina River bridges that the Serbs must use to resupply their brethren in their campaign of ethnic cleansing in Bosnia.


Maura K. Mahoney, Keith A. White
Maura Kathryn Mahoney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Mahoney of Somers, N.Y., was married yesterday to Keith Andrew White, a son of Helen N. White of Denver and the late Daniel P. White.
The Rev.
James Borstelmann performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph in Croton Falls, N.Y.
Ms.
Mahoney, 27, is keeping her name.
She and her husband are associate editors at Reader's Digest magazine in Pleasantville, N.Y.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Manhattan College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and where her father is an assistant professor of history.
She received a master's degree in English literature from the College of William and Mary.
Her mother, Rosemary Mahoney, is an assistant to the town historian of Bedford, N.Y.


Review/Theater; Dusting Off The Spirit Of Ziegfeld
What kind of shows might Florenz Ziegfeld have produced had he been gay and grown up in the age of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, Charles Busch and Ru Paul?
That is the clever premise behind the musical revue "Whoop-Dee-Doo!," in which an ensemble of nine men parade around dressed up as everything from a giant Scotch tape dispenser to a dinner setting complete with tablecloth.
In this all-male sendup of the "Ziegfeld Follies," what is lacking in expensive glitz is made up for in campy ingenuity.
The show, which was conceived and created by Howard Crabtree with five collaborators, is a spoof of a Ziegfeld extravaganza, a parody of a backstage musical, a drag show and a gay liberation polemic rolled into one.
Much of its hilarity lies in Mr.
Crabtree's brilliantly funny costumes, which become progressively more outlandish as the show goes along.


Kari J. Lewis, G. D. S. Anderson
Kari Jennifer Lewis, the daughter of Salim B. and Barbara A. Lewis of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday at the family's home in Essex, N.Y., to Graham Douglas Shelton Anderson, a son of Jane S. Anderson of Cincinnati and the late John M. Anderson.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Bennett, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Anderson, a graduate of the University of Chicago, is a laboratory technician at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.
Her husband is an associate at the law firm of Susman Godfrey in Houston.


Magna-Lab Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Jillian's Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Group I Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Easy Prey for a Violent Criminal; Prostitutes View Murder as Just One Occupational Hazard
The 23-year-old prostitute, who says her name is Margie, walked the stroll off Allen Street in lower Manhattan in a baggy black halter top and baggier jeans, eyeing every passing car.
She said she had seen Joel Rifkin, who the police say is New York's latest serial killer, circling the neighborhood in his white pickup, soliciting prostitutes.
She even knew a few women who had dated him.
But she didn't want to talk about it.
Or even hear of it.


Synbiotics Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


Patents
STETHOSCOPES made of chrome and rubber have long been a staple of the doctor's office.
For decades, patients have seen virtually the same no-frills version hanging around their physician's neck.
But a newly patented stethoscope comes with a microprocessor that automatically diagnoses heart abnormalities.
Mark Bredesen, president of Bloodline Technology Inc. in Incline Village, Nev., and one of the two inventors of the new stethoscope, likens it to "taking the slide rule and evolving it into a calculator."


Jodi Krasilovsky, David H. Miller
Jodi Robin Krasilovsky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Krasilovsky of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to David Haim Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Miller of Houston.
Rabbi Gerald Skolnik performed the ceremony at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Mrs.
Miller, 23, was until recently an associate consultant at the Wilkerson Group in New York, a management consultant to the health-care industry.
Next month she is to become a staff consultant in St.
Louis at Price Waterhouse.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Air Sensors reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Castle &amp; Cooke Homes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Asia and Italy Are Fruitful For Investors
The Government is collapsing and the economy stalling, but the Japanese stock market is doing just fine.
The Japanese recovery, evident on the stock exchange floor but absent elsewhere, continued in the second quarter, far outpacing the returns from most of the world's other leading markets in the second quarter.
American investors in other international markets found that currency losses aggravated weak performances by most major European markets, leaving French stocks at the bottom in dollar terms and German stocks not much better.
The best returns among the 24 leading world markets came in Italy, where elections and investigations of political corruption have brought hopes of political changes.


Body Drama (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; The Baby Bells Are Finding an Unlikely Ally in the Information-Services War: Newspapers.
FOR most of the decade since the Baby Bell companies were born, newspaper companies have been fearing them -- and fighting them.
The newspapers have argued that the Bells, the seven regional telephone companies created in the big A.T.&amp; T. antitrust case, should be barred from selling information services over telephone lines -- everything from news updates to beauty tips and race results.
Telephone information services that were owned by the Baby Bells would unfairly compete with newspapers, the newspapers said, because the telephone companies controlled the conduit.
If they were not stopped, the newspapers said, the monopoly telephone companies would damage the newspapers.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  WHAT SUMMIT? JAPANESE MAY ASK


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Friday misidentified real estate developments at Fisher Island, Fla.
The picture at top showed Seaside Villas, not Bayside Village; the picture at right showed Seaside Village, not a former Vanderbilt estate.


No Improprieties by Bailout Agency Counsel
To the Editor:
An Associated Press article (Business Day, June 28) states that I or my "two top aides" approved no-bid contracts worth millions of dollars to my former law firm, Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft, after I joined the Resolution Trust Corporation in March 1992.
That article is false and misleading.
Since the day I started at R.T.C., I have never seen, reviewed or approved any Cadwalader contract, budget or invoice.
Indeed, I first learned of the amounts paid from reading that article.


New Park's Problems
To the Editor:
I enjoyed your June 28 article on the enjoyment of visitors to the new Riverbank State Park atop the North River Treatment Plant in Manhattan.
It is much needed and appreciated, as the attendance shows.
But as a taxpayer who visited the park several times to play tennis, I am wondering how some glitches occurred even before its opening.
For example, there are already cracks visible to the first visitors.
The one bathroom near the 138th Street area was out of service for weeks.
Of the four courts, only two are really playable; one is without a net, and the surface on two is buckled badly on the back courts.
I can't imagine a contractor getting away with that.


By Design; Hot-Weather Carryalls
In summer, tote bags need to be lightweight, airy in texture and pale.
When the sidewalks steam, the standard leather bag can seem as sticky as melting tar.
In stores there are totes for office or beach that are nearly weightless, made of burlap, straw or synthetics, in colors ranging from a sandy beige to ice cream shades of pistachio, yellow and orange.
The prices of many are lightweight, too.


Tennis Center Expansion Receives Backing of Senate
The proposed expansion of the tennis complex where the United States Open is played took an important step forward tonight when the Senate voted to authorize New York City to lease an adjacent piece of Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens to the tournament's organizers.
The plan, which was approved in a 35-to-23 vote, has already passed the Assembly but still faces a series of hurdles.
They including the final negotiation of a new lease between the city and the United States Tennis Association, which organizes the tournament, and the final blessing of the New York City Council.
But city officials have said that they could not sign a lease without the approval of the Legislature.
The bill now moves to the desk of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


The Talk of Hollywood; Getting Ready for a Breakthrough, Two Directors Savor the Summer
The summer just started in the Real World, but in this town it's just about over.
Summer movies, which generate 40 percent of studios' annual revenues, are appearing (and disappearing) at the local cineplex with alarming frequency.
And every producer, agent and know-it-all in town can sum up the summer with a few choice words.
Dinosaurs are in.
Arnold Schwarzenegger's out.
"The Firm" (No. 1 at the box office over the holiday weekend) and "Sleepless in Seattle" (No. 3, after "Jurassic Park") are doing just fine.
And, looking ahead, Wolfgang Petersen and Andrew Davis are expected to be two of the season's major winners.


Equity Offerings Expected This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd., Toronto, 4.25 million common shares. Merrill Lynch.
Concurrent Computer Corp., Oceanport, N.J., 14.3 million common shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Crystallume, Menlo Park, Calif., an initial public offering of 2 million common shares.
Dakin Securities.
Cyrk International Inc., Gloucester, Mass., an initial public offering of 2 million common shares.
Montgomery Securities.
Echo Bay Mines Ltd., Edmonton, Alberta, 6 million common shares, 4 million in the United States.
Goldman, Sachs.
Genzyme Transgenics, Cambridge, Mass., an initial public offering of 2 million common shares.
Paine Webber.
Media Logic Inc., Plainville, Mass., 1.22 million common shares. Tucker Anthony.
Newmont Mining Corp., Denver, 9.6 million common shares. Salomon Brothers.
People's Choice TV Corp., Bridgeport, Conn., an initial public offering of 2 million common shares.
Gerard Klauer.
Stone Energy Corp., Lafayette, La., 3.5 million common shares. First Boston.
Sundance Homes Inc., Rolling Meadows, Ind., an initial public offering of 2.7 million common shares.
Montgomery Securities.
Taco Cabana Inc., San Antonio, 2.5 million class A shares. Montgomery Securities.
UTD Dominion Realty Trust Inc., Richmond, 5 million common shares. Merrill Lynch.
Source: MCM Corporatewatch.
Ratings: Moody's/Standard &amp; Poor's.


Tennis Wasn't Wimbledon's Show
Sun, stalkers, swearing and Streisand: this was not a Wimbledon that stuck to traditional themes.
From the moment that the now-deposed 1992 champion, Andre Agassi, bared his navel and flippantly launched a "to shave or not to shave" debate, the world's most regal Grand Slam became caught up in issues that ranged from the sublime to the ridiculous and often had nothing whatsoever to do with the tennis itself.


Elderly Drivers
The common notion that drivers become more dangerous when they reach the age of 65 has been exaggerated based on overestimation, according to a new study.
In fact, these drivers are only slightly more likely to die in a car crash than those who are middle-aged, the group with the lowest incidence of such deaths, said Dr.
Leonard Evans, a research scientist at General Motors.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY
Carolina Freight


CHRONICLE
A former legislator wants to honor Ella T. Grasso, the first elected female governor in the United States, by placing her image on a commemorative American postage stamp.
VITO M. MAZZA, who led the successful campaign a decade ago to have a marble statue of the former governor placed in the state Capitol, said Ms.
Grasso deserves the recognition, according to The Associated Press.


Two Investors Testify on Dealings in B.C.C.I. Case
A central charge against Robert A. Altman, the Washington lawyer charged with fraud and bribery, holds that Middle Eastern investors who purchased First American Bankshares in 1981 were front men for the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the rogue bank that was closed by banking regulators two years ago amid evidence of vast fraud -- and that Mr.
Altman knew it.
Last week the jury heard testimony from two of those investors, Sheik Kamal Adham, a major figure in the B.C.C.I. scandal, and Sayed Jawhary, the sheik's financial adviser and business associate for 36 years.
Both men pleaded guilty last year to violations of New York State banking laws for their role in the B.C.C.I. scandal.
The sheik testified that he paid $105 million in fines.


Bledsoe Expected to Sign Contract Today
DREW BLEDSOE, the No. 1 pick in the draft by the New England Patriots, is set to sign a contract today that will reportedly pay the Washington State quarterback $14.5 million over six years.
MAC BLEDSOE, speaking yesterday from his home in Yakima, Wash., said his son was driving across the country with some friends, but planned to leave them and catch a flight to Boston last night.


Using the Spin of Electrons To Make the Smallest Chips Yet
IN the global race to make ever more powerful computer chips, designers for years have been shrinking parts and wires and creating circuits that are both faster and smaller.
Today the standard circuit line is about one micron wide, a hundred times thinner than a human hair, allowing millions of transistors to be crammed onto a computer chip.
On the horizon, with considerable work, lie diameters of 0.1 micron or so, which might yield devices with billions of transistors.
This level of complexity has long been viewed as the likely end of the conventional electronics race, since finer transistors would burn up if subjected to requisite currents.
Now, quite suddenly, a new field is emerging that could possibly leap the size barrier to produce circuits as small as 0.01 micron, the width of a hundred or so atoms.
The transistors on one of these new chips could number in the trillions, squeezing vast power into an incredibly small space.


Chess
The openings that begin with queenside development have a reputation for being generally more solid and less given to startling tactical play than those that feature kingside development, where the black king can well become an early target.
But this is an observation best forgotten in the hurly-burly of a game's later action.
The California grandmaster Nick De Firmian may have been right in saying that when you play 1 e4 you are in for a new crisis every week -- some opponent's last-minute discovery about how to put tricky new life into one defense or another -- but once you get past 10 moves, it is not easy to tell a queenside from a kingside opening.
Indeed, there are queenside gambits that rival all the ingenuity in those on the opposite flank.


Bank Courts Growth in Marriages of Convenience
Edward P. Junker 3d flirts with bankers for a living.
A banker himself, he is chief executive for the northwestern Pennsylvania region of the PNC Bank Corporation of Pittsburgh.
Two years ago, PNC stripped Mr.
Junker and seven other regional executives of much of their operational responsibilities and told them to go out and find banks for the rapidly growing company to buy.
Set in the slow-growth Rust Belt, PNC says its earnings from its existing operations -- which stretch from Kentucky to Delaware -- will increase 6 to 7 percent a year at best.
But like other expanding regional banks, PNC hopes it can grow at twice that rate by buying other banks.


On My Mind; Clinton: Victor and Puzzle
The President gave the small lunch for journalists because he wanted to talk about the Tokyo economic summit before he set off.
I listened earnestly, but the truth is my mind occasionally wandered off -- to a funny movie and to a budget cut that had escaped his attention.


Police Hunt for Body of Another Victim of Killer
State police investigators working with more than a half-dozen dogs today combed a Rockland County intersection for the remains of yet another victim of Joel Rifkin, the man who the police said has confessed to killing 17 women in the last three years.
Investigator Dwayne D. Russell, a spokesman for State Police Troop L based here, said a team of 50 investigators had worked through the weekend to locate and identify the women Mr.
Rifkin has confessed to killing.


Q&amp;A
Rice and Birds
Q.  Is it true that rice thrown at weddings is bad for birds?
A.
"No, it's bad for people," said Heidi Hughes, an ornithologist with the American Backyard Bird Society of Jefferson, Md.


For Libyan Athletes, an Appeal to Clinton
World University Games officials appealed directly to PRESIDENT CLINTON yesterday to allow 79 student athletes from Libya to compete in the multisport event, which begins Thursday in Buffalo.
In a letter to Mr.
Clinton, the president of the International University Sports Federation asked for intervention on behalf of the Libyans, who have been denied visas.
The United States imposed sanctions on Libya in 1986 and after the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.


Transactions
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Paul Carey, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
Sent Anthony Telford, pitcher, to Rochester.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Kelly Gruber, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Damion Easley, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the election campaign in Japan misstated the number of seats at stake in Parliament in some editions.
There are 512 seats, with 955 candidates.


America, a Great Place to Visit
The largest invasion of foreigners in American history is unfolding across the United States, welcomed almost everywhere.
The invaders are tourists, a record 46.5 million of whom are expected this year, and they should spend about $76.9 billion while here -- another record.
The estimates come from the United States Travel Data Center, a Washington-based nonprofit organization.
And for the first time, according to the Commerce Department, the total number of overseas visitors to the United States -- an estimated 19.5 million from every part of the world except North America -- will exceed the total visitors from Canada, and by a sizable margin of one million.


Storied, Cherished Rectangular Patch of Green
After Princess Diana had gone off with her mother, after Pete Sampras had gone off with his girlfriend, after Steffi Graf had gone off to the doctor with a feverish feeling that kept her from attending the Wimbledon ball in a new Harvey Nichols gown, there was still something remarkable to see here.
From high atop Staircase No. 1 in this exclusive club that recalls a vintage American baseball stadium or an ivy-covered Elizabethan theater, as John McPhee wrote, you can look down the deserted arena: Down past the planter boxes of pink and blue hydrangeas, past the expanse of hunter green metal seats, past the square of green wicker chairs that make up the Royal Box, past the scoreboard with the tastefully restrained Rolex logo, to the most famous patch of fatigued grass in the world.


No Headline
"If someone is destroying your life, the worst thing you can do is just sit and let it happen. You have to find humor to be able to function during months of depression like those we've suffered here. Without this we'd all end up in an asylum." -- SASHA PETROVIC of the Surrealist Hit Parade, a Sarajevo comedy troupe.  [ A4:3. ]


Bubbles May Have Speeded Life's Origins on Earth
HARDLY anything matches the evanescence of bubbles, those fragile watery spheres filled with air that have but a moment before they dissolve or burst.
Time enough, though, to enchant with their iridescence in sunlight, give scented caresses in a warm bath or tickle the nose over a champagne glass.
Even time, perhaps, to have set in motion chemical reactions that led to the origin of life.
The role of bubbles in the creation of life on earth is one of the newest approaches to solving the scientific mystery that is probably second in importance only to the problem of how the universe itself began.


Music Notes; Violinists to Play So Youngsters Can String Along
The directors of Music for the World, a new foundation that sponsors music-education projects, have a theory: if Government agencies give money to the public schools for music programs, then music lovers should also chip in.
To that end, Music for the World is presenting Fiddlefest, a benefit at Carnegie Hall on Oct. 25 in which 10 well-known violinists are to perform to raise money for the Opus 118 Music Center, a violin-instruction program in East Harlem, and Link Up, Carnegie's education program.
The specifics of the concert have not been announced, but the roster suggests a polystylistic evening.
Soloists from the world of classical music will include Itzhak Perlman, Midori, Isaac Stern, Ida and Ani Kavafian and two members of the Guarneri String Quartet: Arnold Steinhardt and the violist Michael Tree.
The others will be Diane Monroe and Karen Briggs, who play jazz, and Mark O'Connor, a country fiddler.
A student ensemble from the Opus 118 Music Center, led by its founder, Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras, will also perform.


Floods Force Corps of Engineers Into Balancing Act on Mississippi
As the rain fell again today, S. K. Nanda, the chief hydrologist at the Army Corps of Engineers district office here, punched the keyboards at a bank of computers and choreographed a watery balancing act involving three giant Iowa reservoirs along two Mississippi tributaries that weeks ago had filled to capacity.
From this command post just a few feet from where the Mississippi River was cresting at levels not seen since 1965, and never seen in July, Mr.
Nanda was making water management decisions unlike any others he has faced in his 25-year career here.


Investors' Quandary On Pretoria
Many United States institutional investors are not expected to begin immediately reinvesting in South Africa, even if Nelson Mandela calls for an end to international sanctions.
Executives of pension funds and endowments expressed excitement about the prospects of investing again in companies that do business with South Africa but said it could take months if not years to gain approval to put their money back in the troubled nation.


2 Caucasus Regions Sinking Deeper Into Civil War
Heavy shelling from Armenian forces in central Azerbaijan set off a wave of refugees and augured another Armenian advance into Azerbaijan as warfare spiraled across the Caucasus.
Having now secured virtually all of the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, which has been the focus of the longest ethnic war in the former Soviet Union, the Armenians appeared to be clearing a swath along the Azerbaijani side of the border, presumably as a security zone.


U.N. TEAM LEAVES IRAQ IN STANDOFF OVER MISSILE SITE
A team of United Nations weapons inspectors withdrew from Iraq empty-handed today after being refused permission to install a monitoring camera at a missile testing site.
The Security Council had warned of "serious consequences" if the inspectors did not get their way.


Woman, 74, Is Beaten and Locked in Closet
A 74-year-old woman was found badly beaten and locked in the closet of her apartment in Brooklyn yesterday afternoon, the police said.
A neighbor became suspicious when she heard a television set playing loudly in the woman's apartment at 683 Dean Street in Crown Heights, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


Tough Job at Western Digital
Over the holiday weekend, Charles A. Haggerty scrambled around the slopes of Lassen Peak, a 10,000-foot volcano in Northern California.
Today, his true exertions begin, when he formally takes over as chairman and chief executive of the Western Digital Corporation, the nation's fourth-largest seller of computer disk drives.
The makers of hard disk drives -- memory devices for personal computers -- are fighting a price war in which earnings and shareholder returns have been the major casualties.
High expenses and poor strategies have sent Western Digital's stock from $32.625 a share six years ago to $3.875 on Friday.


Longstreet Hinton Is Dead at 91; Built Morgan Fund Operations
Longstreet Hinton, a retired banking executive credited with building the trust and pension fund operations of Morgan Guaranty Trust Company into billions of dollars, died at his home in Locust Valley, L.I., on June 24.
He was 91.
Mr.
Hinton's entire career was at Morgan Guaranty and its predecessor, the J. P. Morgan Company, the fabled Wall Street firm.


Bigotry Is What's Incompatible
President Clinton will soon be faced again with the issue that has caused him more grief than any other: whether homosexuals can serve openly in the military.
There is little doubt that the worst excesses of the past -- the witch hunts and mindless expulsions of dedicated soldiers, sailors and aviators -- will be ended.
The President's strong support for the right of gay soldiers to serve their country has likely achieved that salutary result.


President's Safety Is Often a Woman's Work
It is an image made famous by countless photographs and movies: The large, steely man with dark sunglasses and dark suit who talks into his watch and stares unrelentingly into the crowd, a telltale cord curling from his ear and down his collar.
And, even in a town that has become accustomed to male bastions crumbling, it is still a bit startling to see a 5-foot-3-inch woman with a revolver and automatic weapon guarding the 6-foot-2-inch President of the United States.


CHRONICLE
It was a bizarre scene, certain to last for a long time in the annals of New York City folklore: hundreds of onlookers, reporters and cameramen crowded outside the Abu Bakr mosque on Foster Avenue on Friday, angling to find out when Sheik OMAR ABDEL RAHMAN, the blind Egyptian cleric who is accused of inspiring his followers to violence, would surrender to authorities from the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service.


A Vast Polar Ice Sheet Mysteriously Vanishes
FOR three years ending in 1991 the thick sheet of ice covering Antarctica's Bellingshausen Sea almost entirely vanished.
The ice, thought to be permanent, had been a notorious impediment to exploration.
In 1898, when the ship Belgica sought to penetrate it to reach the South Pole, the drifting ice trapped the ship and carried it hundreds of miles before loosening enough to permit its escape a year later.


On Wheels: America at 10 M.P.H.; Converging on Nowhere With Families and Fliers
One distinction of this corner of the world is that when you tell residents they live in the middle of nowhere, they agree with you.
On Friday, rolling into Canby, Calif., in the northeast corner of the state about 100 miles south of here, a roving bicyclist pulled into the Canby Hotel for a breakfast of pork chops and eggs.


A Symbol of Racial Conflict Moves Nearer Removal Again
After two emotional public hearings, this city has moved a step closer to again banishing a gray granite obelisk that has come to symbolize white supremacy.
The city's Human Relations Commission voted unanimously on June 30 to recommend that the City Council store the obelisk, the object of bitter debate here for years.
But the debate is sure to continue in at least one more public hearing and perhaps later in court.


People
*
Jennifer Young was named to the new position of senior vice president at FCB Entertainment, Burbank, Calif.
She was previously senior vice president of marketing at Lifetime Television, New York. *
Barbara Hickey was named promotion director at Redbook magazine, New York, succeeding David Chase, who left to become promotion director at Child magazine, New York.
Ms.
Hickey was previously an account director at Beisler &amp; Associates, New York.


As the Year's Second Half Begins, the Industry Has a Full Scoreboard of Personnel Changes.
MAYBE it was the long Fourth of July weekend or the arrival of the second half of the year.
For whatever reason, the industry's typically frantic pace of personnel changes intensified last week.
Tom Carroll, the president of Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano since its founding, left the New York agency as of Friday.
Adam Stagliano, director of account planning, assumed his title and duties.


NORTHWEST AND PILOTS UNION CONTINUE TALKS
Northwest Airlines and its pilots' union met again yesterday in an effort to reach an agreement on concessions that would enable the nation's fourth-largest carrier to avoid filing for bankruptcy protection.
Such a filing could come as early as today.
Although the airline had signaled that it would either announce an agreement with its pilots today or head to bankruptcy court, people familiar with the talks said a final decision might be postponed for a few days.


Observer; Haiti In the Sun
The news was so thin over the weekend that Haiti made the front pages in several newspapers.
You can tell an editor has been looking into a bare pantry when he comes back with a Caribbean story.
When Haiti is the juiciest Caribbean story going it feels as if the end of history may be more than a book by Francis Fukuyama.
We are not slurring poor Haiti, but merely stating the fact.
As the philosopher-journalist James Reston once observed, Americans will do anything for Latin America except read about it.


Legislators and Cuomo Agree on New Smoking Restrictions
Negotiators for the Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo reached agreement today on a bill that would expand restrictions on smoking by prohibiting smoking in schools and limiting it in workplace lounges and cafeterias to separate, enclosed rooms.
The bill also would ban smoking in general hospitals, child-care centers, public institutions and treatment centers for children, ticketing and boarding areas of public transportation terminals, indoor zoos and some food stores.
It also would ban the sale of individual cigarettes out of their packages, which include warnings about the health hazards of smoking.


Review/Concert; At a Music Festival in a Tent, The Importance of Being Loud
The Waterloo Music Festival rightly prides itself on its service to American music and to neglected works in the European tradition.
But Yoav Talmi's program with the Festival Orchestra this evening, after a nod to the Fourth of July with William Schuman's "American Festival Overture," fell squarely back on standard fare: Tchaikovsky's First Piano Concerto, as overworked a war horse as there is, and Saint-Saens's "Organ" Symphony.
If the Saint-Saens can be said to suffer neglect, it is only for lack of pipe organs in modern concert halls that can do the work justice.
And if those halls represent the frying pan in this regard, the Waterloo Festival, with an Allen electronic organ linked to a few speakers in a muddled tent acoustic, must surely be the fire.
But there the work was, or rather, some inadequate shadow of it.
John Van Buskirk, the festival's fine keyboard player, unleashed the Allen for all it was worth, producing blocks of sound that lacked nothing in volume but everything in character.
Chords were monolithic, with no sense of constituent pitches, let alone overtones.
Bass notes carried no physical rumble, nor even much solidity, in the great outdoors.


For Schourek, Opportunity. For Padres, Knocks.
Pete Schourek was summoned from Dallas Green's overstuffed doghouse for one evening and given the ball for an emergency start against the San Diego Padres at Shea Stadium last night.
He did not redeem himself.
Neither did Jeff Innis, another disappointment this season.
And the rest of the Mets, well, they didn't do enough to overcome a pitching debacle that was enough to boggle Green.


Gay Pride March Should Have Made a More Positive Statement
To the Editor:
I watched the 1993 gay pride march from midtown on Fifth Avenue.
What I witnessed was really nothing more than a rather offensive display of flesh.
Bosoms, genitals and gyrating pelvises were the order of the day: Christopher Street and gay bars thrust out for the masses to choke on.
The gay community is given a golden opportunity to make a positive statement about itself and its ideals and values.
We take this opportunity and throw it away.
I am a gay male who loves the male anatomy as much as anyone.
But can we never have higher objectives or aims than promoting our own stereotypes?


In Israel, Dinkins Cites Past Support and Seeks to Build Bridges
When Iraqi Scud missiles were falling on Israel during the war in the Persian Gulf two years ago, Mayor David N. Dinkins came to show his support, and his Israeli hosts greeted him almost immediately with a gas mask.
As Mr.
Dinkins began another visit here today, he was greeted with a political suggestion in the respected newspaper Haaretz, which reported this morning that New Yorkers were saying "a wounded Mayor is traveling to Israel."


Police Report Sex Assault Of Girl, 14, in Bronx Pool
A 14-year-old girl was sexually assaulted by a teen-ager in a crowded swimming pool in the Bronx yesterday, after she was surrounded by several young men who pulled off her bathing suit, the police said.
A 17-year-old boy was arrested a short time later and charged with assaulting the girl by fondling her and inserting his finger in her vagina, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


CLINTON PUSHING FOR JAPAN PACT
On the eve of his most significant foray onto the international stage to date, President Clinton cast his position on trade with Japan in a softer light today, telling a convention of school teachers that he planned to take a broader set of global economic goals to Tokyo this week.
Noting that more than 40 percent of the nation's trade is with Asia and that this accounts for millions of American jobs, Mr.
Clinton put a positive construction on the relations between the United States and Japan that had been missing in recent discussions.


Lawyer Says Sheik Plans Fight Against Extradition
A lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the spiritual leader of suspects in the two recent terrorist cases in New York City, said yesterday that the radical Islamic cleric intended to wage a "vigorous fight" against efforts to extradite him to Egypt, which could keep him in the United States for years.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman was already challenging deportation efforts, and his mounting legal struggle promises to keep him at the center of debate over how to deal with rising concerns over terrorist attacks here and abroad.


In Canada, Elderly Praise Their Health Care
Charlotte M. Cohan, her bones weakened by disease, curled up in a chair at the Rotary-Laughlin Center with a cup of tea and some carrot cake.
"I always thought a nursing home was the worst place you could go to, the end of the line," she said as Tchaikovsky's "Romeo and Juliet" played on the stereo.
"This place is a godsend. I have a hundred friends here."


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Roald Hoffmann; Seeking Beauty In Atoms
ROALD HOFFMANN Nobel laureate, professor of chemistry at Cornell University and poet -- glanced benignly at the stream of students passing his office window along a tranquil campus street.
"I love chemistry," he remarked, "because it's sort of human in scale -- infinitely complex, but always tangible, always real."
Although Dr.
Hoffman's pursuits include such practical goals as finding a cheap substitute for one of the precious metals used in automobile catalytic converters, he is mainly interested in the beauty that he perceives underlying even mundane applications of chemistry.
Dr.
Hoffmann's students know that his conception of "beauty" in chemistry particularly refers to the subtle symmetries and asymmetries of electron "orbitals" in complex molecules.
He was awarded the 1981 Nobel prize in chemistry for his idea that chemical transformations could be approximately predicted from these symmetries.
His method gave chemists a powerful tool for predicting the pathways that chemical reactions may follow.


Review/Television; The Dalai Lama as Boy, Man, Leader
Despite its overly reverent tone, "Compassion in Exile" is an engaging portrait of Tenzin Gyatso, the Dalai Lama of Tibet, who has been in exile in India since 1959, when he fled Chinese repression.
The hourlong documentary, an offering in the "P.O.V." series, deftly combines glimpses of this Buddhist leader as a boy in Tibet with scenes of the man in exile receiving Tibetan refugees and performing picturesque ceremonies.
He tells of his people's afflictions, his pleasure in repairing watches and his dreams of a monastic life.


Record Numbers of Foreigners Tour the U.S.


All Rise! Tyson 'Appeals Court' Is in Session
Our judicial system has it all wrong.
All those sober courtrooms with their solemn protocol are too archaic for gossipy, fin de siecle America, where we can try people if we like on TV without abiding by the rules of evidence.
We need squabbling experts, a divided audience, chatty jurors and an aggressive talk show host to make the courtroom experience entertaining and interactive.
That's what Montel Williams will bestow upon us Thursday at 5 P.M. (WNYW-Channel 5 in New York) when he exports an audience, four expert guests and bailiff Sally Jessy Raphael to a courtroom in Danville, Ind., (much applause here from the audience) to ask whether Mike Tyson deserves a new trial on his conviction of raping Desiree Washington.


INSIDE
Albany Accord on Smoking
Negotiators for the Legislature and Governor Cuomo reached agreement on a bill that would expand restrictions on smoking.
Page B1.
Final Minutes of Blimp Flight
After a blimp became "uncontrollable," its pilot worked to avoid the Manhattan skyline before it crashed on a roof, its co-pilot said.
Page B1.
Sheik to Fight Extradition
A lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman said the radical Islamic cleric intended to wage a "vigorous fight" against extradition efforts.
Page B3.


Woosnam's Driving License Is Suspended
IAN WOOSNAM, the 1991 Masters champion, was fined $3,320 and banned from driving for one year yesterday after a London court ruled that his blood alcohol level was more than double the legal limit when he crashed his car on June 24.
Woosnam, 35, drove through a row of hedges and into a field in the western English county of Shropshire, not far from his home in Wales.
His wife, GLENDRYTH, suffered minor injuries.
The car, a $120,640 Mercedes, was extensively damaged.


Wilander Is Back Without Vengeance
Mats Wilander was bouncing.
Well, he was actually sort of swaying, the movement his 4-month-old daughter, Emma, fresh from a nap and cuddled in her father's lap, appreciates most.
These are lazy days for Wilander, who less than five years ago was the No. 1-ranked tennis player in the world.
Especially lazy in light of Wilander's frenetic year of accomplishment in 1988, when he won three Grand Slam titles in one year.
As if exhausted by that effort, Wilander did a fast fade into tennis oblivion.


U.S. and Europe Out of Step on Japan Trade
Like the United States, the European Community will continue to press Japan at this week's summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrial democracies to curb its $150 billion annual worldwide trade surplus, more than a fifth of which is with Western Europe.
But differences between the United States and Europe over how to address the trade problem will keep them from presenting Japan with a united front on the issue, government officials and analysts said, diluting their message and perhaps weakening their negotiating positions.


CHRONICLE
The dedication of a small community park in Camillus, N.Y., alongside the Erie Canal turned into a Hollywood-style celebration when home-grown movie stars ALEC, WILLIAM and STEPHEN BALDWIN showed up.
The movie stars, along with roughly 130 of their relatives, went to the town, a suburb of Syracuse, for a weekend family reunion and to help dedicate the 13-acre park to the late Roy and Marion Martineau, the brothers' maternal grandparents, The Associated Press said.


Miscellany
*
North American Philips Consumer Electronics, Knoxville, Tenn., will run advertisements in the October-November and December-January issues of Out magazine, New York.
The ads, by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, are believed to be the first for a consumer electronics marketer in a publication aimed at gay and lesbian readers.


The Moving Electron Writes, and Moves On
THE WORDPERFECT CORPORATION introduced version 6.0 of its popular DOS word processing program last week at the PC Expo computer trade show, releasing what will almost certainly be the last major revision of the world's most popular writing program.
Appropriately, Wordperfect 6.0 appears to be the last word in DOS word processors.


Man Kills His Mother, Then Takes Own Life
A Washington Heights man who his neighbors said was distraught over the terminal cancer that had left his 89-year-old mother bedridden, fatally shot her in the head and then killed himself, the police said.
The man, August Fernandez, was also depressed, neighbors said, because he had recently lost his job at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


METRO DIGEST
CHANGES COMING FOR HOMELESS SYSTEM
As the Federal Government begins to retool its policies toward the homeless, New York City officials are moving forward with a revamping of the city's shelter system.
The new effort seeks to shift the city's system toward the use of small residences for the homeless, run by private nonprofit groups, that address such problems as drug abuse and mental illness.
Page A1.
NEW YORK CITY  LAWYER SAYS SHEIK TO FIGHT EXTRADITION
A lawyer for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the spiritual leader of suspects in the two recent terrorist cases in New York City, says that the radical Islamic cleric intends to wage a "vigorous fight" against efforts to extradite him to Egypt, which could keep him in this country for years.
Page B2.


Review/Fashion; In Paris, All Roads Lead to a Men's-Wear Melange
It is strange that a country so troubled by immigration has become such a crossroads for fashion.
Designers on the calendar of men's-wear shows this season hail from Japan, Italy, Belgium, England, Holland, Austria and Spain.
But here, there are no borders.
Arguably the most French fashion for spring '94 was served up by the Japanese designer Kenzo, who sent out three of this city's top chefs in traditional chef's jackets made from the checked Provencal linen used for dish towels.
Meanwhile, the most French fashion house, Hermes, showed raw silk Nehru jackets.
The couture capital that Christian Dior and Yves Saint Laurent built would seem a perfect breeding ground for spectacular men's-wear classics.
But the masters have not been drawn to men's fashion.
While the suits designed at the prestigious houses follow the colors and the softer structures of the season, it is not there that fashion news is made.
Star of the Avante-Garde
That is left to Jean-Paul Gaultier, who has made Paris the capital of avant-garde men's wear, where others can flourish in his wake.
"Gandhi meets Amadeus on Carnaby Street" was how Jon Weiser of Charivari dubbed this season's collection: Indian prints on T-shirts, Mozart-worthy long flared jackets, giant patchwork jeans.
Every model wore a nose-to-ear chain.
This season's innovations were a jacket with sewn-on pin-striped shirt-sleeves and a series of sarong-tied pants.
In a nod to a troubled world, Mr.
Gaultier started his show with a radio playing France's all-news radio station.


Sarajevo Journal; This Can't Be Bosnia, There's Too Much Laughing
Defying the death, destruction and despair smothering spirits across this unhappy land, seven Sarajevans -- Muslims, Serbs, Croats and combinations thereof -- have made themselves a life-support system for one of the Bosnians' most precious possessions: their sharp, self-effacing wit.
"Good evening, all three of you out there who still have batteries," says a member of the Surrealist Hit Parade, the former Yugoslavia's most popular comedy troupe, introducing the lead item in a mock Sarajevo radio news broadcast.
"Today, our street reporter has joined a SWAT team out seeking blood donors."


Looking at Embryos Early in Pregnancy
Using a miniature scope developed for use by cardiologists, researchers are perfecting a dramatic new form of prenatal diagnosis.
The technique, known as embryoscopy, has been used successfully as early as six weeks, when ultrasound is still inconclusive.
Researchers think the method may become an invaluable tool not only in diagnosing abnormalities of embryos and fetuses early in pregnancy but also in treating them, and even in doing surgery.
Science Times, page C3.


Once Again, Baseball Kicks Dirt on Its Own
The Pittsburgh Pirates evidently were not going to let the San Diego Padres beat them at their own game.
The Pirates had lost the bulk of their good players through free agency, but here were the Padres trading away their high-priced players, not waiting for them to leave as free agents.
So the Pirates last week went the Padres one better in the game of one-upmanship.
They took the we-can-slash-our-payroll-better-than-you-can game into the front office and lopped two of their four highest-ranking executives from their staff.
Last Wednesday, Mark Sauer, the Pirates' president, summoned Douglas Bureman, senior vice president for business operations, and Rick Cerrone, vice president for public relations, and told them their jobs were being eliminated and bade them goodbye.


Temporary Workers Are on the Increase In Nation's Factories
Temporary workers, those Americans recruited by companies like Manpower Inc. and rented to corporate clients, have become a familiar sight in many offices.
Now "temps" are being used in manufacturing jobs, too, and in such numbers that the Labor Department no longer knows how many people actually work in American factories.
Their growing presence means that manufacturing will probably not offer much help in solving the country's employment problem.
In the past, manufacturers have been among the first to make the economy bloom after a recession.
As orders turned up, they hired new employees or recalled old ones.
But in an economy that has surged and faltered several times since 1990, temporary workers have provided insurance against the next falter: people who can be brought in or laid off far more easily than regular employees. 'Worst-Case Approach'
"Many manufacturers are taking a worst-case approach," said Ray Marcy, the chief executive of Interim Services Inc., a leader in recruiting and renting temporary workers.
"Companies have surges in orders so they need help, but they don't want to hire. And with unemployment at 6.5 to 7 percent, it gives us a pool of talented people whom we can recruit inexpensively for our clients."


Markets Closed
The nation's financial markets were closed yesterday in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.
An article about trading in foreign markets appears on page D6.


No. 1 in Nelson's Heart
It is not clear who needs a championship more, Chris Webber or Don Nelson.
Webber is the Michigan man who called one too many timeouts in last April's college title game, and Nelson is the Golden State Warriors coach who has yet to call a timeout in a league final because he needs to bring a team there first.
Of the two, Webber has the superior, self-deprecating sense of humor.
Selected first over all by the Magic and quickly traded to Nelson's Warriors last week, Webber fit his huge hands on an airplane, arrived here for a news conference and did stand-up comedy.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  64% IN JAPAN SEE COLD U.S.
TIES  Nearly two-thirds of Japanese polled describe Japan's relations with the U.S. as "unfriendly," with much of the discontent apparently directed at President Clinton, who is to arrive in Tokyo soon for economic talks.
A1  Mr.
Clinton cast his hard line on Japan trade in a softer light.
A6


Still Radical After All These Years; At 74, William Kunstler Defends Clients Most Lawyers Avoid
William Moses Kunstler stood last week in one of his favorite places, the well of a courtroom.
Before business began he chatted amicably with the judge, the court clerk, the stenographer, the security guards, the press.
Of everything and everyone around him that Brooklyn morning, only the words behind the bench, from Aristotle, were uncongenial.
"Good law must necessarily mean good order," they declare.


New Signal Found for Wiring Brain
DURING the development of an animal's nervous system, special chemicals act as biological traffic signals to guide the growing axons from nerve cells to their proper destinations in the brain.
Now a researcher at University College London has found evidence of a new class of traffic signal, a chemical that prevents growing axons from making connections in inappropriate regions of the brain.
Chemicals that attract axons to make the right connections are already known.
The new finding is the first discovery of a chemical that warns axons off from making connections to a particular brain region, said the researcher, Dr.
Adrian Pini.


Miniature Scope Gives The Earliest Pictures Of a Developing Embryo
THE human embryo was just six weeks old, about half an inch long and shaped like a comma, its arms and legs still blunt buds.
On ultrasound, an embryo as early as this one would be just a blur.
But now, using an experimental technique, Dr.
Ruben Quintero, an obstetrician at Wayne State University's Hutzel Hospital, inserted a minute viewing scope into the woman's abdomen, through a needle the diameter of one used to draw blood.
With this device, Dr.
Quintero examined the embryo as closely as if he had opened the woman's womb.
Dr.
Quintero, a man given to understatement, described the experience of seeing a living six-week embryo, an exploration into previously inaccessible territory, by saying merely, "It was impressive." But he and other fetal-medicine experts expect that embryoscopy, as the method is called, is poised to become an invaluable new tool in diagnosing abnormalities of embryos and fetuses early in pregnancy and in treating or even doing surgery on them.


Like Ahab, a Venturer Pursues Destiny at Sea
SOMEWHERE out in Long Island Sound, exactly 11.5 miles from Thomas C. Graver's office window overlooking the New London city pier, there is an invisible line marking the end of state authority and the beginning of international waters.
This is Mr.
Graver's Moby Dick, his Holy Grail and his Comstock Lode all in one.
This is where he believes he will make his fortune, sailing twice a day to nowhere, on a 234-foot Bahamian-registered cruise ship called the Europa Jet that will, upon passing the international waters boundary, offer casino gambling while plying the waters off Fishers Island.


It Still Pays To Increase Your Word Power
PRACTICALLY everybody is a writer at some time.
Students write papers.
Managers write memos and reports.
Politicians, or their aides, write speeches.
Kidnappers write ransom notes.
And practically everybody, except the unusually skillful or terminally arrogant, can use help.
Computer programs can be a big help.
We are not talking here about word-processing software itself, which, with its instant and nearly painless revision, almost makes one long for the quill pen, but about those add-on programs that can help a writer make a piece of prose more concrete and vivid.


Gas Tax Feared Where Commuting Takes Longest
The quiet splendor of Park County, rich with towering pines and white-tailed deer, seems a long way from the screech and clatter of urban life.
And it is -- especially when the alarm clock rings before sunrise, and workers begin the long journey to jobs in Denver.
Workers in this remote county of 7,200 in the Rocky Mountain foothills 40 miles southwest of Denver face the longest average commuting time in the nation, 41 minutes each way, the Census Bureau found.
Here the Senate vote last month to raise Federal gasoline taxes to 18.4 cents a gallon from 14.1 cents is about as popular as a pothole.


Richard Tatlow 3d, 87, Leader in Engineering
Richard Henry Tatlow 3d, a New York engineer and leader in his profession, died on Thursday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 87.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


A Court for International Outlaws
How to deal with a person like Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali warlord who orders attacks on United Nations peacekeepers and uses women and children as shields for the killers?
Under whose jurisdiction could he be prosecuted?
There is no functional civil government in Somalia.
Even if U.N. soldiers could arrest him, what would they do with him after that?
Convene a war crimes tribunal, as is being done now to try the ethnic cleansers in the Balkans?
That idea summons up the daunting prospect of establishing ad hoc tribunals in every corner of the world where civil law breaks down.


Clarence M. Zener, 87, Physicist And Professor at Carnegie Mellon
Dr.
Clarence Melvin Zener, a physicist whose early hypotheses on solid-state physics contributed to modern computer circuitry decades later, died on Friday at his home in Pittsburgh.
He was 87.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Clarion Direct Wins Chase Card Account
The Chase Manhattan Bank in New York last week named Clarion Direct, formerly the Saugatuck Marketing Group, of Westport, Conn., to handle marketing programs for Chase credit cards aimed at students.
The review on the Chase Student Services account involved Clarion and four other finalists; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York, which handled the account for the last two and a half years, was not included.
Billings were not disclosed.


Fears Rise Over Wastes Burned in Cement Kilns
From industrial plants across the Great Lakes region, tanker trucks and railroad cars haul thousands of gallons of hazardous wastes to this city on Lake Huron, emptying their cargo at the nation's largest cement-making factory where it is burned as fuel.
Almost 10 years ago, with the intent of reducing pollution and conserving resources, Congress amended the nation's hazardous-waste law specifically to encourage recycling such wastes as fuel in cement kilns.
About 25 of the roughly 110 American cement plants, many owned by foreign multinational corporations, then installed new piping and other equipment and began being paid to burn hundreds of millions of gallons of hazardous waste each year.


Accounts
*
Huffy Corp., Dayton, Ohio, to Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, to handle its Huffy bicycles account, previously at Lois/U.S.A., Chicago.
Tatham was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million, after a review that also included Lois/U.S.A.; Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, and J. Walter Thompson Detroit. *
Brooks Sports, Bothell, Wash., to McCann-Erickson Seattle, to handle the athletic shoe and apparel company's account, previously at Griffin Bacal, New York.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million.


Minneapolis Clinics Brace for Siege: Operation Rescue's on the Way
Last year it was Buffalo, two years ago it was Wichita, and now it is Minneapolis's turn.
Operation Rescue is coming, and many in this city have a feeling of impending siege.
The Planned Parenthood clinic in nearby Highland Park is surrounded by a new, eight-foot-tall chain-link fence, erected by the police for crowd control.
A coalition of abortion-rights groups has trained more than 1,200 volunteers in defending clinics nonviolently; some volunteers are already on duty in bright red T-shirts with "Keep Minnesota Nice" on one side and "Stop Operation Rescue" on the other.


Patterns
Watch Out, New York
Anyone who attends the Paris collections knows the tart tongue of Angeline de Monthurban von Schtupp y Fuentes, whose Parisian Diary keeps a hooded eye on happenings on and off the runway.
Now, calling herself the more American-sounding Miss Angeline, she is heading across the Atlantic to bring the diary to the New York women's collections.


Review/Concert; The Sounds Of America, In the Park
What happened to Thomas Jefferson?
This year is the 250th anniversary of his birth, and despite celebrations here and there, he seems elusive.
America has grown remote from the semi-anarchistic collective of self-ruling republics that Jefferson once celebrated.
Jefferson briefly came to mind during the New York Philharmonic's somewhat offbeat Fourth of July concert in Central Park.
The program was a convocation of distinctive American voices: the synthetic individualism of Bernstein's "Candide Overture" and "Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story"' (continuing the perpetual Bernstein commemoration); the populist solidarity of Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man"; the smooth cross-cultural dialogues of Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue." Most strikingly, there was the exuberant disorder of Charles Ives's "Variations on 'America'," Jeffersonian music for the industrial age.


Cable TV Law Trespasses on Religious Speech
To the Editor:
The "must carry" provisions of the new cable television law provide for two ludicrous results -- the carrying by cable systems of home shopping stations, as you note in " 'Must Carry' Must Be Changed" (editorial, June 27), and the intrusion of Government into religion, which you do not note.
The purpose of the must carry rules was to create an even playing field between over-the-air television stations and cable-delivered networks such as CNN, C-SPAN, Discovery, and 40 or 50 other cable services.


Books of The Times; One Network's Trip on the Campaign Trail
Strange Bedfellows  How Television and the Presidential Candidates Changed American Politics, 1992.
By Tom Rosenstiel  368 pages.
Hyperion. $24.95
Denouncements of the press by politicians proliferated during last year's Presidential campaign.
George Bush's campaign complained that the news media suffered from a liberal bias.
Bill Clinton's campaign complained that the media diverted attention from the real issues by focusing on silly matters like Gennifer Flowers.
And Ross Perot's campaign complained that the media had become an obstacle between the voter and the political process.


Cable TV Law Trespasses on Religious Speech; Road to Police State
To the Editor:
What is the purpose of all this "telecommunications highway" technology?
To get a message a few minutes sooner?
To play more games?
Will we eat better? Make love better? Raise our children better?


Legislator Seeks Pressure on Indians
An Ohio lawmaker plans to introduce legislation to block the use of public money for the Cleveland Indians' new Gateway Stadium if the team continues to use Chief Wahoo as its symbol.
The team said last week it would keep the symbol because of fan support.
American Indian groups have protested the symbol as racist.


The Hook: No Ladder A Cherry Orchard Is Easy Pickings
Kneeling on the ground, Norma Saddlewire picked ripe, dark-red cherries as fast as she could from branches just pruned from heavily laden sweet cherry trees.
Nearby, her friend Joyce Nethaway stood plucking cherries from a dwarf tree not more than 10 feet high.


Scandal Taints India's Move To Economic Liberalization
To re-energize its two-year program of liberalizing a stolid state-controlled economy, the Indian Government threw open the door to Westerners late last month by giving approvals for several foreign investment projects, cutting interest rates, easing agricultural credits and raising the ceiling on executive pay.
But as the repercussions of a political payoff scandal continue to spread, the announcements, while broadly welcome by business, are considered to be an effort by the Government to save itself as much they are an effort to nudge along the process of economic change.


Tin Is Found in Interstellar Space
USING the Hubble Space Telescope, researchers at the University of Chicago have found tin in interstellar space.
It is the heaviest element yet seen in the gas between the stars.
Although it was assumed that tin would be found, Dr.Lewis Hobbs, a professor of astronomy and astrophysics at the university, and his colleagues were surprised to find it there in essentially the same proportion as in the Sun.


Sports of The Times; The Padre 'Dangling Out There'
HE'S the only slugger in baseball's modern era to lead the National League and the American League in home runs.
With 209 homers at age 29, he's capable of hitting 400 in his career, a milestone that might provide a Hall of Fame plaque.
His 191 homers over the last six seasons are the most of any big leaguer, more than Mark McGwire, Jose Canseco or Joe Carter.
You would think that owners of a major league team would cherish Fred McGriff: a talent in his prime and a classy citizen.


On Budget's Razor Edge, Opposites March in Step
They seem like an odd couple, the two committee chairman who will be the central figures in the Congressional conference that will write the final version of President Clinton's budget package.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the rookie chairman of the Finance Committee, has been a naval officer, a Harvard professor, an author and a diplomat.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the veteran chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, was an Army private, a night-school dropout, a semi-pro baseball player and a ward-heeler.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Novacek and Masur Gain  Karel Novacek of the Czech Republic and Australia's Wally Masur became the first seeded players to advance yesterday at the Swiss Open in Gstaad.
The third-seeded Novacek overwhelmed a Spanish qualifier, Sergio Gomez-Barrio, 6-1, 6-1, at the clay-court tournament.
The fourth-seeded Masur beat David Prinosil of Germany, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2).
Unseeded Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany upset the sixth-seeded Frenchman Arnaud Boetsch, 6-4, 2-6, 6-4, and will face Marc-Kevin Goellner of Germany next.
Goellner beat Amos Mansdorf of Israel, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4. (AP)
Holm Is Upset: Top-seeded Henrik Holm of Sweden was beaten by the Austrian Horst Skoff, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4), in the first round of the Swedish Open at Stockholm.
Seventh-seeded Nicklas Kulti of Sweden beat his countryman Jonas Bjorkman, 6-4, 6-1, and No. 6 Richard Fromberg of Australia beat Jordi Burillo of Spain, 6-1, 6-4.
Others who advanced included Bart Wuyts of Belgium, who beat Martin Jaite of Argentina, 6-4, 7-6, and Ronald Agenor of Haiti, who defeated Daniel Orsanic of Argentina, 6-3, 6-4. (AP)


Finding Ways to House All Vexes Leaders at Every Level
President Clinton signed a little-noticed executive order in May directing his Administration to come up with a "single coordinated Federal plan for breaking the cycle of homelessness." There was no ceremony that day, no soaring oratory, no Presidential photo-op at a homeless shelter.
The order itself was as modest as the circumstances of its signing, emblematic of the lowered expectations of what government can do for the poorest of its poor.
The President instructed the 17 Federal agencies involved with homelessness to come up with a strategy in nine months, but promised no new money to carry it out.


A Transformation Stays on Hold
The teachers here have been working without a contract for a year, and they are steaming.
The school board rejected a tentative pact this spring.
A Rochester newspaper columnist pretty much captured public sentiment when he wrote that the people he called "Adam Urbanski's teachers" are coming off as "a bunch of greedy whiners."
But Adam Urbanski is doing fine.
In May, while he zipped around on the national speaking circuit, he was re-elected president of the Rochester Teachers Association with 93 percent of the vote.


64% OF JAPANESE SAY U.S. RELATIONS ARE 'UNFRIENDLY'
As President Clinton heads to Tokyo for the Group of Seven summit meeting and his first official visit to the country he describes as America's most important partner, nearly two-thirds of Japanese polled describe their country's relations with the United States as "unfriendly."
The poll, conducted in both countries by The New York Times, CBS News and the Tokyo Broadcasting System, found Japanese feeling toward the United States to be more negative than at any time in the eight years the poll has been conducted.


Police Cordon Off London's Financial Core
In an effort to head off further attacks, police officers have sealed off most roads leading into London's financial district and are closely monitoring all traffic that enters on remaining roads.
How effective the measure will be in deterring car and truck bombs remains to be seen.
But the measure, which was announced Thursday and carried out over the weekend, got its first real test early today, when weekday rush-hour traffic began pouring into the area's maze of narrow streets.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
U.S. institutional investors are unlikely to reinvest in South Africa immediately, even if Nelson Mandela calls for an end to international sanctions.
It could take months if not years to gain the needed approvals from state legislatures and city councils, many of which are in recess.  [ Page D1. ]
The European Community will continue to press Japan to curb its $150 billion trade surplus, more than a fifth of which is with Western Europe.
But differences between the U.S. and Europe over how to address the trade problem will keep them from presenting a united front at the summit meeting in Tokyo this week.  [ A6. ]


In 2 Elections, Voters in Mexico Demonstrate Loyalty (to Soccer)
They were supposed to be elections that showed the advance of democracy in Mexico, but results announced today in gubernatorial races held in two key states on Sunday, the day Mexico played in a big international soccer match, were characterized by low turnout and cynicism.
Candidates representing the Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has controlled the presidency and most state governorships in Mexico for 64 years, won easily in the central state of Mexico and the small Pacific coast state of Nayarit.


Blimp Pilot Tried to Avoid Crash in City
The co-pilot of the blimp that crashed onto a Manhattan apartment building Sunday described the frantic final minutes of the flight yesterday, saying the craft's problems appeared suddenly, making the airship "uncontrollable" and leaving its pilot desperately trying to steer away from the city's skyline.
"We didn't want to go near the buildings," said the co-pilot, Pat Russell, 49, speaking from his bed at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
"It became uncontrollable to where we just drifted in."


Judge Is Certain the Subject Was Thomas's Harassment of Hill
To the Editor:
David Brock, author of "The Real Anita Hill," apparently thought his June 14 letter would vindicate his book in the face of the "hysteria" and "blatant distortion" he claims to see from critics.
Mr.
Brock's letter provides an illustration of the distortion, innuendo and shoddy "journalism" decried by critics, as Catharine MacKinnon shows (letter, June 30).
Judge Susan Hoerchner, whom I represented during her testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, is the focus of Mr.
Brock's letter.
As Anthony Lewis noted in his May 21 column, "Much of the Brock attack rests on a point about Judge Hoerchner." Mr.
Brock insists that Judge Hoerchner's credibility is seriously damaged by an early offhand guess that Professor Hill spoke to her of harassment by Clarence Thomas in spring 1981, which turned out to be before Professor Hill and Justice Thomas first worked together.


Elizabeth H. Waters, Choreographer, 83
Elizabeth Hannah Waters, a modern dancer and choreographer who performed with Hanya Holm's company in the 1930's and who founded the dance program at the University of New Mexico, died on June 5 at her home in Echo Canyon, N.M.
She was 83.
Ms.
Waters was born in Salem, Ore.
She studied in Colorado at the Perry-Mansfield School and in New York City with Ruth St.
Denis, also working as the famed dancer's personal maid and assistant in 1931.
When Ms.
Holm, a disciple of the German modern-dance pioneer Mary Wigman, opened the American Wigman School in New York, Ms.
Waters became a scholarship student.
She was a soloist in the Holm company from 1935 to 1939 and was Ms.
Holm's teaching assistant at the Bennington School of the Dance in Vermont.


British Immigration
To the Editor:
Milton C. Gelenian writes in a June 16 letter on United States immigration of "Britain's restrictive policies regarding people of color." Not true.
Last year's breakdown by origin: Indian subcontinent, 29 percent; Americas, 14 percent; Africa, 17 percent; Australasia, 4 percent; Asia (other), 19 percent; Western Europe, 7 percent; Eastern Europe, 2 percent, others, 8 percent.
We do not keep records of "color."  NICHOLAS BROWNE  Counselor, British Embassy Washington, June 23, 1993


Distinct Reality Is The One To Watch
Belmont Park rang down the curtain on its booming holiday weekend yesterday with the 101st running of the Tremont, a race that has launched many 2-year-old colts into the big leagues of stakes racing.
And the colt who was launched this time was Distinct Reality, winning his second straight race and doing it against a field of six other juveniles with breeding, credentials and great expectations.
Distinct Reality ran a textbook sprint with Jerry Bailey riding, kept his poise when Fabulous Force shot the first quarter-mile in 21 1/5 seconds and the half-mile in 44 4/5 seconds, and then kicked into high in the homestretch.
At the wire of the five-and-one-half-furlong race, he had two lengths on Gusto Z, who in turn had a length and a half on Slew Gen Fizz.
Then it was more than three lengths back to the favorite, Code Home.
Lacking a Past
Juveniles are probably the least predictable horses in the business, and for good reasons.
They may come to the races with royal pedigrees and smart trainers, but none comes with a past-performance record or even a past.
Many can run fast, but not many can run far.


Kamieniecki Finally Gets One for Road; Yanks 1 Out
The road trip, which had produced little but despair for the Yankees so far, produced delight tonight.
The road, which has produced nothing but losses for Scott Kamieniecki for almost two years, finally granted him a valuable victory.
So the resilient Yankees survived another painful loss and rebounded to defeat the Mariners, 6-3, in the first game of their series.
Actually, the Yankees had to bounce back from a series of setbacks because they had suffered three straight one-run losses in Oakland and were teetering and tottering just behind the Blue Jays in the American League East.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None


Bristol-Myers Shifts 3 Brand Accounts
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company reassigned three consumer product brands among three of its agencies last week.
They were among five lines previously handled by DDB Needham New York, which resigned last month, severing its 24-year tie with the company.
J.
Walter Thompson New York, which already handles advertising for Bristol-Myers products like Nuprin, was awarded the Excedrin PM pain reliever account.
Bozell New York, which handles Fisherman's Friend throat lozenges, was awarded the Excedrin account, while LCF&amp;L of New York, which handles brands like Ban and Bufferin, was awarded the account for Sea Breeze astringent.
Billings were not disclosed, but trade publications estimated them at $17 million to $20 million.


Fed Expected to Hold Line on Interest Rates
After nine months of predicting changes in Federal Reserve monetary policy that never occurred, investors and traders in the credit markets expect today's meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee will result in an agreement by Fed officials to hold short-term rates stable.
A decision by the committee to maintain rates would modify its assessment in May, when Fed officials voted to hold rates stable for the immediate future but hinted strongly at their willingness to raise rates if inflation worsened.
Explanations of any shift may be forthcoming next Tuesday, when the Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan, is scheduled to present the central bank's views on the economy and monetary policy to Congress.


Market Place; The Effect of Japanese Politics on Business is Likely to be Slight.
THE president of Toray Industries, Katsunosuke Maeda, has seen the effect of Japan's political upheaval on his company's stock.
When the Government was toppled last month, foreign shareholders, fearing instability, bailed out of the stock of his chemical and fiber company.
But Mr.
Maeda thinks foreign investors are overreacting.
The impact on industry from the political changes, he said, "will be smaller than what people overseas think."


Business Association To Change Its Name
The Business/Professional Advertising Association in Alexandria, Va., is planning to change its name to the Business Marketing Association, effective Sept. 1.
" 'Advertising' in the title was too specific," said Jason H. Green, a spokesman for the 71-year-old association for business-to-business advertisers and agencies.


Bridge
Bridge partnerships, like marriages, often crumble.
Few top American partnerships have a long history of success.
The record belongs to Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan and Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., who have played together with one break for almost 40 years.
Second longest, apparently, is a much younger partnership: Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., and Ron Rubin of Aventura, Fla., have played together for 17 years, using a sophisticated relay system, and have also been business colleagues as options traders on the American Stock Exchange.


Editorial Notebook: Deconstructing 'Tommy'; Watch for the Reagan Touches
Fortyish man: "I hear they took out the LSD, cleaning up the show for the middle class."
Thirtyish woman: "But wasn't it middle-class people who took LSD in the 60's?"


Ships Are Culprits As Foreign Species Invade Ecosystems
Kudzu, the galloping green vine imported from Japan in the late 1800's, has taken over much of the American South.
The zebra mussel, which arrived from Europe in the late 1980's, is on the march in the lakes and rivers of the eastern United States, clogging intake pipes and threatening to disrupt water distribution.
In Australia, a tropical toad imported from America in 1935 to control sugar-cane beetles is eating everything but the beetles and has become a plague on the land.
Alien species of plants and animals transported around the world by human beings are invading ecosystems on every continent and island, imperiling the natural ecology and to some degree the human economy.
And now scientists have found that the kaleidoscopic array of marine creatures in saltwater ponds are being transferred routinely, every day, from one part of the world to another -- in the ballast tanks of ships.


Treasury Set To Sell Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes only today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.93 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.04 percent, traders said.


Dodgers' Deaths Bring Out the Best
Last week, the Los Angeles Dodgers, under the direction of their club owner, Peter O'Malley, assisted the survivors of Roy Campanella in making funeral arrangements.
This week, the Dodgers will do the same for the family of Don Drysdale.


A Mother's Third Son, Her Last Child, Dies as Did His Brothers, in a Shooting
Frances Davis lost her last son yesterday.
He was gunned down on the same Brooklyn street where his two older brothers had been killed.
The young man, Frank Davis, 18, was shot at noon, moments after he walked out of his grandmother's home in the Tompkins Houses at 220 Throop Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Ms.
Davis said her son was walking around the corner to his aunt's home.
Struck in the chest by a single bullet, he staggered back toward the door of the building, dying, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Albany Must Now Act On the Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
I applaud your support of the community mental-health resources bill before the State Legislature in Albany in "An Agenda for Albany" (editorial, June 29).
This legislation requires reinvestment of $250 million, saved by the state from downsizing psychiatric hospitals, into a fund for community-based care for the mentally ill.


A Resignation at Salomon
Salomon Brothers said yesterday that Myron S. Scholes, a leading academic studying the complex world of options, had resigned as the co-head of its derivatives unit.
Mr.
Scholes said yesterday that he would like to apply his theories to managing money for clients in a smaller entrepreneurial company.
He will continue to teach at Stanford University and will also take time to complete some articles he is working on related to financial topics.


Rising Yen Might Widen This Gap
The Clinton Administration sees the recent strengthening of the Japanese yen against the dollar as one means of reducing Japan's monumental trade surpluses.
But as the leaders of the seven leading industrial nations gather here this week, some American business executives and trade experts are warning that a strong-yen policy could backfire.
Yes, they say, a strong yen will make American goods less expensive relative to Japanese products and thus more competitive.
But the strong yen -- the dollar has fallen more than 13 percent against the Japanese currency since the beginning of the year to a current level of 108.83 yen -- is also making it prohibitively expensive for some foreign businesses to build their own factories, distribution networks and marketing operations in Japan.
Conflicting Currents
And such direct investment into Japan, American trade experts say, is critical to achieving sustained success in this notoriously difficult market.


CCA Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Nigeria's Ruler a Puzzle to His People
Compared to the palatial style that seems to be the vogue among African rulers these days, the newly built personal residence here of Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida is remarkably modest.
It is a spartan, ranch-style house devoid of the grandiose touches some expect of the leader of black-ruled Africa's wealthiest and most populous country.
But what Aso Rock, as Nigerians have taken to calling it, may lack in splendor and comfort, it makes up for in security.
It is a virtual labyrinth, full of unmarked hallways and dozens of doors without labels or numbers.
Government officials say many rooms were built with secret exits connected to hidden tunnels, and it is widely rumored that a bunker, generously supplied with food and armaments, is buried deep underneath.


Lend Russia Money and a Tough Accountant; Stemming Corruption
To the Editor:
Dimitri Simes fails to discuss corruption in "Waffling and Wavering on Russian Aid" (Op-Ed, June 27).
He argues for increasing aid to Russia.
However, current assistance to Russia is inefficient because of the corruption on the receiving end.
It is part of the Russian character to seek out and profit from loopholes in the bureaucratic structure.
Gogol's character Chichikov profited from a loophole by buying up dead souls.
The Soviet period did not alter this because Marxism did not contain an explicit ethical system.


BE Aerospace (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


The Pop Life
Listening In on a Big Party
Paul Shaffer decided to throw a party and invite people he admired.
The guest list included David Letterman, his boss on late-night television; Tony Bennett, Eartha Kitt, James Coburn, Ringo Starr and Phil Spector.
They all showed up and so did Charles Koppelman, who heads Mr.
Shaffer's recording label, Bill Murray, Martin Short, Dana Carvey, Mike Myers, Phil Hartman, Jon Lovitz, Aaron Neville, Lou Reed, Leonard Cohen, George Clinton, Bootsy Collins, LL Cool J, Joe Walsh, Joan Jett, Phoebe Snow and David Sanborn.
The merrymaking, something that has been described as akin to an exclusive psychedelic discotheque, can be heard on the new double compact disk "The World's Most Dangerous Party" (SBK/ERG.


Haiti: The Secret of Success
Getting the Haitian military to agree to a timetable for returning President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power is a considerable achievement.
The United Nations mediator, Dante Caputo, and the Clinton Administration deserve much credit.
But after pressuring President Aristide to accept an agreement that leaves real power in military hands for most of a four-month transition period, the U.N. and the U.S. are now obliged to insure that army and police commanders live up to their parts of the deal.
They must end political intimidation now and actually surrender power at the end of October.


Sports of The Times; One Final Pursuit Of Glory
Over a breakfast of cantaloupe and orange juice yesterday, Orlando Cepeda, the man I remembered from youth as the Baby Bull, spoke passionately about the two-tier assignment that had brought him to New York.
As the San Francisco Giants' vice president of community services, Cepeda, who enjoyed the best years of a fabulous career with the Giants and the St.
Louis Cardinals, explained that a large part of his mission was to spread the gospel of baseball and inspire young people, especially Puerto Rican and Dominican youngsters, with his life story.


In East Europe, Kmart Faces an Attitude Problem
Ludmilla Buchovako, a seasoned saleswoman in this city's biggest department store, looked slightly miffed as she stood amid the baseball caps, track suits and exercise machines of Eastern Europe's first Kmart.
Indeed, she had removed the Kmart badge with the slogan "I'm Here for You" from her new red sales pinafore and hidden it it in her pocket.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Thursday about an agreement by television networks to precede violent programs with warning labels misstated the response of CBS to public protests over "Liar, Liar," a movie about incest.
The network did not cancel the movie, but many companies dropped plans to advertise during its showing.


ACCORD IS REACHED AT TRADE PARLEY
Trade ministers for the leading industrial nations said today that they have reached a crucial tariff reduction agreement that they said will likely lead to a revival of stalled global trade talks.
"We have concluded our deliberations successfully," Kabun Muto, Japan's Foreign Minister, said upon emerging from a meeting of trade officials of the United States, Canada, Japan and the European Community.
"We believe it will result in substantial progress."


Divided on Inflation; Few Signs of Price Pressures, but Anxiety Among Economists Refuses to Go Away
Blue-chip corporations from Sears to I.B.M. are sending out pink slips by the sackful, leaving millions of qualified workers sifting the want ads for employment.
Whole industries, from airlines to cigarettes to computers, are hemorrhaging cash in a struggle to attract price-conscious consumers.
Why, then, are economists worried about inflation?
One answer is that many are not.
"You are looking at a global economy with lots of excess capacity," said Van Doorn Ooms, the director of research at the Committee for Economic Development.
"It's difficult to see inflation on the horizon."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.96
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.93
3.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.04
3.32
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.43
5.38
6.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.68
6.66
7.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.41
7.40
8.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.72
5.72
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday with a review of the Mozartean Players' appearance on Friday at the Caramoor Festival referred to the performance incorrectly.
It was not the festival's opening concert; that took place on June 26.


Systemhouse reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Russell Pendergast, 57, of Rockefeller Group, Dies
Russell A. Pendergast, a senior executive of the Rockefeller Group in New York for the last 10 years, died on Friday at his home in Wilton, Conn.
He was 57 years old.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


INSIDE
Northwest and Pilots in Pact
Northwest will give employees a 30 percent stake and its pilots will take pay cuts under an agreement aimed at staving off bankruptcy.
Page D1.
Court Voids Hasidic District
New York's highest court ruled that a special school district set up for Hasidic Jews endorses a religion and thus is unconstitutional.
Page B1.
Violence Grows in Nigeria
At least 11 people were reported killed in Nigeria as pro-democracy protesters battled police.
Page A3.
Harrison Salisbury Dies
The longtime correspondent and editor for The New York Times, an author of 29 books, was 84.
Page D19.


Pros in the Caddy Shack: Country Club Recession; An Engineer Learns to Carry Golf Clubs
Until Pentagon budget cuts crippled production of Trident submarines, Tom Kingsley worked as a mechanical engineer at the Groton Naval Base in Connecticut, teaching officers how to operate the nuclear reactors that power the subs.
Two years ago his employer, General Dynamics, dismissed him.
Now, at age 29, he is caddying under the majestic oaks at the Ridgewood Country Club here.


Better Living (Perhaps) Through Palm Readings
"PSYCHIC Readings by Gena," said the flier handed out by the dark-haired boy.
"Do you have problems through law, health, marriage and success? Come, see this gifted lady and let her solve your problems today."
Gena also promised "to show you with your own eyes how she can take away suffering, sickness and bad luck from your home and body."


Staff Builders (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Commodity Rise Wilts Treasuries
A sharp rise in commodity prices yesterday took some steam out of the Treasury bond market, where prices fell by about a quarter of a point.
With prices of Treasury notes and bonds at such lofty levels that their yields were the lowest in about 20 years, analysts said the bond market was particularly vulnerable to a setback.
"Investors are understandably reluctant to buy when yields are at 20-year lows," said one institutional salesman.
"And the rise in commodity prices was just the excuse they needed to pull back a bit."


Saratoga Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Youths Sentenced in Killing of Brooklyn School Principal


CHRONICLE
JOHN F. KENNEDY JR. has resigned as an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, it was announced yesterday.
BARBARA THOMPSON, director of public information for the district attorney's office, said that no date for his departure had been set but that "we believe it will be in the next couple of weeks -- he will be wrapping up his cases until then."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Activated Ron Karkovice, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Designated Rick Wrona, catcher, for assignment.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Tom Kramer, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Albie Lopez, pitcher, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.


CHRONICLE
Robbers stopped a limousine carrying MARVIN DAVIS, the billionaire former owner of 20th Century Fox, and his wife, BARBARA, in Nice on the French Riviera on Sunday and escaped with $10 million worth of jewelry and $50,000 in cash, the police said yesterday.
Reuters reported that the couple were on their way to the Eden Roc Hotel in Cap d'Antibes when a car swerved in front of their vehicle, forcing it to stop.
Four men with semiautomatic pistols surrounded the limousine, grabbed the chauffeur and took the keys to the trunk, where they found the jewelry and cash in a handbag, the report said.
The incident occurred so quickly that bodyguards following in a car had no time to intervene, it added.
The police said the robbery had been meticulously planned.
They said they later found the getaway car, containing some of the Davises' personal documents, and arrested two French passengers, said to be accomplices in the robbery.
The police said the two would be taken before a judge today to be placed under investigation -- a prelude to criminal charges -- for receiving stolen property.


Personal Health; Does a bout of exercise a day keep the doctor away?
THE effects of exercise on resistance to illness, from the common cold to cancer, have long been surrounded by controversy and conflicting evidence.
While few would dispute the value of fitness in warding off heart disease and osteoporosis, when it comes to the immune system the facts are not nearly so clear.
Nonetheless, millions of people believe that regular exercise keeps them healthier.
Many avid exercisers insist that their fitness routine helps them ward off colds and recover more quickly from the minor illnesses they do get.
Unless they are too sick to move, they tend to keep running, cycling, swimming or whatever when others with similar symptoms would lie low.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  CLINTON PRESSES TRADE AND TIES  President Clinton, at the start of the summit for leading industrialized nations, sought trade concessions from Japan, but then began building relationships with those trying to overthrow the ruling party.
A1  Trade negotiators say they are getting closer to an agreement.
A9


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Iran Advances in Cup Play  Iran advanced to the second round of Asian qualifying for the 1994 World Cup with a 1-1 tie against Syria at Damascus last night.
Iran and Syria each finished the double-round robin Group B qualifying with 3-0-3 records and 9 points, but Iran advanced with a better goal differential, 15-2 to 14-4.
Iran, which made its only World Cup finals appearance in 1978, joins Iraq, Japan, North Korea, Saudi Arabia and South Korea in the second round. (AP) BASKETBALL  Tropics Defend U.S.B.L.
Title  Ken Bannister scored 35 points on 14 of 15 shooting last night as the Miami Tropics successfully defended their United States Basketball League title with a 139-127 victory over the Westchester Stallions in the championship game in Milford, Conn.
Bannister made his first 13 shots and grabbed 10 rebounds to earn most valuable player honors.
The Tropics, made up primarily of former National Basketball Association players using the summer league to try and win another shot in the N.B.A., are owned and coached by John Lucas, who is also the head coach of the N.B.A.'s San Antonio Spurs. (AP) TENNIS  Bruguera Is Back and Winning  Sergi Bruguera of Spain, playing in his first tournament since winning the French Open last month, defeated Bernd Karbacher, 6-4, 6-0, yesterday in the first round of the Swiss Open in Gstaad.
In addition to being the clay-court event's top-seeded player, the fifth-ranked Bruguera is also its defending champion.
He next plays Markus Zoecke, who defeated Renzo Furlan, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1. (AP) Svensson Beaten: Marcos Arelio Gorriz of Spain upset third-seeded Jonas Svensson, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1, of Sweden yesterday in the rain-interrupted first round of the Swedish Open in Bastad.
After losing, Svensson announced that he had quit Sweden's Davis Cup team. (AP) Shelton Is Defeated: Bryan Shelton, the two-time defending champion, was unable to handle the bullet serve of Japan's Shuzo Matsuoka and lost, 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (7-4), in the first round of the $175,000 Hall of Fame Championships at Newport, R.I. (AP)


Nets and Reed Show Off Their Modest Draft Prizes
There were no fans, no fanfare, not even a drumroll as the Nets introduced their top two draft picks to the news media today at a hotel across the road from their offices at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was just as well, for neither Rex Walters nor John Best is expected to make that much of an impact next season.
The 6-foot-4 inch Walters, from the University of Kansas, was the 16th pick in the first round last Wednesday, and he knows that he was a consolation prize for the Nets, who were hoping that shooting guard Terry Dehere of Seton Hall might still be available.


Overdue Fiscal Fix for New York City
When the Standard &amp; Poor's bond-rating agency told New York City officials the new city budget was too dependent on one-time savings and wishful thinking, it was hardly news.
Fiscal analysts had been warning all year that balancing the fiscal 1994 budget with gimmickry would make trouble for 1995 and the years beyond.
But when the warning comes from analysts who rate city bonds, City Hall listens -- and well it should.
The issue is, simply, that New York is living beyond its means.
True, the budget has been balanced every year since the city emerged from its mid-1970's crisis.
Looking ahead, however, it is clear that anticipated revenues in future years won't cover anticipated spending.
A persistent gap of $1.5 billion to $2 billion each year for the foreseeable future is what concerns Standard &amp; Poor's and other fiscal analysts.


Gin Account Is Won By FCB/Leber Katz
Hiram Walker &amp; Sons Inc. said yesterday that it had selected FCB/ Leber Katz Partners in New York to handle its Beefeater gin account, which had been at Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws in Chicago for the last three years.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $8 million.


Yankees Are Moving! Up on Toronto
While the bantering continues among politicians, fans and team executives about the possibility of the Yankees moving out of the Bronx and to a better location, the Yankees have moved into a posh district of the American League East.
They were one game behind first-place Toronto as they prepared to face the Mariners at the Kingdome tonight.
Any Yankee fan who checked the standing after 83 games last July would have spotted the Yankees sputtering toward the All-Star Game break with a 41-42 record, 11 games behind Toronto.
One year later, the Yankees have improved by six games (47-36), the defending World Series champion Blue Jays have proven to be mortal and the gap between the teams is one tiny game.


More Rain Endangers Soggy Levees
Flooded towns along the upper Mississippi River were given more bad news today as officials said the river had still not crested and warned that miles of earthen levees could collapse.
In Iowa, rising water levels on the Iowa River, a tributary to the Mississippi, threatened to flood the intake pipes of Iowa City's water treatment plant, and the Mississippi neared a level that forecasters said would be just short of the record for the Davenport area.


New Doubts About 'Ivan the Terrible'
For the first time in years of legal battling, a Federal judge finds "substantial doubt" that John Demjanjuk, who is under a death sentence in Israel, was the notorious "Ivan the Terrible" of the Treblinka death camp where nearly a million Jews were gassed to death.
That creates the ghastly prospect that Mr.
Demjanjuk, a retired auto worker from Cleveland, should not have been extradited to Israel by the United States.
Yet now he faces execution there.
Those devoted to justice and the punishment of war criminals should hope that Israel's courts won't uphold Mr.
Demjanjuk's death sentence on this confused record.


Review/Theater; Young Lincoln Pursues His Passions
Question: What's better than a lively musical with a love story?
Answer: A lively musical with two love stories.
The example that makes the point is "Young Abe Lincoln," the highly commendable Theaterworks/USA production at the Promenade Theater, which deserves to be a magnet for children.


Teachers' Unions Will Discuss a Merger
The National Education Association, the nation's largest teachers' union, has voted to begin merger talks with its longtime rival, the American Federation of Teachers.
The vote, which had been expected, came by show of hands at the N.E.A.'s annual convention here over the weekend.
The merger talks are expected to last one year; at next year's convention, in New Orleans, N.E.A. delegates are to vote by secret ballot on any proposal that comes out of the discussions.
There is to be a one-year moratorium on disputes between local affiliates of the two unions over representing school employees in labor negotiations.


Yankees Are Moving! Up on Toronto
While the bantering continues among politicians, fans and team executives about the possibility of the Yankees moving out of the Bronx and to a better location, the Yankees have moved into a posh district of the American League East.
They were one game behind first-place Toronto as they prepared to face the Mariners at the Kingdome tonight.
Any Yankee fan who checked the standing after 83 games last July would have spotted the Yankees sputtering toward the All-Star Game break with a 41-42 record, 11 games behind Toronto.
One year later, the Yankees have improved by six games (47-36), the defending World Series champion Blue Jays have proven to be mortal and the gap between the teams is one tiny game.


Confirmation of Judge Could Be Stalled
A Long Island man nominated by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to become a State Supreme Court justice lost an election against Senator Michael J. Tully Jr. last year and subsequently filed a lawsuit related to the Senator's publicly financed mailings during the campaign.
Mr.
Cuomo said tonight that he did not learn of the suit until recently.
But it could imperil the nomination of Michael J. Siris, a Democrat from Manhasset, which must be confirmed by the Senate.
Had he known of Mr.
Siris's lawsuit, the Governor said, he would not have sent the nomination to the Senate on June 30 because he would not want it to appear that he was trying to embarrass Senator Tully, an influential Nassau Republican.


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Richard C. Rogers; Times Executive, 71
Richard C. Rogers, who directed real-estate activities for The New York Times Company for 17 years until he retired in 1985, died on Sunday in an automobile accident at Horse Shoe, N.C.
He was 71 and had moved to Hendersonville, N.C., six months ago, after being a longtime resident of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
He was fatally injured on impact, said his son Stephen.


Sheik Hospitalized At Federal Prison
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Islamic fundamentalist whose followers have been linked to two bombing conspiracies in New York City, was hospitalized with "higher than average" blood-sugar levels at the Federal prison where he has been held since Friday.
A spokesman for the Bureau of Prisons said the sheik, who has diabetes and high blood pressure, was hospitalized at the prison in Otisville, 72 miles northwest of New York.
The spokesman said he was "not aware of any life-threatening condition."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Coke takes a bearish approach to its new winter campaign.
THE Coca-Cola Company has more news that Madison Avenue might find hard to, you should pardon the expression, bear.
It was bad enough, traditional agencies have growled, that a Hollywood talent agency wrested creative control over the Coke brand's 1993 global advertising campaign from McCann-Erickson Worldwide, its longtime shop.
Now the soft-drink giant says it intends to make one of the commercials from that unorthodox campaign the centerpiece of its winter marketing plans.


Finance Chief Is Appointed At BellSouth
The BellSouth Corporation, the nation's largest regional Bell company in revenue, announced the appointment yesterday of Earle Mauldin, who has headed its thriving cellular telephone business, as its new chief financial officer and executive vice president.
The company also announced the appointment of William F. Reddersen, 45, as senior vice president-broadband strategies, overseeing planning for advanced telecommunications methods.
Mark L. Fiedler, 37, was elected vice president-corporate development.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Long Island Lighting Co., Hicksville, L.I., is offering through Lehman Brothers $145 million of 6.25 percent debentures due in 2001 at 98.949 to yield 6.42 percent.
The noncallable debentures are rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
McDonald's Corp., Oak Brook, Ill., is offering through Salomon Brothers $200 million of 7.375 percent debentures due in 2033 at 99.578 to yield 7.408 percent.
Callable in 10 years, the debentures are rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps Corp.


Corrections
A picture in Business Day on Monday showing Louis Rossetto, editor and publisher of Wired magazine, carried an incorrect credit.
The photographer was Diana Cheren.


Gold Rush of '93
Gold has been growing popular lately.
Some analysts point to rising commodity futures as the cause, while others argue the rise reflects uncertainty over stocks and bonds.
But these times may seem less uncertain when one considers where gold was 10 years ago, despite yesterday's post-Persian Gulf war high of $391.65 an ounce (spot price).


Corrections
An article on Saturday about burglary charges against teen-age girls in Montclair, N.J., referred incorrectly to another legal case involving Montclair teen-agers.
Several boys have been charged with sexual abuse of a 14-year-old girl who lived in the house that was reportedly burglarized.
The boys were not charged with rape.


No Headline
"The major controversy is whether the medical consequences of chicken pox are serious enough to warrant a major vaccination effort, whether chicken pox is worth preventing." -- DR.
WALTER ORENSTEIN of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  [ A1:1. ]


More Power to the Tribes
The nation tunes in to Indian issues only when there is a crisis like the mysterious illness plaguing the Navajo reservation in Arizona.
Or when Donald Trump files a lawsuit to stop Indian gaming.
Or when a movie like "Dances with Wolves" attracts movie stars lamenting the plight of our reservations.
Indian reservations are among the poorest areas in the United States: 93,000 Indians are homeless or have inadequate housing, according to the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Of the 1.8 million Native Americans, 603,000 live below the poverty line.


Metropolitan Diary
THE CATSKILLS Before the ink on your  Report card was dry; your  Mother's hair was teased  At least three inches; and  Your father checked the tires  On the Studebaker you were ready  To go.
The only air on this four-hour  Trip came from four open windows  And the paper fan you made while  You waited to arrive at the Red  Apple Rest.
You gave up teasing your brother  About halfway there because you  Knew he'd be eating at the kids'  Table and there was always the chance  That one of those summers you would  Have a grownup memory to bring home.
ELLEN FUCHS
. . .
Dear Diary:
My fiance and I had just attended the penultimate performance of "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," Frank McGuinness's play about three men held hostage in Lebanon.
As we were leaving the theater, we were approached by a young man handing out samples of cologne.
The fragrance?
Calvin Klein's Escape, of course.
BETHANY SMITH
. . .


United Jewish Appeal Usually Flies El Al
To the Editor:
"Jewish Lobbyist Ousted for Slurs" (news article, June 29) includes a quotation that misrepresents the United Jewish Appeal in very fundamental ways.
First, it is untrue that the United Jewish Appeal doesn't like to use El Al Israel Airlines.


'92 German Vintage Is Drawing Notice
"WAIT, I have something to show you," Fritz Hasselbach said in February at a New York tasting of German wines from 1990 and 1991.
He knelt behind his table and took out a bottle of 1992 Nackenheimer Rothenberg riesling kabinett.
One sip, another and quickly, a third.
The aroma was wonderful.
The wine was saturated with the flavor of apples and peaches.
It had depth.
It was spicy -- lovely.


Costly School Overhaul for Massachusetts
All three branches of government are in rare agreement about the state of public education in Massachusetts: inadequate.
But there is no unanimity on where to find the money to fix it.
Last month the state's highest court became the 12th in the nation to order lawmakers to devise a plan to close the financial gap between the wealthiest and poorest school systems.
In the same week, Gov.
William F. Weld, a Republican, signed a $1.3 billion measure adopted by the Democratic-controlled Legislature to raise spending in the poorer districts to $5,550 per student by the year 2000.


Casino Resource Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ITEMS ON TITANIC BROUGHT TO U.S.
Deep-sea salvors sailed into Norfolk, Va., last week with about 800 artifacts newly raised from the sunken hulk of the Titanic, prompting accusations that they are violating the spirit of Federal legislation that sought to make the shipwreck a memorial to the more than 1,500 victims of the sinking.
They vigorously denied that charge and any hint of impropriety, saying their work honors the dead.
"When you go down there and see what's going on, you realize all this history is going to be lost," Arnie Geller, president of RMS Titanic Inc., a New York company that is salvaging the Titanic, said yesterday in an interview.


Lend Russia Money and a Tough Accountant
To the Editor:
In "Waffling and Wavering on Russian Aid" (Op-Ed, June 27), Dimitri Simes is unhappy with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund for refusing "to relax their loan requirements" and the I.M.F. director for "stonewalling on Russian aid." He recommends that the Group of Seven set up a "public-and-private entity on the model of the Marshall Plan," presumably with less stringent criteria, for shaping Russian aid.


At $14.5 Million, Bledsoe Is a Patriot
Drew Bledsoe interrupted his own real-life version of Route 66, abandoning a Ford Surburban full of buddies in Sioux Falls, S.D., to fly to Boston for a business appointment that made him one of the wealthiest quarterbacks in the National Football League.
Bledsoe, the quarterback from Washington State University and the No. 1 pick in the 1993 college draft, signed a contract with the Patriots yesterday that was reportedly worth $14.5 million over six years, including a $4.5 million signing bonus.


River Shippers Squirm As Profits Wash Away
Capt.
Bill Ohlendorf peered out the window of the towboat wheelhouse today as another storm gathered over this river city in the southeastern corner of Iowa.
The bruise-colored clouds were dropping sheets of water into the Mississippi River, which was already too big for its bed.
Captain Ohlendorf, aboard the Mary L, shook his head.
"I'm ready to ride," he said.
"It's harder doing nothing like this than going up and down the river, doing my job."


Does New York Need a 'Public Advocate'?
To the Editor:
Andrew Stein's withdrawal from the race for New York City's Public Advocate (news article, June 30) makes it appropriate to ask, "What do we need a Public Advocate for?"


China in Pact to Help Iran Build A-Plant
Iran and China signed an agreement Sunday to build a nuclear power plant near Teheran, Etellat newspaper reported today.
In a joint statement issued by the official Iranian press agency, IRNA, Chinese officials said it was "the dawn of a new era of commercial and technical cooperation" for the two countries.


Review/Film; An American Satire, Transplanted
For satire to be effective there must be some idea of what is being satirized.
Disconnected from any particular reality, satire becomes merely a demonstration of eccentric behavior, which is a fairly accurate description of "Barjo," the new French comedy opening today at the Film Forum.
The film's provenance is impressive.
It was directed by Jerome Boivin and written by him with Jacques Audiard.
They had collaborated on the ghoulishly funny "Baxter," a first-person (first-dog?) account of the rise and fall of a dirty-white bull terrier in search of the perfect master.
Like the exemplary "Baxter," which was inspired by a novel by the American writer Ken Greenhall, the new film has as its source material an involving, seriously lunatic American novel, "Confessions of a Crap Artist" (1975) by Philip K. Dick, who died in 1982.


Olive A. Beech, 89, Retired Head of Beech Aircraft
Olive A. Beech, a leader in the aviation industry and a co-founder and chairwoman of the Beech Aircraft Company, died yesterday at her home in Wichita, Kan., at the age of 89, her family said.
Under her leadership, Beech Aircraft became a leading manufacturer of private airplanes for general aviation, including propeller, turbo-prop and jet planes.
It also won missile and space contracts.


Lincoln Capital reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Pollution-Curbing Plan Is Set in Albany
Faced with the threat of losing $1 billion in Federal transportation funds, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders agreed today on a plan intended to reduce air pollution in New York City and its suburbs sharply by 1996.
Once signed into law, the agreement between Mr.
Cuomo and legislators will give state agencies broad new powers to curb smog and other forms of air pollution in the New York City metropolitan area, primarily by encouraging more commuters to join carpools or use mass transit and by stiffening enforcement measures against smokestack industries.


Drug Industry Musters a Coalition To Oppose a Change in Medicaid
It looked like a consumer organization, and it seemed to spring up spontaneously to fight a provision of the pending budget bill that it said would condemn poor people to inferior medical care.
The group, calling itself the Coalition for Equal Access to Medicines, is an unusual union of poor people, minority members and public health advocates, but it did not come together effortlessly.
It was created and financed by another interest group, one with perhaps the biggest stake in the outcome: the prescription drug industry.


Mercury Finance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Victims of Chance in Deadly Rampage
When a gunman began his shooting spree in the halls of the Pettit &amp; Martin law firm here last Thursday, his first victims were Jack Berman and Jody Jones Sposato, who were trying to do what the gunman himself apparently thought he was trying to do: fight the system.
Colleagues say Mr.
Berman, a lawyer with Bronson, Bronson &amp; McKinnon, had worked hard to persuade his firm to spend less time defending corporations and more time helping people fight former employers.
Ms.
Sposato's case was one of the first in his campaign.


An End to Nuclear Testing
For nearly half a century, test explosions in the Nevada desert were a reverberating reminder of cold war insecurity.
Now the biggest worry is nuclear proliferation, not the Soviet threat.
That's why President Clinton has quietly decided to extend the moratorium on tests of nuclear arms for at least 15 months.
To persuade nuclear have-nots to stay out of the bomb-making business, it makes more sense to halt testing and try to get others to do likewise than to conduct more demonstrations of America's deterrent power.


Why Just Drive, When You Can Fax, Dial, Shave, Eat and Brush?
In the 11 years he has spent patroling California's freeways, Officer John Marinez of the California Highway Patrol has seen more than his share of fender benders and high-speed chases.
But the day he saw a driver use her left hand to hold a bowl and her right hand to scoop cereal into her mouth he thought his eyes were playing tricks on him.
Officer Marinez recalled his reaction when he watched the woman's measured driving.
"I turned to my partner and asked, 'Did you see that?' " he said.
"I asked him how she could drive like that, and he shrugged and said, 'With her knees.' "


Allied Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Critic's Notebook; About the New Labels On TV Violence: Meanings and Motives
Appropriately, the announcement last week that the nation's four broadcast networks would henceforth stick parental warnings on programs they deem excessively violent was delivered in the form of a television special.
An hourlong news conference, carried by CNN, featured Thomas Murphy, who heads Capital Cities/ ABC; Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS Broadcast Group; Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment, and George Vrandenburg, the executive vice president of Fox Broadcasting.
Together for the first time!
They were led by Jack Valenti, the enduring spokesman for the Motion Picture Association of America, and introduced by Senator Paul Simon, the Illinois Democrat, and Representative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat, who have taken the lead in focusing Congressional interest on television violence.
Everyone congratulated everyone else and themselves for the new initiative.


Byrd Goes Electronic, Lands Job With CBS
The remarkable recovery of Dennis Byrd from partial paralysis yesterday earned the former Jets defensive end a new job as a pro football analyst for CBS Sports.
Byrd received a one-year contract for a modest sum to analyze six games during the upcoming National Football League season and to appear in CBS's "The N.F.L. Today" studio an unspecified number of times.


Italian-Style Sauce in 30 Minutes
TOMATO sauce, Italian style, brings to mind slowly simmering tomatoes and seasonings that send irresistible aromas through the house.
Makers of commercially prepared sauces promise they've done all the simmering and will save you lots of time.
But if you are willing to spend a half-hour on an entire dinner, you can have a sauce far better than anything that comes in a jar or a can.


In Display of Unity, School Panel Backs An Insurgent Leader
Just months ago, she was vilified by her foes as a leader of the "Gang of Four," the ideologues representing narrow partisan interests who had seized control of the Board of Education and unceremoniously dumped New York's reform-minded Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez.
But yesterday, in a brief meeting in the marbled great hall of the board's headquarters, Carol A. Gresser, a onetime parents school volunteer from Queens, was re-elected president of the school board, with the unanimous support of her six colleagues.


Decline in Stocks Continues As Dow Moves Down 34.04
After idling all morning, the Dow Jones industrial average slipped into gear -- reverse -- and resumed the trip it began Friday, losing 34.04 points to finish trading yesterday at 3,449.93.
Across the board, leading market indicators fell.
Analysts attributed the Dow's plunge in part to fears of rising prices and interest rates caused by the surge in commodities markets.


Graf Is Out With Foot Injury
STEFFI GRAF, winner of her fifth Wimbledon title Sunday, will be out of action for at least two weeks with a foot injury, her doctor said yesterday.
She could miss the Federation Cup in Germany this month and her status for the United States Open next month is also uncertain.
Graf's incapacitation means that the top two women's tennis players are now out with injuries with no one sure when they will return.
No. 2 MONICA SELES is still recovering from a stab wound suffered at a tournament in Hamburg, Germany, on April 30.


Book Notes; One Picasso, Two Writers And an Editor on the Spot
Norman Mailer has long been fascinated by Pablo Picasso, and so it seemed like a natural fit when the renowned author set out, he says, to write a biography of the renowned artist for his editor at Random House, Jason Epstein.
But there were a couple of difficulties, the most pressing among them being that Mr.
Epstein happened, quite awkwardly, to be the editor of another biographer, John Richardson, who is working on a four-volume series on Picasso.
Mr.
Richardson's exhaustive dissection of the artist's early years, "A Life of Picasso: Volume I, 1881-1906," achieved both critical and commercial success several years ago.
"I was apprehensive and told Norman that there might be a problem," Mr.
Epstein said.


Yankees Are Moving! Up on Toronto
While the bantering continues among politicians, fans and team executives about the possibility of the Yankees moving out of the Bronx and to a better location, the Yankees have moved into a posh district of the American League East.
They were one game behind first-place Toronto as they prepared to face the Mariners at the Kingdome tonight.
Any Yankee fan who checked the standing after 83 games last July would have spotted the Yankees sputtering toward the All-Star Game break with a 41-42 record, 11 games behind Toronto.
One year later, the Yankees have improved by six games (47-36), the defending World Series champion Blue Jays have proven to be mortal and the gap between the teams is one tiny game.


Roadway Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Kelly Critical of Remarks by Head of Police Union
In a rare rebuke of the leader of the largest police union, the New York City Police Commissioner yesterday assailed Phil Caruso for remarks critical of the Mayor that the Commissioner said politicized the Police Department by "dragging" it into the mayoral race.
The Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, who has been on good terms with Mr.
Caruso, the president of the 20,000-member Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, said he was disappointed in the statements Mr.
Caruso had made on Sunday on WNBC's "News Forum."


Accord in Albany On Clean-Air Plan
Faced with the threat of losing $1 billion in Federal transporation money, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders agreed on a plan intended to reduce air pollution in New York City and its suburbs sharply by 1996.
Once signed into law, the agreement between Mr.
Cuomo and legislators will give state agencies broad new powers to curb smog and other forms of air pollution in the New York City metropolitan area.


Profit Up 55% at Advanced Micro Devices
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reported yesterday that net income increased 55 percent in the second quarter from the corresponding period a year earlier, largely because of strong sales of microprocessors for advanced personal computers.
The company, the sixth-largest semiconductor maker, began selling the more powerful 486-generation microprocessor two months ago.
But the profit of $64.4 million, or 65 cents a share, did not meet Wall Street expectations of 67 cents a share.
Shares of Advanced Micro Devices closed yesterday at $23.25, down 62.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Modatech Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton pressed for trade concessions with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan, but also began building relationships with the political renegades trying to overthrow Mr.
Miyazawa and his party.  [ Page A1. ]
The resurgent yen has angered Japan's exporters about as much as it has pleased the Clinton Administration.
But some American executives and trade experts are warning that the strong-yen policy could backfire by making it too expensive for non-Japanese businesses to build operations in Japan.  [ D1. ]


Jersey City Lures 3 Tenants To Waterfront Development
In a display of competitiveness that was both economic and political, New Jersey officials said today that they had lured three new tenants and almost 400 jobs from New York City to a sparsely occupied office development on the Hudson River waterfront here.
The announcement continued a pattern of interstate rivalry for jobs that intensified last fall, when the First Chicago Corporation agreed to move 1,000 employees from lower Manhattan to Newport Tower, a 36-story building with a breathtaking view of the World Trade Center towers.


Layne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Harrison E. Salisbury, 84, Author and Reporter, Dies
Harrison E. Salisbury, a dashing Pulitzer Prize-winning correspondent for The New York Times who roamed some of the world's most inaccessible places and later became a top editor and prolific author, died Monday morning in a car that his wife was driving outside Providence, R.I.
He was 84 and lived in Taconic, Conn.
The cause was a sudden heart attack, said his wife, Charlotte Y. Salisbury, who added that her husband had a history of heart problems.


A Fitting Close For Boxing At Garden
There was no one on hand named Sugar or Rocky at Madison Square Garden yesterday.
Instead, there was a fighter named Kevin Kelley, and if anyone wonders what the difference is between the days when boxing was big-time in New York and now, you need look no farther than Kelley.
The brash Kelley was trying to go out in style as the Garden staged its last pre-fight gabfest for one of its own promotions.
It is closing down its own boxing department after a card tomorrow night.
Only independent promoters will bring the sport into the main arena or the boutique Paramount Theater six floors below, where this card will be presented.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MCDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC., New Orleans, an energy services company, said its Babcock &amp; Wilcox division had won a $123 million contract from Taiwan Power Co. to supply a sulfur scrubber for the utility's Taichung Station in central Taiwan.


John Robert Castro; C.I.A. Agent, 71
John Robert Castro, an electronic communications specialist and retired agent of the Central Intelligence Agency, died on Sunday at the HCA Reston Hospital in Reston, Va.
He was 71 and lived in Reston.
His son Frank said the cause was a heart attack.


Paychex Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Canada's Leader Enters Global Arena
Less than two weeks into her administration, Kim Campbell, the first woman to become Prime Minister of Canada, has a dream photo opportunity in Tokyo as the newest kid on the block of the Group of Seven.
Although she hopes to be around for many more summit meetings, her chief political opponent, the Liberal Party leader, Jean Chretien, quips that she merely has a "summer job" until the elections that must be called by fall.


Mets Leave Johnson Feeling Uneasy
Howard Johnson never imagined his Mets' career reaching this point.
His manager, Dallas Green, is publicly questioning his ability and his future value to this club or any other.
There is no one in management he feels comfortable approaching about his current status, or his future.
So many of the faces on the field are strangers, with several of his friends and former teammates having departed Shea Stadium via free agency or trades.
It is enough, Johnson said yesterday, to give him a general sense of uneasiness about his life with this ball club, despite his nine seasons in New York.
He can feel it on the field, in the clubhouse, even at home with his wife -- who is nervously wondering where she will be living after her husband becomes a free agent this fall.


Accounts
*
Prudential Securities, New York, said yesterday that it had narrowed a review of its $20 million account to three agencies, confirming reports in Advertising Age and Adweek.
The finalists are the incumbent, Lowe &amp; Partners, New York; DDB Needham New York, and Deutsch/Dworin, New York.
A decision is expected by next month.


Sampras to Play McEnroe
The Wimbledon champion, PETE SAMPRAS, will play JOHN McENROE on July 18 in a special benefit exhibition preceding the Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J.
Sampras defeated JIM COURIER in the Wimbledon final Sunday to retain his No. 1 world ranking.
The 21-year-old Californian is only the second player to win the United States Open and Wimbledon before his 22d birthday.


New Status for Stylish Art of Braiding
Aminata Khafra sat in the sparsely furnished living room of her row house in northwest Washington making braids in the carefully parted hair of a young girl, a friend's daughter.
Ms.
Khafra was slowly transforming 10-year-old Shannon Gopoul's hair into a "singles" style, in which at least a hundred tiny braids hang down from the scalp and rest gently on the shoulders.
The style, which took five hours to complete, is one of seven that Ms.
Khafra, 28, said she had learned by watching her cousins as a girl in Mali.


Very Few Standouts So Far
When the midterm report cards are issued in baseball during the break for the All-Star Game next week, you can figure that the Philadelphia Phillies and San Francisco Giants will be leading the class in the National League, and a half-dozen teams will be close in the American.
The Yankees should go home with a high grade (A-) and the Mets with a low grade (F).
But in horse racing, the midterm report cards aren't nearly so precise.
There is no dominant horse this year, not even a public-relations monster like Arazi a year ago.


In Times Square, Art Conquers Kung Fu
"Hey you," purrs the voice that issues from a pair of giant red lips projected onto a screen inside the entrance to the old Rialto Theater in Times Square.
"Hey you, want to buy a place in heaven?"
While Times Square has hardly been a mecca for those seeking redemption, the 42d Street Art Project is out to change all that.
Starting tomorrow, the predominantly vacant strip of former kung fu and pornography theaters along West 42d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues will be transformed into a public art exhibition featuring the works of more than two dozen American artists, architects and designers.
The seductive lips, for example, are the work of the team of Liz Diller and Ric Scofidio.
Among the other artists involved are John Ahearn, Karen Finley and Jenny Holzer.


David Paley, a Retired Editor, Dies at 90
David Paley, a retired senior editor of Parade magazine and associate arts editor at The New York Herald Tribune, died on Sunday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale.
He was 90 and a resident of Manhattan before moving to Riverdale in the Bronx several months ago.
His daughter, Maggie, said he died of cardiorespiratory failure.


U.S.-Egypt Ties Are Strained In Detention of Islamic Cleric
Relations between the United States and Egypt, once the linchpin of American policy in the Arab world, have sharply deteriorated over a number of disputes that culminated with the detention of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, whom Egyptian officials condemn as a "creation" of Washington.
Three years ago, President Hosni Mubarak played the crucial role in assembling George Bush's coalition to fight Iraq in the Persian Gulf war by serving as host for an Arab summit meeting here that cracked the myth of Arab solidarity.


Their Quest Is a Job -- Not a Number


CLINTON COURTING REBEL LAWMAKERS ON TRIP TO JAPAN
Landing in the midst of Japan's political turmoil, President Clinton set out Tuesday to build relationships with a new generation of politicians trying to overthrow the party that has ruled Japan for four decades.
And this morning, in a speech at one of the country's leading universities, he sought to enlist the Japanese people to lower trade barriers for their own good and prosperity.
In a toughly worded address to students at Waseda University, Mr.
Clinton outlined his strategy for relations with Asia but also argued that Japan's high prices and restrictive practices had "hurt Japanese consumers." He told the audience, mostly students, that major changes in the country's trading system "would benefit both of us," and argued that "you have a common cause with the people of America."  [ Excerpts, page A8. ]


Marseilles Official Charged
The general manager of the Olympique Marseilles soccer club was charged with corruption yesterday, becoming the fifth person charged in what authorities have said was a bribery and match-fixing plot involving Europe's championship club.
JEAN-PIERRE BERNES was charged with "active corruption" for what prosecutors said was an attempt to bribe three Valenciennes players to play below par in a May 20 match so that Marseilles could save its energy for a Champions Cup match with AC Milan of Italy six days later.


Review/Music; Two Versions of the Sound of the Melting Pot
To mark Independence Day, Summerstage celebrated the all-American melting pot, and some indissoluble ethnic lumps, with a musically incongruous but exhilarating double bill of immigrants' music on Sunday afternoon.
Black 47 represented New York's young Irish immigrants.
And the clarinetist Don Byron led a 10-member klezmer band in music by Mickey Katz, the clarinetist, composer and arranger whose comedy songs were hits from 1947 to the mid-1950's.
Most of the music was lighthearted (though Black 47 started with earnestly political songs) and vigorously entertaining.
But behind it was an inventory of immigrant survival strategies, between assimilation and insularity.
Songs by Katz, who died in 1985, and by Black 47's Larry Kirwan rally their respective ethnic groups with inside jokes and musical echoes of the old country, while facing outsiders with a laugh, a partial explanation and touches of American music.
They toy with stereotypes -- drunken Irish, herring-loving Jews -- and, lest they appear presumptuous, conceal their own ingenuity.


Settlement Houses Open Summer Camp for the Season


Bridge
Bridge is one of the few competitive activities in which high-level performances are possible as you grow older.
Ian McCance, a 65-year-old lecturer in physiology who represented Australia in a world championship a quarter-century ago, did some brilliant card reading on the diagrammed deal.
It was played in a tournament in Queensland earlier this year and was reported by Dick Cummings.
North-South should have reached four spades but failed to bid that suit, perhaps because East's take-out double suggested a bad split in that suit.
They reached a precarious five diamonds and West led the spade deuce, a conspicuous singleton.
McCance as South won with the spade ace, drew trumps ending in his hand, and did some thinking.


CHRONICLE
MAGEE HICKEY, a television news reporter and co-anchor of the weekend "Today in New York" shows on WNBC, and her husband, RICHOLSON SALEMBIER, are giving a party this evening for RICHARD OSTERWEIL, a painter known mainly for his talents as a party crasher.
Mr.
Osterweil, who also checks coats at Cafe des Artistes ("but not now because there are no coats," he said), has become so skilled at crashing that he now gets more invitations than he can handle.
"That is depressing because it has taken most of the fun out of it," he said yesterday.
Tonight's party, though, is not likely to depress him.
It is being given because Mr.
Osterweil has agreed to sell the couple an 8-by-4-foot panorama of Venice done in the style of Canaletto and titled "Judy Goes to Venice."


Doctors Weigh the Costs Of a Chicken Pox Vaccine
Ever since vaccines have consigned measles, mumps, rubella and polio to the history books, chicken pox has been the only major childhood illness that parents weather with their children.
Now, a chicken pox vaccine that has proved both safe and 97 percent effective in trials in children may be about to enter the United States market.
But as eager parents await news of its release, doctors and Federal officials are hesitating about whether to use it.


Agency Plots Future After Account Loss
Martin, Davis, Omon &amp; Partners, which opened as Omon New York Ltd. in 1989, is pondering its future after the loss of its large Toyota corporate advertising account.
Joanne M. Davis, the president of the agency, disputed a report this week in the newsletter The Delaney Report that the agency had gone out of business.
She said yesterday that its future was being evaluated, adding that billings, once as high as $25 million, had dropped below $5 million and the number of employees, once as high as 19, was now "a handful."


American's Drop in Traffic Sends Airline Stocks Lower
Stocks of several major airlines fell yesterday, apparently on news that American Airlines' traffic dropped 3 percent in June from the 8.9 billion revenue passenger miles flown a year earlier.
Some erosion had been expected, since fare price cuts this summer are not comparable to last year's half-price sale.
But analysts say investors seem to have reacted to the failure of either leisure or business traffic to bounce back.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the White House's report on the dismissal of seven employees of its travel office misattributed a statement about the investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Bureau officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said no criminal wrongdoing had been uncovered so far.
Officially, the agency has not commented on the progress of the inquiry.


Mariners Make Abbott Feel Ancient
The Jim Abbott saga continued tonight, his suspect pitching filling the Yankees with doubt just when they thought he might have righted himself.
There was little that went right for Abbott or for the Yankees, whose flirtation with first place in the American League East must wait another day.
The Yankees knew that a victory over the Mariners and a Toronto loss to Chicago would nudge them into a first-place tie this late in the season for the first time since 1988.
They watched the Blue Jays-White Sox game in their clubhouse before batting practice, but were quickly disappointed by the first inning of their contest because the Jays broke their five-game losing streak and assured themselves of remaining in first for another night.


High Court Nominee Defends Judges' Use of Broad Powers
Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, President Clinton's nominee to the Supreme Court, says disputes over "judicial activism" arise when the courts are forced to resolve issues that lawmakers are too timid to handle.
In written answers to a questionnaire from the Senate Judiciary Committee, which released them today, Judge Ginsburg said judges who, for example, take over public school districts to enforce desegregation rulings or order mental hospitals to insure patients' rights, do so with great reluctance.


Harleysville Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amrep Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Food Notes
Something's Baking
A new organization for people interested in baking, Bakers Dozen East, is planning its first event for July 26.
Betty Fussell, the author of "The Story of Corn" (Knopf, 1992, $30), is to give a presentation on cornmeal at 6 P.M. at the Mark Hotel, 25 East 77th Street, Manhattan.
Admission is $20.
Bakers Dozen East is a fairly informal group -- no official whisks or rolling pins -- patterned after Bakers Dozen, a group organized by Marion Cunningham and Flo Braker in the San Francisco area.
A number of professional bakers, pastry chefs, baking teachers and cookbook authors have already agreed to join Bakers Dozen East, which as yet has no rules, dues or other formalities.
The group is open to nonprofessionals interested in sharing information about baking.


Make Me an Offer, Mr. Dinkins
Dear Mayor Dinkins,
First, I wish you good luck in the coming negotiations to keep the Yankees in New York City.
Also, congratulations on your success in preventing Mastercard International from moving to the suburbs.
In this era of flight from the city, the presence of such institutions remains a source of pride for all New Yorkers.


AT LUNCH WITH: Mickey Rooney; At 73, Still the Star, Still the Child
LET everyone else in the world spend time and money trying to free his inner child.
Mickey Rooney's is already free.
You might even say it needs a spanking.
Listen:
"My autobiography, 'Life Is Too Short,' got to be No. 5 on the best-seller lists and Random House sold the rights in England for all of $10,000. Can you believe that? So I wouldn't do anything for them, no promotion, nothing. My original title for the book was 'Me.' But then they called and said Katie Hepburn wanted to call her book 'Me,' so I let her.


U.N. Said to Reject Hearing on Iraqi Compliance
The United Nations has rejected an Iraqi request to present evidence that it is complying with the terms of the agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war, the Iraqi delegate to the United Nations said today.
The Iraqi Government had asked the United Nations to hear a Government delegation give an account of Iraq's compliance with the Security Council resolutions on eliminating its weapons of mass destruction before allowing a United Nations weapons inspection team to carry out a crucial task in its monitoring program, installing a camera at a missile testing site.


S.E.C. Said to Seek Large Prudential Fine
Federal regulators are seeking at least $350 million in fines and penalties from Prudential Securities to settle charges of securities law violations stemming from the firm's practices in selling limited partnerships during the 1980's, people with knowledge of the talks said.
Negotiations over the settlement have been hectic but fluid, and the cost of fines and penalties could reach as much as $400 million under the terms being discussed, these people said.


Lend Russia Money and a Tough Accountant; Friend of Foreign Aid
To the Editor:
A June 23 article on foreign aid states that the "House leadership was able to persuade their counterparts on the Republican side, including the minority leader, Robert H. Michel, and the minority whip, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, to support" the foreign aid bill.


World Bank Reports Major Health Gains for Poor
Since 1960, life expectancy at birth in developing countries has soared to 63 years from 46 and the number of children who die before their fifth birthday has dropped by two-thirds, the World Bank reported here today.
The startling gains have come from wider availability of basic public health measures like treating diarrheal disease with oral fluids and standard immunizations that now save about 3 million lives each year.
Such measures have narrowed the gap between poor and rich countries in health, unlike that for income.


Prep Schools and Minorities: A Place at the Table
When Elizabeth Fernandez arrived at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., three years ago, she found some things she had never encountered -- things like cauliflower, chicken Kiev and volleyball.
Life at the 500-acre campus, with its endless green sweep of lawns and playing fields, drew her intimidatingly far from her roots in Washington Heights in Manhattan, where her Dominican parents cooked red beans and rice and she and her friends played handball against buildings.


ConAgra Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to May 30


METRO DIGEST
EDUCATION BOARD CHIEF RE-ELECTED
In a brief public meeting in the marbled great hall of the Board of Education's Brooklyn headquarters, Carol A. Gresser, a one-time parents' association president from Queens, was re-elected president of the board, with unanimous support from her colleagues.
A1.
A MALEVOLENT RITUAL AT MANY POOLS
They call it "the whirlpool," and pool officials and regular swimmers say it has become a common, if malevolent, ritual of these sweltering summer days at many of New York city's municipal pools.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Investigators Say Cause of Blimp Crash May Be Weeks Away


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Year to April 30


Iowa Women's Coach Signs
Iowa women's basketball coach, VIVIAN STRINGER, who guided the Hawkeyes to their first Final Four appearance this year, has signed a new five-year contract.


Gooden's Bases-Loaded Triple Spearheads Mets' Hit Parade
Doc Gooden enjoys throwing strikes and setting down batters, and he loves shutouts and complete games and all of that stuff.
He likes it most, though, when the Mets' bats are on fire -- especially when one of those bats belongs to him.


New York Court Prohibits Hasidic Public School
New York's highest court ruled yesterday that a special school district set up by the State Legislature to accommodate Hasidic Jews "inescapably conveys a message of endorsement of religion" and is therefore unconstitutional.
The Court of Appeals, in a 4 to 2 decision, rejected the Legislature's 1989 solution to the thorny problem of how to provide services to handicapped youngsters in the Orange County village of Kiryas Joel, where nearly all the residents belong to the Satmar Hasidic sect.


A Menacing Ritual Is Called Common in New York Pools
They call it "the whirlpool," and pool employees and regular swimmers say it has become a common, if malevolent, ritual of these sweltering summer days at some of New York City's municipal pools.
Groups of teen-age boys lock arms and shoulders and move in circles through the expanse of blue, churning the cool, chlorinated water, chanting rap lyrics and fondling girls at will.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Qualifying for Puerto Rico
The first of seven regional qualifiers for the finals of the Rums of Puerto Rico National Club Pro-Am was staged yesterday at Ardsley Country Club in Arsdley, N.Y.
The four-man team headed by Quentin Griffith 3d of the Pennsauken Country Club (N.J.) was the winner, with six other local teams also qualifying for the finals, which will be held Dec. 1-5 at the Hyatt Regency Cerromar Beach Resort in Dorado, P.R.


Restaurants Present Their Signature Dishes, at $3 to $5 a Taste
DAVID RUDINI and Mike Niciforo stood in the sweltering sun on West 46th Street yesterday, each precariously balancing a paper plate heaped with cannelloni filled with vegetables, meat and cheese, and tortellini swimming in cream and Parmesan..
When informed that their $5 plates of pasta normally cost $18 at lunchtime at Barbetta, the two account executives from Deloitte &amp; Touche gulped.


Schrader's Suspension Is Lifted
A three-member panel yesterday lifted the suspensions of the Nascar Winston Cup driver KEN SCHRADER and his car owner, JOE HENDRICK, who were accused of using an illegal carburetor in qualifying for last week's Pepsi 400 race at Daytona International Speedway.
Both had been suspended for four races, beginning with this Sunday's race at Loudon, N.H., after Nascar inspectors found that holes had been drilled in the carburetor and manifold in an effort to get more air past the restrictor plates that were required for the event.


Wine Talk
In buying the prestigious Chateau Latour last week, Francois Pinault became the newest member of an elite group of ambitious French entrepreneurs who have shaken the staid French wine trade down to its world-famous roots.
Mr.
Pinault, 56, bought the Bordeaux chateau through Artemis S.A., a family-owned holding company that controls Printemps, the French department-store chain.
Mr.
Pinault takes his place alongside Claude Bebear, whose insurance group, AXA, owns eight Bordeaux chateaus as well as vineyards in Burgundy and Hungary, and Bernard Arnault, whose luxury-goods conglomerate, LVMH Moet-Hennessy Louis Vuitton, controls seven important Champagne houses, including the largest of all, Moet &amp; Chandon.


Petroleum Helicopters Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Albany Lawmakers Give Up On Hospital Finance Revision
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders conceded defeat tonight in their efforts to forge an agreement on revamping the state's hospital financing system, meaning the Legislature will have to return to Albany in the fall to deal with the issue.
Mr.
Cuomo and the Legislature had negotiated for more than three months over how much money to inject into the hospital system by increasing the state's Medicaid reimbursement rates.
Those rates also regulate payments by commercial insurance companies to hospitals.
The current hospital reimbursement formula, which was enacted three years ago, expires at the end of this year.


Tipper Gore Triumphs in a Personal Campaign
Tipper Gore holds a distinction few can claim: she lost weight during a political campaign.
If you want to know how contrary to the norm that is, just ask Bill Clinton.
Or his staff.
Or any reporter who covers political campaigns.
Those who saw Mrs.
Gore last July as she began campaigning for her husband, Al, could hardly believe their eyes during the Inaugural festivities in January.
There was so much less to see.
Today, Mrs.
Gore has accomplished her goal and is on maintenance.


Part of Toy Account Is Placed in Review
Tyco Toys said yesterday that it had placed a portion of its estimated $60 million account, now at Bozell New York, in review, by seeking a shop to handle creative assignments and media planning for some new and current products.


Review/Television; The Liberal Arts: No Match for Career Training
If the image of liberal education is not enhanced by the four half-hour conversations that begin tonight on "Firing Line," William F. Buckley Jr. has nobody to blame but himself and his guests.
On the first two programs, "What Is Liberal Education?" and "Who Should Be Liberally Educated?," he is joined by Elizabeth T. Kennan, the president of Mount Holyoke College; John Agresto, the president of St.
John's College, and Cornel West, the director of African-American studies at Princeton University.


Maximum Terms for 2 Youths in Red Hook Murder
Two teen-agers convicted of killing Patrick Daly, the elementary school principal caught in crossfire at a Brooklyn housing project, were sentenced to the maximum prison term of 25 years to life yesterday, after Mr.
Daly's widow told of the loss to her family and to the troubled community where her husband had worked.
Madeline Daly told a hushed, packed courtroom of how "the man I loved and who loved me was cruelly and abruptly taken from me" after 23 years of marriage.
The children in his school's Red Hook neighborhood will also feel the loss, she said.
"Who will help them now?" she asked.
"He was always there when they needed him."


14th Body Is Linked to Suspect in Serial Killings, Police Say
The police in Westchester County said last night that they had identified the body of a woman found last December in Yorktown as another victim of Joel Rifkin, who the police call New York's latest serial killer.
The New York State Police said it brought to 14 the number of bodies linked by the police to Mr.
Rifkin, who has confessed to killing 17.
The victim, Mary Katherine Williams, 31, was positively identified yesterday after her dental records were obtained from her father, a dentist in Charlotte, N.C., and checked against the corpse.
Credit cards with her name were found at the home of Mr.
Rifkin last week.


Keith Group of Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Northwest And Pilots In Accord
Northwest Airlines and its pilots' union said yesterday that they had agreed to grant each other broad and deep concessions as part of an effort to keep the carrier from filing for bankruptcy protection.
But none of the conditions will take effect unless the pact is also approved by two other Northwest unions: the machinists and the teamsters.


Apolda Journal; When Laissez-Faire Collides With Just Plain Lazy
When the Communist Government of East Germany collapsed in 1990, Dagmar Alberti saw her chance for success and grabbed it.
Formerly employed in the promotion department of a state-owned hotel, Mrs.
Alberti scraped together enough money for a small computer and began designing ads for businesses here in her hometown.
Now she runs an advertising agency with two offices and five full-time employees.


National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Campus Journal; A College Declared Dead Is Now Quite Clearly Not
When the campus bell rang 149 times in May 1974, the 300-student Cazenovia College in this lakeside hamlet near Syracuse was pronounced dead.
The ringing tolled the years of existence for the two-year women's college.
But today, nearly 20 years later, the college is alive and flourishing, with 1,000 students, male and female, and it could be a model for the growing number of colleges that face financial trouble.
There is wide agreement that the credit goes to Cazenovia's president, Stephen M. Schneeweiss, who was a vice provost at nearby Ithaca College when he was hired in 1975 after a local Committee to Save the College persuaded creditors to give Cazenovia one last chance.


Burials Begin for Victims of Shrine Sinking


Centennial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MTV Film Is Planned
MTV: Music Television, the cable network, and Geffen Pictures announced yesterday that they would team up on a full-length film project, "Joe's Apartment," based on an MTV live-action animated short film.
Geffen Pictures and Warner Brothers will finance the film, and MTV will supervise the development of the script.
In May, MTV, which is owned by Viacom Inc., announced the formation of MTV Productions, whose projects will include films for theatrical release.


Specter of Crown Heights Clings to Dinkins, Even in Israel
On the first full day of his visit to Israel, David N. Dinkins found to his dismay today that you can take the Mayor out of Crown Heights but you cannot take Crown Heights out of the Mayor's agenda.
Before he even sat down to breakfast, Mr.
Dinkins had thrust before him a large advertisement in The Jerusalem Post, an English-language daily, holding him accountable for the racial violence in Crown Heights two years ago and saying that it had smacked of "bigotry, lawlessness and pogroms."


Yankees Are Moving! Up on Toronto
While the bantering continues among politicians, fans and team executives about the possibility of the Yankees moving out of the Bronx and to a better location, the Yankees have moved into a posh district of the American League East.
They were one game behind first-place Toronto as they prepared to face the Mariners at the Kingdome tonight.
Any Yankee fan who checked the standing after 83 games last July would have spotted the Yankees sputtering toward the All-Star Game break with a 41-42 record, 11 games behind Toronto.
One year later, the Yankees have improved by six games (47-36), the defending World Series champion Blue Jays have proven to be mortal and the gap between the teams is one tiny game.


Apple Cutting Its Work Force 16% Worldwide
Under deepening pressure from its personal computer rivals, Apple Computer Inc. confirmed today that it would restructure its operations and slice its work force by 16 percent, or about 2,500 employees worldwide.
The company also said it would take an unspecified charge against its third-quarter earnings, due to be announced next week.
Some analysts predict the charge may be as high as $300 million and will result in a loss for the period.


American Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Film; The Last Unspoiled Bonus Baby
In "Rookie of the Year," a lighter-than-air movie fantasy of major-league stardom, Thomas Ian Nicholas plays 12-year-old Henry Rowengartner, an avid baseball fan who can't catch a fly ball to save himself.
One day while chasing a ball, Henry falls and breaks his right arm.
Four months later, when his cast is removed, he discovers that through a freak of orthopedics, he has developed a 100-mile-an-hour fastball.
In no time, he finds himself the star pitcher for the Chicago Cubs and the team's only hope of winning its first pennant in nearly 50 years.
"Rookie of the Year," which opens today, is a slick featherweight comedy whose paint-by-the-numbers plot has young Henry trying to pair his single mother (Amy Morton) with the Cubs' nearly-over-the-hill pitching idol, Chet Steadman (Gary Busey).
Chet is Henry's only hope in saving his mom from the clutches of her smarmy, unscrupulous boyfriend (Bruce Altman), who appoints himself Henry's agent and schemes to make a fortune by having him endorse soft drinks and sneakers.


Politics and Plunder Mix in South African Violence
Before they chased her away in the name of the African National Congress, the young warriors who invaded Sheila Hadebe's home in this battle-scorched black township did something strange.
They backed up a van, she said, and began demolishing the walls of her house, carting off the bricks for resale.


Sheik Is Put Into Hospital At U.S. Prison
Five days after entering a Federal prison in upstate New York, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Islamic fundamentalist whose followers have been linked to two bombing conspiracies in New York City, was taken to the prison hospital yesterday morning with "higher than average" blood-sugar levels, one of his lawyers said late yesterday afternoon.
Daniel Dunne, a spokesman for the Bureau of Prisons in Washington, confirmed that Mr.
Abdel Rahman, who is 55 years old and blind, was in the small hospital at the Federal prison in Otisville, 72 miles northwest of the city.


Detection Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In America; School Daze
The New York City Board of Education is about to pick a new chancellor to run the school system.
The board tries to do this every few years and most of the time the process is a near-fiasco.
The rest of the time it's a total fiasco.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE flavor of liver is anything but neutral, yet I have found that combining it with assertive sauces can change its character.
For example, it is greatly enhanced by garnishes or sauces that give the finished dish a slightly acid taste: a trace of vinegar, lemon, mustard or, even better, capers.
Capers are among the most underused ingredients in the American pantry.
Most cooks think of them only as an ingredient for salads, as a garnish for stuffed eggs and, occasionally, as an ingredient for sauces for boiled beef.
Few home cooks seem to realize that capers, when cooked in butter or other fat, gain a whole new dimension, as if their flavor has been concentrated.


Books of The Times; The Constitution: Is It Organic or Cast in Stone?
Main Currents in American Legal Thought By Bernard Schwartz 660 pages.
Carolina Academic Press.
In the foreword to "Main Currents in American Thought" in 1930, Vernon L. Parrington wrote, "The point of view from which I have endeavored to evaluate the materials is liberal rather than conservative, Jeffersonian rather than Federalistic." What excited generations of college students was Parrington's notion that the literature of the American people was not purely literary but rather an outgrowth of their environment, ethnic differences and epoch.


Executive Changes
EXOGENE, Monrovia, Calif., a biotechnology company, named Robert E. Leach chairman and chief executive.
GANTOS INC., Grand Rapids, Mich., named L. Douglas Gantos chief operating officer.
Mr.
Gantos, who is also the company chairman and chief executive, replaces Michele Fortune, who resigned as president and chief operating officer and as a company director.


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about lawyers' and scientists' reactions to last week's Supreme Court decision on the reliability of scientific testimony misidentified a commission that has been studying the issue.
The Carnegie Commission on Science, Technology and Government is a nonprofit group that works with the Federal judiciary; it is not a branch of the judiciary.


TAT Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Talks Resume in Strike Against Garbage Haulers
Representatives of striking sanitation workers and private trash hauling companies resumed talks today trying to end a six-day walkout.
The negotiations had been suspended over the long holiday weekend as dozens of New Jersey communities scrambled for alternative ways to dispose of garbage.


Tab Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Florence Cooper, 84, Community Organizer
Florence Cooper, a Manhattan community organizer of child-care and women's-support services, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 84 and lived in Washington Heights.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Genital Herpes Drug Found Safe for Daily Use
THE drug commonly used to treat outbreaks of genital herpes infections can safely be used on a daily basis for years to prevent recurrences of this distressing viral disease, according to a five-year study published recently in Archives of Dermatology.
The highly communicable virus newly infects half a million Americans a year; they join an estimated 30 million Americans who are already infected.
After the first infection, many people experience recurrences at rates that typically vary from once or twice a year to as much as once or twice a month.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Holy Barometer! Hot Bath!
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


9 New Jersey Hospitals Sue Blue Cross Over Ban
Nine hospitals that were excluded from a program of managed medical care filed suit in Federal court here today against Blue Cross-Blue Shield of New Jersey, charging that the program violated antitrust laws.
Blue Cross-Blue Shield, New Jersey's largest health insurer with 2.3 million customers, eventually wants to enroll most of its policyholders in a health maintenance organization.
It announced in April that it had signed up 56 of the state's 85 acute care hospitals for the program; they would provide services at reduced rates in exchange for high patient volume that allows some economy of scale.


AT THE BALL PARK WITH: David Halberstam; Making Legwork (and Edginess) a Virtue
BY the end of the first inning, things are shaping up pretty nicely at Yankee Stadium.
With the sun shining brightly, the home team has scored four runs on four hits, leaving Minnesota's pitcher shellshocked.
Oh, and one more thing.
Mighty Dave Winfield, the Twins' designated hitter, has taken strike three.
This development affords exquisite delight to David Halberstam.
"God, how I love to see that man strike out," he says, cackling softly.


Summer Is Sarajevo's Worst Period Since Winter
In the intensive care unit of the children's clinic at Kosevo Hospital, Selma Sisic lies immobile, eyes closed, her severely burned body swathed in bandages.
She is 8 years old.
Her 12-year-old sister lies close by, also bandaged for the burns suffered when a Serbian incendiary shell engulfed their home in flames on Sunday.
It is touch-and-go whether Selma will live.
Her doctors say it would be a struggle under any circumstances, with third-degree burns to 75 percent of her body.
But there is no standby respirator, no monitor to trace pulse, heartbeat and blood pressure, no autoclave to sterilize medical instruments, no way to sterilize gauzes.


Joseph I. Dirvin, 75; Official at St. John's Wrote About Saints
The Rev.
Joseph I. Dirvin, retired secretary of St.
John's University and biographer of St.
Elizabeth Ann Seton, died on Sunday at St.
Catherine's Infirmary in Philadelphia.
He was 75 and lived on the university's Queens campus until recently.
The cause was heart failure, the university's announcement said.


Books of The Times; The Joy, Art and Understanding of Narrative
The Art of Fiction  By David Lodge 240 pages. Viking. $22.
An example of the fun to be had with David Lodge's "Art of Fiction" is Chapter 32, entitled "Epiphany." Here Mr.
Lodge begins by quoting a paragraph from John Updike's novel "Rabbit, Run" in which Rabbit Angstrom is playing golf with someone named Eccles and hits a ball so perfectly that he is moved to cry out, "That's it!"


Charles Torem Is Dead; Paris Lawyer Was 77
Charles Torem, an American who represented corporate clients while practicing as a lawyer in France, died on Saturday in Paris.
He was 77.
His family said he collapsed on the street near his residence and the cause appeared to be heart failure.


Housing Secretary Carves Out Role As a Lonely Clarion Against Racis
Henry G. Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, has staked out a striking role: that of a Cabinet-level contrarian on the volatile question of race.
In an Administration that has been largely silent on the subject, Mr.
Cisneros has gone out of his way to call racism a driving force behind many social ills, particularly urban poverty.


Drugs, Crime and Punishment; The War On Drugs Is Self-Defeating
In the debate over national drug policy, too many policy makers, unsure of what might work or why, appear to rely upon what seems politically safe: harsher law enforcement based on more prison time.
A nonpartisan Federal Commission on Drugs needs to be formed.
Its object should be to report candidly on the costs, benefits, risks and advantages of present and potential national drug policies.
Such a commission could provide the fact-finding and serious analysis lacking in the political climate surrounding drugs.


MANY LOOSE ENDS MUST BE TIED UP
An agreement to cut tariffs that was heralded here today as a significant achievement still leaves several contentious issues to be resolved before the completion of an accord to lower worldwide barriers to trade.
Officials at the meeting of leaders of the Group of Seven industrial democracies said today that despite its shortcomings, their agreement could end up as the biggest surprise and their most important accomplishment here, breathing new life into trade talks that have dragged on for years.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Stoop to Conquer
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Market Place; What's $400-an-Ounce Gold Called? A Start
Now investors know this gold rally has legs. But how's its stamina?
So far, pretty good.
Spot gold prices flirted with the level of $400 an ounce yesterday for the first time in almost three years, continuing the blistering rally that began in mid-April.


Gerald P. Culkin Is Dead at 87; Judge Ruled on Celebrated Cases
Gerald P. Culkin, a retired New York City judge whose celebrated cases included the "capeman" murderer, Clifford Irving's fake Howard Hughes autobiography and Andy Warhol's shooting, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
In his 28 years in both city and state courts, Justice Culkin at times was himself the center of controversy.
He became a state Supreme Court judge in the 1960's and retired in 1976.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; The Thunder Wore a Watch
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.19
4.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
2.96
3.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.11
3.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.42
5.43
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.68
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.41
7.41
8.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.71
5.72
6.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; A Cable Car Named Shiver
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Agassi to Play Mahwah
ANDRE AGASSI has joined JOHN McENROE and PETE SAMPRAS for the men's exhibition for the Safe Passage Charity on July 18 at the Pathmark Tennis Classic, JOHN KORFF, the tournament director, said yesterday.
Korff said a fourth player for the exhibition at Corporate Crossroads Center in Mahwah, N.J., would be added later this week.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 2
June 25
July 3
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.5
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
220.2
222.3
222.8
Distillate stocks
109.5
106.8
103.7
Crude imports, daily
6.1
6.6
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.8
2.2
Crude stocks
349.7
354.8
327.1
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
96.3
92.7
92.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


High Court Nominations Were Always Political
To the Editor:
In "The Senate's Power Grab" (Op-Ed, June 23), Robert Bork engages in deliberate distortion of the history of Senate confirmations of Supreme Court appointments.


We Can't Call Missile Attack Self-Defense
To the Editor:
The United States position on the June 27 missile attack on Iraq is seriously flawed when we try to justify our attack before the Security Council in terms of "self-defense."
The "inherent right of self-defense" preserved to members in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter was certainly understood by the drafters in 1945 to refer to the 1842 Caroline Case, in which Secretary of State Daniel Webster defined the terms under which a British pre-emptive strike into New York State would have been legal.
The action's necessity would have to be "instant, overwhelming and leaving no choice of means and no moment for deliberation, and must be limited by that necessity and kept clearly within it." The law of self-defense has nothing to do with retaliation or reprisals.


A Bit of Athletic History Is Made in Buffalo
The 1993 World University Games made American history yesterday, even before the opening ceremony took place.
With the opening of the soccer competition yesterday in Buffalo, this year's games are the first to take place in the United States.
The events will be held throughout the Niagara frontier area, including some venues in Canada, and will run through July 18.
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the first International Student Games, which were held in Paris.


No Demand, U.S. Says in Cutting Resettlement Slots Open to Bosnia
Citing a lack of demand, the Clinton Administration has cut by 1,000 the number of displaced persons from Eastern Europe that it will resettle in the United States, State Department officials say.
Refugee organizations say that more than two million people have been displaced by the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But the State Department said that because of an apparent reluctance to leave the Balkans, only 1,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina have applied for resettlement in the United States since Oct. 1.
As a result, the number of slots reserved for Eastern European refugees in fiscal 1993, which ends on Sept. 30, will be reduced to 2,500 from 3,500.


Grey Makes the Cut For Remington Ads
Remington Products Inc. of Bridgeport, Conn., said yesterday that it had selected Grey Advertising of New York to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.
Grey was awarded the account after a three-month review that began with seven agencies plus an in-house creative team.
The review, which involved a creative shootout decided by consumer response to test commercials, was narrowed in May to Grey and three other agencies: Ally &amp; Gargano of New York, the Jeff Atlas Group of San Francisco and Towne, Silverstein, Rotter Inc. of New York.


Catch-Up Time for the New Drug Czar


We Can't Call Missile Attack Self-Defense; To Punish Iraq
To the Editor:
It is deeply disturbing to us of Pax Christi to see our President turn to the use of force, air power and bombs to punish Iraq for a supposed threat to President Bush's life.
Do we believe that six lives are not important as long as we hit our target?


Review/Television; Onstage at the Outer Limits of the Outrageous
"Russell Simmons's Def Comedy Jam," taped for Home Box Office before an exuberant audience at the Academy Theater in Manhattan, is a showcase for black stand-up comics.
Four are crammed into each 27-minute show, which also includes an opening monologue from the host, Martin Lawrence.
This is definitely not Bill Cosby territory.
The language is almost relentlessly and defiantly from the streets.
Much of the subject matter is guaranteed to leave fundamentalist watchdogs sputtering.
And, oh yes: "Def Comedy Jam" is one of the most popular shows on HBO's schedule.
A run of several new editions begins tomorrow at midnight.


F.B,I., in Shift, Proposes Backing Gun Control
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is proposing to break its tradition of public neutrality on political issues and call for immediate enactment of the bill to require a five-day waiting period for buying handguns, Government officials said today.
William S. Sessions, the Director of the bureau, sent Attorney General Janet Reno a letter on Tuesday outlining a proposed six-point policy statement on the bill and other gun control issues.
He asked her to approve the move and advise President Clinton of the decision, the officials said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the halting of barge traffic on the Mississippi River because of flooding misidentified a city on the river.
Quincy is in Illinois, not Missouri.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; The Rollin' of the Rugs
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


New Adventure for Jerry: Marvel Comics
The Marvel Entertainment Group said yesterday that it had named Jerry Inc., Jerry Della Femina's fledgling agency in New York, to handle the account of its Marvel Comics division.
"Marvel is powerful but whimsical," said Gerard Calabrese, executive vice president at Marvel Entertainment of New York, "and I don't think we could have found a better person to embody that than Jerry." He added that Jerry Inc.'s assignment would extend beyond creating trade advertising aimed at persuading marketers to buy ad pages in Marvel Comics titles.
It would also include publicizing Marvel's television programming (for example, "The X-Men Adventures" on Fox) and seeking advertisers interested in sponsoring customized promotional comic books, like an "X-Men" custom comic that Pizza Hut will distribute starting next month.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; A Special Night in '45
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Kroger Plans to Issue Credit Cards to Customers in Texas
The Kroger Company said yesterday that it planned to issue Mastercard credit cards to its customers in Texas, thus becoming the first major grocery chain to team up with a worldwide credit network.
Credit cards issued by other companies, like the General Motors Corporation and American Airlines, which offer rebates and discounts, have met with enthusiastic consumer response.


INSIDE
In India, Politics as Usual
As scandals remake the political systems in Italy and Japan, India's political system remains unruffled by payoff allegations.
Page A2.
Teen-Ager Guility in Slayings
A youth was convicted of manslaughter, not the more serious charge of murder, in the deaths of two in a Brooklyn high school.
Page B1.
F.B.I.
Said to Back Gun Bill
The F.B.I. is proposing to break its tradition of public neutrality and support a waiting period for handgun purchases, officials said.
Page A13.
Nose Count Falls Short
Rudolph W. Giuliani held a news conference to show his broad appeal as a mayoral candidate, but it was less broad than it seemed.
Page B1.


Outfielders Turn Out the Vote, And Bonds Is the Star of Stars
Barry Bonds, who has been the National League most valuable player two of the past three years, yesterday became the top vote-getter for the All-Star Game for the first time.
Already in good position to win m.v.p. honors again with an outstanding first-half performance with the San Francisco Giants, Bonds drew 3,074,603 votes, the most any player has received in the voting by fans since Davey Lopes had nearly 4 million in 1980.


Perot Bloc Is Here to Stay, Clinton Pollster Finds
Voters who supported Ross Perot in last year's election remain deeply committed to him and are "increasingly skeptical" of President Clinton, who wants their support to win re-election, a national survey released today by Mr.
Clinton's pollster has found.
While the pollster, Stanley B. Greenberg, said Mr.
Clinton could draw support from Mr.
Perot's backers, the findings underscored how difficult that effort could be.
Mr.
Clinton would have to prove that his policies fundamentally improved the economy, the study said, and to persuade the Perot voters that he had significantly changed Government by cutting waste and bureaucracy and greatly curbing the influence of special interests.


Aging Gracefully, Waiting for Floyd to Dominate
On the eve of the 14th United States Senior Open at Cherry Hills Country Club, the biggest upset of the season in senior golf isn't that Tom Wargo won a single tournament, but that Raymond Floyd hasn't won a bunch of the others.
Not that the 50-year-old Floyd has been a bust in his first full season on the Senior Tour.
In only nine events, he has won $441,300, including a victory in March at the Gulfstream Aerospace in Indian Wells, Calif.


Bridge
One of the most sensational deals in the history of the game is shown in the diagram.
The names of the East-West players, who enjoyed the proceedings, are not on record, but South, who did not, was Martin Cohn, who has had some remarkable triumphs at the bridge table.
This was not one of them.
His hand had great potential in no-trump, since he could expect to take seven diamond tricks and at least one of his kings.
He was therefore confident when he was eventually doubled in two no-trump.
He redoubled, praying that the opponents would stand their ground, and they did.


Entrepreneur Is Named New Chairman of Neorx
The Neorx Corporation, a Seattle-based biotechnology "fallen angel" company that has had some false starts, said yesterday that it had named Fred Craves, an experienced pharmaceutical entrepreneur, as chairman.
Dr.
Craves formerly headed Codon, a start-up that was acquired by Schering A.G., a leading German drug maker, for about $80 million in cash in 1990.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; A Cable Car Named Shiver
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Falcons Get Dickerson From Raiders for Pick
The Atlanta Falcons are the latest National Football League team to think they can make ERIC DICKERSON happy.
After waiting a week for AL DAVIS's approval, the Falcons yesterday completed a trade with the Los Angeles Raiders for Dickerson, the N.F.L.'s No. 2 career rusher.


Economic Scene; Health Care in Rich and Poor Lands: Some Issues Are the Same.
"Government needs to promote greater diversity in the financing and delivery of health services. . . . Regulation can strengthen private insurance markets by improving incentives for wide coverage and cost control. . . . Spending on health should be redirected to more cost-effective programs that do more to help the poor."
THE message sounds familiar.
The medium, however, is not Hillary Rodham Clinton but the World Bank's latest World Development Report, published this week.
And the subject is not the $800 billion lavished on the care of 250 million Americans, but the frugal $170 billion worth of services doled out to the 4.1 billion citizens of the globe's low- and middle-income countries.


Drugs, Crime and Punishment; Don't Let Judges Set Crooks Free
Two Federal judges recently announced that they would refuse to take drug cases because they oppose mandatory minimum sentences.
One judge, Jack Weinstein of Brooklyn, confessed to a "sense of depression about much of the cruelty I have been party to in connection with the war on drugs." The other, Whitman Knapp of Manhattan, heartened that President Clinton "has not committed himself to the war on drugs in such a way as the Republican Administration had," hoped his action would influence the President to abandon tough mandatory sentencing.
If the Clinton Administration listens to these voices, and their echoes, and tries to roll back minimum mandatory sentences, it will certainly win applause from some criminal defense lawyers, judges and the media -- and no doubt many criminals -- but it will betray millions of Americans who took the President at his word when he promised to be tough on crime.


Kigali Journal; Refugees Trying to Flee a War Settle for Limbo
Less than six miles from Rwanda's capital, thousands of makeshift huts have encroached into the lush green fields and eucalyptus groves, digging into the steep hillsides like a gaping brown wound.
Patched together with leaves, saplings and plastic sheeting, the tiny huts huddle shoulder to shoulder.
The mud is as slick as ice when it rains, the open latrines draw clouds of black flies, and ragged children play in the dirt, their only activity.


BellSouth Plans to Open Its Network
The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it would open parts of its telephone network so that customers, including rival phone companies, large corporations and presumably individuals, could tailor their own telecommunications services.
The plan would encourage companies to develop computer programs to offer features like voice-activated banking, advanced paging services and voice-into-text translators for the deaf, BellSouth said.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Atlas Threw a Snowball
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; The Big Whoosh
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


A Little Albany Zaniness: When a Bill That Is Defeated Becomes Law
Say what you will about state government, but it's still not every day you see a bill pass after being voted down.
That was the case recently in the Assembly, where the Ways and Means Committee approved a bill on June 24 that would allow billboard owners to ask the state to remove trees blocking the view of their signs.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Stoop to Conquer
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; The Rollin' of the Rugs
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Not So Fast on the Sheik
Wait a minute.
The Government's rush to extradite Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman defies common sense.
If there is a solid case for sending him out of the country before getting a full account of his activities here, the public has not heard it.
Are the Justice Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the New York City Police Department and Federal and local prosecutors ready to step forward and say there is no case for criminal conduct or conspiracy to be made against Mr.
Abdel Rahman?
Are they also ready to warrant that there are no additional terrorist plots afoot about which he might provide information or clues?
Until that happens, any decision to extradite him looks hasty, ill considered and risky.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Holy Barometer! Hot Bath!
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Requiem for Garden Fight Nights
Six floors below the main arena in Madison Square Garden, boxing as New Yorkers have known it for almost 70 years counts itself out tonight.
Want to see fights locally?
Try the South Mountain Arena in West Orange, N.J., on July 29, or the Ramada Hotel across from the Garden on July 30, or call the Kingsway Gym in Brooklyn Heights.
Some nights they set up $10 seats at ringside there to watch the local fighters.
There are fights at hotels in Huntington, L.I., and in Hauppauge, L.I., and there are fights at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.


Washington at Work; A Switch From Hill to Foggy Bottom Offers a Suddenly Expanding World
Despite 18 years as a lawmaker on Capitol Hill, Timothy E. Wirth, now Counselor for the State Department and the Administration's point man on global issues, allows that he still has a lot to learn.
There was, for instance, the meeting he convened on May 20, attended by 25 representatives of refugee advocacy groups, experts who every day confront the issue of the many thousands of displaced people in places like Bosnia and Angola.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Albie Lopez, pitcher, to Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.
Recalled Bill Wertz, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Gene Larkin, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Bernardo Brito, outfielder, from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.


U.S. Programs Will Pay Bulk Of Storm Costs
The Government is expected to pay for most of the more than $800 million in insured losses from flooding in the Midwest, Federal officials and industry experts said yesterday.
The losses to crops from rains and flooding covered by insurance are estimated at $700 million so far, the Federal Agriculture Department said.
At least 65 percent of those losses will be paid by the Federal crop-insurance program.


Le Carre on the Most Immoral Premise of All
To: HQ
From: Tim Weiner


Blue Chips Gain, With Dow Up 25.74
Big was beautiful in the markets yesterday, as investors bid up most blue-chip stocks for the first time in five sessions but spurned over-the-counter issues.
That caused the Dow Jones industrial average to diverge sharply from other leading market indicators.
Fears of inflation may have eased somewhat, analysts said, but worries over the flagging economy sent investors running for the stability of larger companies.
Trading on the New York Stock Exchange was moderately heavy, at 253 million shares, compared with 235 million Tuesday.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN SUZUKI MOTOR CORP., Los Angeles, named Sokichi Nakano, who previously oversaw the Suzuki factory in Canada, as chairman of American Suzuki.
He will be based in Japan.
Yoshinori Fujii, the executive vice president, was promoted to president, succeeding Kenjii Shimizu.
Masao Nagura, the assistant to the president, becomes executive vice president.
ARBY'S INC., Miami Beach, named Leo Johnson senior vice president of development with responsibility for domestic growth and franchise administration.
Joe Langteau was named vice president of operations.
Both had been on the company's executive committee.
Gaylon Smith, who was responsible for franchise development, and Clifton Pawley, who handled building development, have left the company.


Court Holds Landowner Responsible in Pollution
The Connecticut Supreme Court has ruled that the owner of polluted land is liable for the cleanup of the property even if the owner was not responsible for the pollution that occurred before she owned it.
However, a new Connecticut law that took effect last week appears to have blunted the impact of the long-awaited decision by establishing an "innocent landowner" defense in pollution cases and limiting the liability for landowners.


Big Health Gap, Tied to Income, Is Found in U.S.
The health gap between affluent, well-educated people and the poor and poorly educated has greatly widened for three decades, the Government reported today.
By 1986, the Government said, Americans with family income of less than $9,000 a year had a death rate more than three times that of people with family income of $25,000 or more.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
IT could have been a scene out of "Gypsy," the show about an aggressive, self-centered mother who lives out her own theatrical ambitions by pushing her children into the limelight with little regard for their emotional needs.
In fact the incident occurred during auditions for the Broadway revival of that musical, when hundreds of nervous children were trying out for various roles.
"One day I saw a mother slap her child in the face because she wasn't doing what the mother wanted," said Stuart Howard, a casting director in Manhattan who was running the auditions.


Climbing Back
Stock in Sciclone Pharmaceuticals Inc. fell as low as $11.25 a share on June 8, after a stock newsletter called it overpriced.
It has since risen on rumors that the company would be permitted to run clinical tests of its hepatitis drug in Japan.
The company announced the tests on Tuesday, but the stock price already reflected the news.


No Headline
"This was a stupid way to spend the day, a stupid way to spend my life, that it was a stupid institution, that I was a stupid member and a stupid wife. Stupid was his operative word." -- ASSEMBLYWOMAN EILEEN M. HICKEY, of a birthday phone call from her husband yesterday as the session drew to a close.  [ B8:2. ]


For Young, Three Hits And One More Loss
It was the best stuff that Anthony Young has, the best he has thrown during this whole miserable 14-month losing streak.
He threw strikes.
He retired batter after batter.
There was one simple single, from San Diego's leadoff hitter, and then Young set down 23 straight Padres yesterday.
"This is the best that I've pitched in two years," Young said afterward.


New Agency Wins A Toyota Account
Four former executives at Martin, Davis, Omon &amp; Partners of New York have left the agency to open their own shop: Oasis International Group Ltd.
Oasis was awarded the Toyota corporate advertising account last month.
The account, previously at Martin, Davis, Omon, has billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
The four partners are: Paul Bernasconi, 27, creative director; Rand Pearsall, 36, account director; Eric McClure, 30, media director, and Hilde Oord, 35, planning director.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; A Special Night in '45
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


Sports of The Times; The Garden Throws Its Last Punch
BETWEEN bouts in the Felt Forum that evening, ring announcer Johnny Addie took the microphone and intoned, "With us tonight is the lightweight champion of the world, Scotland's Ken Buchanan."
Stepping aside, Addie waited for Buchanan to take a bow.
A shaggy young man in a windbreaker and jeans, much huskier and taller than the 137-pound champion, hopped up the steps, leaned through the ropes, shook hands with each of the fighters in the next bout, waved to the spectators and quickly departed to some scattered applause.
Moments later Buchanan, trim and tiny, appeared.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; The Rollin' of the Rugs
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


A Hasidic Village Frets Over Its School's Future
People in this Hasidic enclave of 12,000 do not watch television or read daily newspapers.
Still, the news of a decision by the state's highest court that found their school district to be unconstitutional spread from house to house today like wildfire.
Tuesday's ruling by the Court of Appeals was the main topic of conversation today at the milliner, who sells the black hats of the men, and in the shops that sell the long print dresses of the women.
When members of the Board of Education went to the main synagogue for morning prayers, they were mobbed by fellow Hasidic Jews who wanted more information.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mariko Takahashi  Carnegie Hall
A hushed, appreciative, almost entirely Japanese audience greeted Mariko Takahashi at Carnegie Hall.
She responded with songs that but for their Japanese lyrics, could have come directly from the pop-music factories of Los Angeles and London, a tribute to Japanese culture's skill at mimicking foreign models.


Review/Music; Some Mendelssohn, But Mostly Mozart: A Festival Returns
Any concern about the continuing purpose of the Mostly Mozart Festival was temporarily laid to rest on Tuesday night as the 27th edition of the successful summer series began in Avery Fisher Hall.
The festival has survived many traumas over the decades: years in which the pick-up orchestra sounded newly picked up; years in which Mozart's Greatest Hits haunted the programs, making Elvira Madigan seem like one of Costanze's sisters; numerous attempts to develop themes and novelties, and most amazingly, even the Mozart Bicentennial Celebrations.
Why?
Because its main purpose is to play glorious music wisely and well, which is what it primarily did in this program, which was repeated and broadcast on "Live From Lincoln Center" last night.
Gerard Schwarz, the festival's music director, has already begun to shape this year's orchestra into a well-rehearsed and attentive ensemble (last year, in contrast, opening night was almost desultory).
He attended to the call for "brio" in the first movement of Mendelssohn's Fourth Symphony with exuberance; the music was brisk but never breathless, and if the woodwind tone was strained, musically there was something worth straining for.
The opening to Mozart's Symphony No. 24 was also gallant and sparkling.


Rivalry Ends in Death of a Queens Boy, 14
Nahl Finch was, to those who knew him, a wayward boy who was in desperate need of supervision but who instead found an early death on the hard asphalt path of a park near his home in Jamaica, Queens.
His family, sadly, was not surprised.


High Court Nominations Were Always Political; Legitimate Role
To the Editor:
"The Senate's Power Grab" by Robert H. Bork (Op-Ed, June 23) fails to comprehend the "American understanding of the Supreme Court's legitimate role in governing us."


Except for Gwynn, It's Going, Going Gone
San Diego Padre players don't send their laundry out on road trips.
They don't put payments down on condos overlooking the Pacific Ocean or sign long-term leases for cars.
Not in these topsy-turvy days, when the team owners are more likely to trade batting champions and potential pitching greats than not.
This is, after all, a team that by order of management insists its players come cheaper by the two dozens.
Players besides Tony Gwynn, that is.
For Gwynn is the one Padre destined to ride out the tidal wave of salary dumping that has washed away most any player of stature, economic or otherwise.


Detective Suspended for Failing Drug Test
A detective who worked as an investigator for the board that reviews complaints of police misconduct was suspended yesterday after he tested positive for drug use, the police said.
The detective, James Murray, a 19-year veteran of the police force, had worked for the Civilian Complaint Review Board.
But he was recently transferred to the Internal Affairs Bureau after the board was reorganized to exclude police personnel.


CHRONICLE
In East Hampton, L.I., the trustees of Guild Hall have named a new executive director.
He is HENRY KORN, a 47-year-old writer and arts administrator.
He will succeed Joy Gordon, and after Labor Day, he will take the helm of the complex that includes the John Drew Theater, four art galleries, an arts education center and a library.
Since 1990, Mr.
Korn has been cultural-affairs manager for Irvine, Calif.
He has also been director of the Santa Monica Arts Commission and Foundation and, in New York, the executive director of the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council and the administrator of the Jewish Museum.


McIlvaine to Take Reins But Stay West, for Now
The Mets will introduce Joe McIlvaine as their new general manager at a news conference at Shea Stadium at 2:30 P.M. today.
McIlvaine, who was in charge of baseball operations for the Mets during their 1986 World Series championship season, is expected to operate from his home base in San Diego until his wife, Marty, gives birth in mid-August.
But he is expected to visit the Mets' farm systems, join the team on its West Coast road trip and meet with Manager Dallas Green over the next several weeks.


In Overseas Campaign, I.B.M. Tries to Brighten its Big Blue Image With a Pink cartoon Character.
WHAT happens when a company that urged the world to "Think" joins forces with a panther that's pink?
Those blurting out "Think Pink!" have seen "Funny Face" more than a few times.
Actually, the result, as evident in an ambitious new campaign, is more like Big Blue meets Big Pink.
The campaign, selling I.B.M.'s personal computers, seeks to solve a daunting marketing conundrum: how to soften the hard image of a beleaguered company.
Since ending a popular campaign featuring a Charlie Chaplin lookalike in 1987, I.B.M. has failed miserably at maintaining an approachable personality.
Worse yet, the task must be tackled when the personal-computer market is roiled as never before by buyers demanding the most computing power at the lowest prices.


MCI Ordered to Improve Corporate Rate Disclosure
A Federal judge today ordered the MCI Communications Corporation to disclose its prices to large corporate customers in greater detail, a ruling that strengthens the hand of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
The order here, by Judge Stanley S. Harris, means that MCI will have to publicly disclose all the rates it charges for complex packages of services.


SUMMIT IN TOKYO: Reporter's Notebook; Hillary Clinton Wins Friends in Japan
In a country where the courtship and wedding of an independent-minded woman to Crown Prince Naruhito held people in thrall for weeks, Hillary Rodham Clinton is also viewed -- favorably -- as an independent sort.
At Waseda University today, the very mention of her name drew murmurs of approval.
And when she slipped into a meeting hall, most in the otherwise reserved crowd craned for a look at her blond head bobbing in a sea of shiny black hair, and burst into applause.


Cisneros's Call to Centrists
The Housing Secretary has become a contrarian in the Cabinet, criticizing party centrists as ignoring the "malignancy" of racism.
Page A16.


Events: Exploring New York Harbor
Taking to the Water  Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
On Tuesday from 6 P.M. to 9:30 P.M., there will be a boat tour of New York Harbor, highlighting the history of its islands and waterfront areas.
Boarding for Circle Line Boat XVII will be at Pier 83, 42d Street and the Hudson River.
Tickets are $23 (members, $20) in advance; at the dock, $26 (members, $23).
Reservations are suggested.
Federal Furniture  Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street; (212) 838-6878.
Richard Beecher, an editor of the New England Antiques Journal, will give a talk on iconography found in American furniture made between 1785 and 1825.
On Tuesday at 6:30 P.M.
Fee is $5; members, $4.


Recalling '88 Drought's Disaster, Farmers Say Deluge Is Not as Bad
Five summers ago the worst drought in half a century left the fields around this tiny Iowa town as dry as bleached bones, stunting corn, killing soybeans and driving farmers out of business.
Farmers are recalling that dry summer with some measure of longing this week as the Middle West continues to be pelted by the heavy rain that has flooded the upper Mississippi River.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
REPAIRING hinged windows is usually a breeze.
Cleaning and lubrication cure most ills.
Besides casement windows, which open from the sides, hinged styles include awning and hopper windows, which have hinges at the top and bottom respectively, and jalousie windows, which consist of horizontal glass louvers.
If a casement window squeaks when being opened or closed or if it has a crank that is difficult to turn, first try lubricating the moving parts.
Open the window as far as possible.
Remove the crank handle by loosening the small screw that holds it in place.


COX AND PRODIGY AGREE TO START INTERACTIVE NETWORK
Cox Newspapers and the Prodigy Services Company signed a letter of intent yesterday to start a nationwide interactive network that would allow newspapers to combine print and local electronic services for readers.
The companies said they also planned to encourage other major newspaper groups to join them in a consortium that would market the network to local newspapers.
Cox, based in Atlanta, owns The Atlanta Journal and Constitution as well as 15 other newspapers in Florida, Texas, Ohio, Arizona and Colorado.
Prodigy currently delivers its service to personal computers through telephone lines.
Cox said its newspapers in Atlanta and West Palm Beach, Fla., would move immediately to develop the service.


METRO DIGEST
HOT ENOUGH FOR YOU?
It was inescapable.
There was the heat -- a record 98 degrees in Central Park and 102 at Newark Airport.
There was the humidity.
There was the ozone, enough to set off an alert that the air was not fit to breathe.
A1.
Experts are reminding people that besides air-conditioning and ice, they can take advantage of perspiration and common sense.
B8.


Ben Chapman, 84, All-Star Outfielder With Yanks in 30's
Ben Chapman, a former New York Yankee outfielder whose quickness of temper matched his quickness afoot and at bat over a 15-year major league career, died yesterday at his home in Hoover, Ala., a suburb of Birmingham.
He was 84.
The cause of death apparently was a heart attack, a family member said.


Chilean Officers Must Testify in Rights Cases
In 17 years of military rule, military officers hardly ever appeared in a civil court.
Any problems, particularly in cases of missing persons, were referred to military courts, which ruled almost without exception in favor of soldiers.
Now, three years after democracy returned to Chile, the floodgates of criminal investigations have opened against the military in the civilian courts, prompting a display of force by the Army.


MARTIN MARIETTA GETS $150 MILLION NAVY CONTRACT
The Martin Marietta Corporation has received a $150 million contract from the United States Navy to produce advanced diagnostic equipment to test a variety of electronic and air systems.
Martin Marietta Automation Systems will build 69 of the diagnostic units, beginning deliveries in the second quarter of 1994 and continuing into 1995.
The final assembly will take place at a Martin Marietta manufacturing operation in Americus, Ga.


Iraq and U.N. Open Talks on Limited Oil Sales
Negotiations on Iraq's request to sell a limited amount of oil to raise money for food and medicine opened at the United Nations today with the head of the Iraqi delegation saying he would stay in New York to negotiate for "as long as necessary."
After an initial two-hour session, the talks were adjourned until Thursday.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Early Water Bed
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


High Court Nominations Were Always Political; Times Change
To the Editor:
Robert Bork is clearly a man who spends a good deal of time pondering the Constitution and questions of judicial philosophy (Op-Ed, June 23).
Yet Mr.
Bork's stand on strict original interpretation belies his own prejudices, hidden though they are behind the facade of impartiality.


India's Government Waits For a Scandal to Blow Over
A growing political scandal involving suitcases of money, doctored evidence, taped telephone calls and questionable alibis has swept over Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and the governing Congress Party, paralyzing the Government and forcing Mr.
Rao to scramble around the country in search of support.
Two weeks ago, at a dramatic and chaotic news conference, Harshad Mehta, once a high-flying stockbroker in Bombay and now the central figure in the country's securities scandal, announced that he had lugged a suitcase stuffed with $237,000 in small bills into the Prime Minister's residence in late 1991.
A day later, he said, he shipped over a second bag with $134,000 more to round out the sum at 10 million rupees.


Le Carre on the Most Immoral Premise of All
To: HQ
From: Tim Weiner
Subject: le Carre, John, a k a Cornwell, David.
Former British intelligence officer; author, "The Night Manager." Cross-file under: Arms merchants, international.
Cocaine cartels.
Governments, bankrupt, morally.
Intelligence services, post-cold war, confusion of.
Report follows.


Pop and Jazz in Review
'By Myself' 'The Words and Music of Howard Dietz and Arthur Schwartz' KT Sullivan  Oak Room Algonquin Through July 17
Early in her new cabaret show, "By Myself: The Words and Music of Howard Dietz and Arthur Schwartz," KT Sullivan sings a rendition of "Rhode Island Is Famous for You" that is edged with delicious comic nuance.
Coyly running down a make-believe list of products associated with different states ("pencils come from Pennsylvania," "tents come from Tennessee,"), she resuscitates the traditional show-business archetype of the not-so-dumb blonde (in her case strawberry).


Chicago (Midwest) Market Dusts Off Its Original Name
Sometimes you have to backtrack to get ahead.
That is what the Midwest Stock Exchange, which has seen its clout erode despite its position as the nation's largest exchange outside of New York, hopes to accomplish on Thursday by returning to its original name, the Chicago Stock Exchange.
Since the 111-year-old exchange adopted its current name in 1949, after absorbing regional exchanges in St.
Louis, Cleveland and Minneapolis-St.
Paul, the Chicago name has acquired valuable cachet on which the exchange now hopes to capitalize.
The rise of institutions like the Chicago Board of Trade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange have propelled the city to international prominence in financial circles.


George Squibb Dies; Drug Executive, 78, Chided the Industry
George S. Squibb, a retired drug company executive who sometimes criticized the pharmaceutical industry, died on Sunday at a hospital in Providence, R.I.
He was 78 and lived in Jamestown, R.I.
The cause of death was heart failure, a family spokesman said.


Review/Music; M-I-C-K-E-Y Inhabits the M-E-T
Mickey Mouse is at the Met. You can't miss him.
A 35-foot-high balloon in the shape of the world's most celebrated rodent stands outside the Metropolitan Opera House greeting everyone who arrives for "Disney's Symphonic Fantasy," which opened there Tuesday night.
A less gargantuan Mickey frisks about onstage during the show, which is to continue at the Met through July 18.


Teamsters Union Makes Great Strides in Restoring Democracy
To the Editor:
It's easy to see why a reputed top mob leader would want to smear me and undermine the efforts I have been committed to for more than 25 years to restore democracy and honesty to the Teamsters Union.
It's harder to see why you would publish outrageously false innuendo in "Despite Change, Reform Is Slow in the Teamsters" (front page, June 28).


State Police Link Possible 18th Victim to Suspect in Slayings
State police officials said today that they were intensifying their investigation of Joel Rifkin, the unemployed gardener who confessed to killing 17 women, after linking him Tuesday night to a possible 18th victim that he had not told them about.
The latest victim, Mary Katherine Williams, 31, an aspiring actress originally from Charlotte, N.C., was identified by the Yorktown police as the woman whose naked and badly decomposed body was found Dec. 21 in a wooded area of Westchester County.
She is the first victim Mr.
Rifkin did not confess to killing, but whose death has been connected to him through evidence the police collected in a search of his East Meadow bedroom.
Inquiry to Widen
"It is clear that Mary Katherine Williams is now one of 18 possible victims," Capt.
Walter Heesch of State Police Troop L Headquarters in East Farmingdale said in a statement.
"Although Joel Rifkin did not state to investigators any details of that particular case, identification papers bearing her name were found in Rifkin's bedroom."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Burlington Northern Inc., Fort Worth, is offering $150 million of 7.5 percent debentures due in 2023 at 98.53 to yield 7.625 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Noncallable for 10 years, the debentures are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is offering through Merrill Lynch $200 million of notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 5.24 percent, or 20 basis points more than Treasury notes with a comparable maturity date.
The issue is callable in one year.


Guerrero Is Back
PEDRO GUERRERO, who hit 215 home runs in his major-league career and batted over .300 seven times in 10 seasons with the Los Angeles Dodgers, signed a one-year contract with the Sioux Falls (S.D.) Canaries of the Northern League, the club said yesterday.


How the Burp Saved Dinner
To the Home Section:
So Tupperware is "Rethinking the Bowl, Perfecting the Burp." Its stodgy old shapes saved our supper once.
Several years ago, our family spent a weekend canoeing down the Susquehanna River with another family whose only canoeing experience had been in Central Park.
Olive and Ari's canoe swamped in the first rapids, soaking all its contents and sending supper down the river.
Olive had packed the supper (including marinated lamb chops) in Tupperware containers.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; The Rollin' of the Rugs
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


CUNY Adjusts to the Times
Trustees of the City University of New York have approved a plan to review and overhaul programs in the 21-campus system -- with a central role for its Chancellor, Ann Reynolds.
Though many viewed Dr.
Reynolds's pressure for the overhaul as a power grab, she's right to try to streamline the university system.
Like many other public universities, CUNY is struggling to balance rising enrollments and declining revenues.
Those trends are likely to continue.
The university now has 203,000 students, but in 1996 it expects to have 224,000 -- and no more money.
At the same time, CUNY has needed to devote more time to preparing its students for college work.


Dinkins and New York, in Jerusalem
A new square, New York Place, was dedicated in Jerusalem today by the Mayors of the two cities.
Truth be told, it is not much more than a traffic island on a noisy, heavily traveled boulevard, and its distinguishing characteristic is a large stone planter upon which stands a post-modern statue looking suspiciously like the Statue of Liberty, fashioned of jagged metal and painted sky blue.
She has visible, slightly bent legs, this Ms.
Liberty.


Topics of The Times; Warming Up the Cup
Next year at this time, ready or not, American sports fans may finally get hooked on the world's most popular team competition.
Soccer will dominate the scene from mid-June to mid-July, when 24 nations go at each other for the World Cup in 52 games played in stadiums from Foxboro, Mass., to Pasadena, Calif.
World Cup matches rivet the rest of the world every four years.
A billion people watched the 1990 final on television -- four times the audience for this year's Super Bowl.
Only in America do soccer teams come and go without public commotion, but that will surely change when hordes of foreign fans descend next year.
The soccer-smart have already snatched up virtually every ticket for the first two rounds of play.


Youth Guilty In 2 Slayings At a School
A teen-ager who admitted shooting two other youths to death in a Brooklyn high school was convicted yesterday of manslaughter, but not of the more serious charge of murder, by a jury that found he had acted "under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance."
The killings admitted by Kahlil Sumpter became symbols of the violence that has invaded many New York high schools and of the often deadly consequences of teen-age disputes in an age of easily accessible guns.
And while the verdict indicated that the jury did not accept Mr.
Sumpter's claims that he had fired his gun in self-defense, one juror said afterward that she believed that he had been in fear of his life because of bad blood between himself and the victims.


Critic's Notebook; On Thermodynamics, Byron and, Oh, Yes, Sex
Only an Englishman could write a play about sexual passion and sublimate it in three hours of witty discourse on the second law of thermodynamics, the history of British landscape gardening, the elusive movements of Lord Byron and the advent of the mathematical revolution known as chaos theory.
And probably no Englishman could write such a play better than Tom Stoppard, whose new comedy, "Arcadia," is his first London hit and only his second major work for the theater since "The Real Thing" a decade ago.
At the Royal National Theater, where "Arcadia" is playing in a glossy Trevor Nunn production on the Lyttelton stage, the program is stuffed with enough scholarly apparatus to support a cross-discipline seminar jointly taught by Stephen Hawking and A. S. Byatt.
Some English newspapers sent science correspondents along with their drama critics to cover the play when it opened this spring.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  CLINTON'S WORLD DEBUT  President Clinton stepped onto the world stage with a flourish in Tokyo, sitting down with other leaders at the opening session of his first economic summit meeting.
He hailed a limited pact to lower tariffs as a major breakthrough.
Mr.
Clinton also plunged into the streets to shake hands and chat with children.
A1  Crowds in Tokyo craned for a look at Hillary Rodham Clinton.
A8


First-Aid Kit: Forget Caboodle
STATISTICS compiled by the National Safety Council show that each year nearly 13 million children suffer preventable injuries serious enough to require medical attention.
Yet too often, the medicine cabinet holds four brands of toothpaste but nothing for a sting or scald.
Only after an accident or onset of illness does a panicky hunt begin for items to clean, cure and comfort.
Medical experts say that while a wisely stocked, convenient and orderly first-aid kit may not fully treat a health crisis, its value is in helping to limit pain and complications until a doctor's examination.


No Headline
Nearing formulation of a new policy toward gay men and lesbians in the military, Defense Secretary Les Aspin will give President Clinton later this week three proposals on how to phrase one thought, "Homosexuality is incompatible with military service," that is the crux of a contentious issue.
That sentence is currently the first statement in the Pentagon's regulation banning homosexuals from the armed forces.
The Administration has, for now, abandoned hope of lifting the ban completely and declaring homosexuality compatible with military service.
So Mr.
Aspin and his top aides are struggling over minor changes that could carry large symbolic meaning.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Steve Lacy Saxophonist  Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Toward the end of his show on Tuesday night, the saxophonist Steve Lacy finally took a solo.
Mr.
Lacy was deep into "Vespers," a suite he recently composed, and he had generously given virtually everybody else in the band room to improvise.
When he stepped up to the microphone and began to inch his solo forward, note by note and shorn of any artificiality, his precision seemed like a particularly brilliant form of honesty.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton hailed a limited agreement to lower tariffs as a major breakthrough at the economic summit.  [ Page A1. ]
The tariff accord could end as most important accomplishment of the meeting in Tokyo and despite its shortcomings could breathe new life into trade talks that have dragged on for years.  [ A1. ]


Treasury Yields Stay Near Lows
Interest rates were little changed yesterday as traders and investors marked time while yields on Treasury notes and bonds remained near their lowest levels in 20 years or more.
With yields so low, many investors are wary about new purchases of long-term Treasury issues.
But with short-term interest rates barely above 3 percent, they are not willing to ignore the long-term market completely.


Valium Found to Reduce Fever Convulsions
Valium can safely reduce the risk of the alarming, fever-induced convulsions that are experienced by tens of thousands of babies and small children each year, researchers said today.
A six-year study involving more than 400 children shows that oral doses of Valium, a tranquilizing drug, at the time of fever can markedly reduce the recurrence of febrile seizures, the fever-induced convulsions that occur in about four percent of all children in the United States.


Pact Reached On Incinerator For Brooklyn
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders reached a compromise Wednesday that would allow New York City to build a much disputed garbage incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
But in doing so, they imposed new hurdles that could slow the project or make it more expensive.
The agreement, which will partly exempt the incinerator from strict air-pollution regulations, left both its proponents and critics claiming victory.


Yanks' Pennant Fever Subsides a Few Degrees
They came, they saw, they crumbled.
The Yankees arrived in Seattle with a chance to grasp first place.
They moved within one game of the top spot after snatching the first game of the series here at the Kingdome, but they tumbled back amid the debris of two damaging and depressing losses to the Mariners in less than 20 hours.


Betting Bill, A Long Shot, Passes Test In Assembly
Proponents of legalized sports betting in Atlantic City casinos kept their cause alive today when a State Assembly committee approved legislation that would allow voters to decide the issue in November.
But today's 4-to-2 vote by the Assembly Financial Institutions Committee was only the first of a string of increasingly tough votes on the issue of sports betting.
The Assembly Appropriations Committee, which rejected the legislation in December, is to reconsider the issue on Thursday.
Should the legislation clear that hurdle, it still must win approval from the entire Assembly over the opposition of Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian.


Lillehammer In the Black
Thanks to unusually large advertising revenues, Norway has already made a profit on the Winter Olympics, which don't begin in Lillehammer for another eight months.
The country of four million also has bought 700,000 of the 850,000 Winter Olympic tickets.
A spokesman for the organizing committee said yesterday that the big sale of licensed products will bring revenues $20 million above the projected figures.


Tupperware Blues
To The Home Section:
I have limited sympathy for Morrison Cousins's attempt to breathe new life into Tupperware (At Tupperware, Rethinking the Bowl, Perfecting the Burp, June 10) and no regrets over the fading popularity of Tupperware parties.
The idea of grown women dressing up and getting together to emote about little plastic storage containers makes me wince.
KIRSTEN M. DAHL  Hermosa Beach, Calif.


Court Says Tapes in Bomb Plot Fail to Support Some Charges
Secret tape recordings made by a Government informer in the plot to bomb the Hudson River tunnels fail to substantiate some charges against one suspect, a Federal magistrate said yesterday.
The tapes' shortcoming is likely to force prosecutors to depend more heavily on the informer's testimony as they build cases against the men charged in the year's second major bombing case.
But the magistrate found that the tapes and other items provided enough evidence to continue holding the suspect without bail.


Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail; Early Water Bed
SWELTERING in the midsummer heat?
Wilting under the crush iof bone-numbing humidity?
Escape is only an air-conditioner away.
Go home.
Shut the door, flip a switch: instant cool.
But remember when ingenuity, not electricity, was the answer?
For nine New York Times editors and reporters, the reality of a New York July was all it took to jog the memories of that year, that summer, that day, when keeping cool wasn't so easy.


A Bartender With Buttons Serves Brew to Go
It is hot.
You have just three-putted to fall further behind.
You would love a cold drink to revive your spirits and maybe your game.
But six holes remain between you and the clubhouse.
In the old days, about the best a golfer could hope for was a nearby water fountain.
But George R. Jensen Jr., who once turned old black-and-white movies into color for Ted Turner, is about to change all that by bringing the 19th hole right onto the course.


COMPANY NEWS
DAMES &amp; MOORE, Los Angeles, international engineering and environmental consultants, signed a contract with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Omaha district, to perform hazardous- , toxic- and radiological-waste services nationwide.
The one-year contract with two option years is valued at $20 million.


Police Arrest Man in Shooting Of 10-Year-Old Girl in Brooklyn
A 22-year-old man was arrested yesterday in the accidental shooting of a 10-year-old girl in Brooklyn on Tuesday, the police said.
The man, Dwight Boone, was leaving a building at 220 Throop Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant with a friend, Frank Davis, when two or three gun-toting men approached them and opened fire, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about unrest in Nigeria referred incorrectly to Lagos.
It is the former capital; Abuja is the new one.


Northwest Pact Seen As Closer
Northwest Airlines and leaders of its machinists' union met yesterday to try to find a key that would free them from their respective binds.
Northwest is striving to avert bankruptcy and the union leaders need a victory in contract concession talks to take to their members, whose approval is needed to keep the airline from the bankruptcy courts.


Xerox Signs On As I.O.C. Sponsor
Xerox, as expected, agreed yesterday to follow Coca-Cola, Eastman Kodak, Time Warner, Visa and Bausch &amp; Lomb as a worldwide sponsor of the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, and the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
An International Olympic Committee sponsorship costs $40 million in cash and/or products, and allows companies to use the familiar five-ring Olympic logo for their global marketing.
Through its program, the I.O.C. expects to get 10 sponsors for the current four Olympic years.


Haitian Senator Resists Terms of Pact on Aristide
For Thomas Eddy Dupiton, a silky politician who lays claim to the presidency of Haiti's boisterous and badly split Senate, news that the United Nations is seeking a purge of some of his institution's members as part of a settlement of Haiti's crisis falls somewhere between a surprise and an annoyance.
Although Haiti's army signed an accord last week in New York that is expected to lead to a return of democracy, Mr.
Dupiton, the leader of a bloc of parliamentarians who have fought for months to obstruct diplomatic efforts aimed at restoring the country's elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, shows no signs yet of giving in.
A Donkey Out of Place?
Told that Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, who presided over Father Aristide's overthrow in September 1991, had signed the accord on Saturday, Mr.
Dupiton, a courtly man with a gift for the quick aphorism, exclaimed, "Each donkey should bray in its own pasture!"


Reluctantly, a Kibbutz Turns To (Gasp!) the Stock Market
A few weeks ago, a quiet revolution occurred on the southern shores of the Sea of Galilee when this kibbutz, the second oldest in Israel, placed shares in its plastics factory for sale on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange.
It was the first time that an Israeli collective had resorted to such a blatantly capitalistic device to raise cash, and the change was a big one.


Go, Stay, Go, Stay: Simms Glad He Stayed
Back in March, if Phil Simms had detected even the slightest reservation on the part of the Giants about making him their starting quarterback, he would have joined his former coach, Bill Parcells, in New England in the blink of an eye.
"I was going to sign a contract the day I signed and it was going to be with the Giants or the New England Patriots," Simms said yesterday.
"When I had a chance to talk to Bill Parcells when the free agency thing started and he voiced his opinion that he would like to have me in New England, I knew then that I would sign with either the Giants or New England.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Nigerian President, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, misidentified an organization of Islamic countries and incompletely summarized Nigeria's relationship to it.
The group is called the Organization of the Islamic Conference; Nigeria joined in 1986 but repudiated its membership in 1991.


Snap, Develop And Discard
THE niftiest development in photography isn't some high-priced whiz-bang camera with electronic everything, or film so fast you can take a picture of a hummingbird flying through a coal mine at night.
In fact, what may be the most important innovation in photography in recent years is decidedly low-tech, little more than a cardboard box folded around a roll of film, with a plastic lens stuck into one side.
Welcome to the world of throwaway cameras.
The companies that make these cameras have a nicer name for them: Fuji, which introduced cardboard cameras in Japan in 1986, and Kodak, which entered the fray the following year with its Fun Saver line, call them single-use cameras.
But whatever they're called, the models have been enormously popular, with more than 22 million sold last year, according to the Photographic Marketing Association, a trade group.
With sales figures like those, throwaways have become the photographic equivalent of plastic razors.


Tax-Exempt Yields Off; Taxables Unchanged
Yields offered by tax-exempt money market funds and taxable funds were mixed in the latest week, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
Tax-exempt money fund yields fell for the period that ended on Tuesday, paring some of the sharp gains made the previous week as seasonal factors influenced yields through supply.
In the previous week, many money managers allowed securities held in portfolios to reach maturity without buying new paper, waiting instead for municipalities to begin issuing new debt at the start of the new fiscal year on July 1.


Tests of Hepatitis Drug Are Stopped as 2 Die
An experimental drug intended to treat a common liver disease, hepatitis B, has killed two patients because of an unexplained medical failure in tests that the chief Federal researcher in the case called a "catastrophe."
The National Institutes of Health, which conducted the tests, and Eli Lilly and Company, makers of the experimental drug, fialuridine, halted the tests on June 26.
On that day, the first of 15 patients being treated with the drug fell "desperately ill, critically ill" from toxic reactions, the chief Federal researcher, said Jay H. Hoofnagle, director of the division of digestive disease and nutrition at the National Institutes of Health.


Inside Post for Trot Favorite
American Winner, already the overwhelming favorite in the Yonkers Trot, received even more of an advantage today when he drew the inside post in a field of eight horses that will compete in the first leg of trotting's triple crown on Saturday night.
The Hambletonian at the Meadowlands on Aug. 7 and the Kentucky Futurity on Oct. 8 are the other races in the series for 3-year-old trotters.


Elisabeth Draper, Grande Dame Of Interior Design, Is Dead at 93
Elisabeth Draper, an interior designer in New York for 60 years, died in her sleep at her home in Manhattan on Monday.
She was 93.
John R. Taylor Jr., one of Mrs.
Draper's grandnephews, said she had been in declining health for the last four years.


7 NATIONS' LEADERS OPEN TOKYO TALKS; EXPECTATIONS LOW
President Clinton stepped onto the world stage with a flourish Wednesday, sitting down with other world leaders for the opening session of his first economic summit meeting, hailing a limited agreement to lower tariffs as a major breakthrough, and plunging into this capital's narrow, twisting streets to shake hands and chat with children.
As the seven leading industrial democracies began their 19th annual three-day summit conference, widespread skepticism remained that they can do much to cure the global economic recession.


Little Teeth at the Dentist
To The Home Section:
As a dentist with 44 years of experience, I can add an important supplement to the advice in Lawrence Kutner's Parent &amp; Child column ("Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Doctor? Most Children Are," June 24).
It's true that a preliminary visit to meet the staff, ride the chair and get a little gift is a good idea.
Generally, it should be included in a routine visit by a parent, to avoid overstressing the event.


Revolution of People Power Wells Up in the Bronx; Residents Who Survived Bad Times Alter Development Plans for Their Neighborhood
Tissue-thin maps laced with a tangle of free-hand drawings covered the tables and walls of an urban planning studio where small clumps of architects and designers were sketching their vision for a new 30-block community in the South Bronx.
Theirs is an atypical atelier -- a ground-floor apartment on Courtlandt Avenue in Melrose.
Even unlikelier, however, are their partners in planning -- a group of neighborhood people who not long ago beat back the plan and the possibility of eviction from their houses, apartments and stores.


Tandy Names President For Radio Shack Unit
The Tandy Corporation yesterday named Leonard H. Roberts, an outsider with extensive marketing and franchise experience in consumer products and restaurants, as president of its Radio Shack division.
Radio Shack is the nation's largest chain of consumer electronics stores, with 6,500 retail outlets.
Mr.
Roberts, 44, formerly chairman and chief executive of the Shoney's Inc. restaurant chain, is a "proven market-driven executive who has been very successful at interpreting consumer needs and then engineering and communicating clearly strategies to his associates to meet those needs," John V. Roach, chairman and chief executive of Tandy, said in a statement.


In This Heat, the Body Has One Main Defense: The Brain
As the summer's first heat wave settles in over the New York City region, experts are reminding people that besides air-conditioning and ice, they can take advantage of two things to withstand the heat -- perspiration and common sense.
By avoiding strenuous physical outdoor activity and drinking plenty of fluids, the experts say, heat illness can be easily avoided.


Healy Pledges Allegiance to Rangers, Almost
Glenn Healy, a hero in goal for the Islanders in the Stanley Cup playoffs last spring, has returned to New York after a 16-day vacation in Ireland.
Healy is a free agent entertaining offers, but the Rangers obtained the rights to him in a trade, which means they can match any other offer and retain the 30-year-old Healy.


U.S.-JAPAN TALKS ON SURPLUS STALL
Even as the leaders of the Group of Seven industrial democracies announced a breakthrough in their discussions on liberalizing the world trading system, Japan and the United States engaged in an increasingly tough war of words today over how to reduce Japan's huge trade surpluses, and their talks dragged on inconclusively.
Taking time off from what have turned into a parallel set of negotiations to the Group of Seven summit meeting here, American officials said they abandoned the talks with Japan once, but returned with some reluctance after a personal appeal from Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa to President Clinton.
Nonetheless, they said, progress has been modest at best.


New York Region Steamed by Bermuda High
It was inescapable.
There was the heat -- a record 98 degrees in Central Park and 103 at Newark International Airport.
There was the humidity.
There was the ozone, enough for an advisory that the air was not fit to breathe.
Throughout the New York metropolitan region yesterday, no matter where people were or what they were doing, a lot of them had good reason to wish they were doing something else and doing it somewhere else.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Wind, Shade and Green
Q.
I have a windy, rooftop terrace that gets very little sun.
But I want to look out and see green, especially in winter.
This year I lost my ivy.
What other evergreens do you suggest? -- Paula Offricht, New York.
A.
Too much wind and too little sun are challenges, to be sure, but losses on a winter terrace invariably result from insufficient moisture.
It helps to have generously proportioned containers -- at the very least 15 to 16 inches high and wide.
And if there is little winter rain or snow during a period of four to six weeks, get outside and add some water.
Plan on doing this early in the day when the temperature is expected to remain well above freezing.


Up and Down the River, Get Out or Hang Tough
The murky waters of the Mississippi River rushed over stacked sandbags, splashing across the knees of Ticsha Dwiggins, one of the volunteers who had been building the wall until the authorities declared on Tuesday that it was no use.
"This is so scary," said Mrs.
Dwiggins, 37, whose husband was racing to pull belongings from the basement of their one-story frame house a mile away.
"I'm afraid we could lose our whole life savings."


Emergency Care Is Called Inadequate for Children
A failure to consider children's needs in planning emergency medical services has resulted in inadequate and sometimes dangerous care for thousands of sick or injured youngsters each year, experts said today.
The Institute of Medicine, a unit of the National Academy of Sciences, said in a report that children often needed special care and equipment that were not always available in ambulances and hospital emergency rooms.


Topics of The Times; Iran Stoops to Grave-Robbing
After the election of President Hashemi Rafsanjani, a supposed harbinger of moderation, the world hoped for better from Iran.
But the morality police still stalk the streets, jailing men for wearing T-shirts and women for wearing sunglasses.
Even more upsetting is the recent bulldozing of grave sites and uprooting of bodies from a Bahai cemetery in Teheran, ostensibly to make way for a cultural center.
This officially sanctioned grave-robbing follows years of persecution of an estimated 300,000 Iranian Bahais, whose faith the mullahs treat with spite, since it is viewed as a heretical offshoot of Islam.
Bahais were singled out for oppression in a secret 1991 order calling for their dismissal from jobs and universities.
When the order became known this year, it was rightly condemned by the Clinton Administration and in U.N. debates.


Streets Are Opened to Play for Police Athletic League Children


A One-Man Thrill Factory for Children
SITTING behind his sleek black lacquered desk, Avi Arad looks like a Hell's Angel who has taken a wrong turn.
A big, burly man, he is in black from the pointed tips of his leather boots to the buttoned-up collar of the long-sleeve shirt he wears in the 85-degree summer heat.
The only touch of nonblack is the silver hardware on his Harley-Davidson leather vest.


Monday in the Booth
Former major league outfielder RICK MONDAY will join the Los Angeles Dodgers broadcast team for the rest of the 1993 season as a replacement for Don Drysdale.


Blind Woman Killed by a Subway Car
A blind woman led by a guide dog was killed yesterday when she fell from a midtown subway platform and was struck by a train as she frantically tried to climb back over the platform edge, the transit police said.
Guide dog experts said her death was the first fatal accident they could recall in New York City involving a blind person and a guide dog.
"We don't how or why, but she apparently slipped over the edge, leaving her dog on the platform," said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


Scorchers
Going outside is like opening an oven door.
The heat hits you in the face.
Sleeping is an affair of bits and pieces.
The drone of the air-conditioner -- assuming there is one -- wakens as often as it lulls.
The subway platform: Ah well, let's not talk about the subway platform.
As for the bus stop at high noon, or 5 in the afternoon or even at midnight: No, let's not talk about that either.
On the other hand, what is New York without a heat wave?


Head Count Fails to Broaden Giuliani's Appeal
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for New York City mayor, held a news conference yesterday in an attempt to show his broad appeal, but it turned out that his appeal may not have been as broad as it seemed.
Standing on the steps of City Hall under a blistering sun, Mr.
Giuliani smiled as he received the endorsement of a Democratic club from Staten Island.
Flanked by a group of about 14 people holding signs that read "Democrats Need Rudy" and "Democrats Want Rudy," Mr.
Giuliani said the endorsement showed he was gaining support among Democrats.


Glen Ellen Winery Told to Pay $2.5 Million
A Sonoma County jury has awarded the Franzia family, owners of the JFJ Bronco Winery, $2.5 million for financial damages the winery suffered when Glen Ellen Winery terminated a six-year business relationship, setting off a two-year legal dispute between two of California's leading wine families.
Fred Franzia, the president of Bronco, said he thought the $2.5 million award, announced on Tuesday, was a record for a distributor losing a winery's business.
Bronco had been seeking $10 million from Glen Ellen, a Sonoma Valley winery owned by the Benziger family and several partners.


Norman Goes to Bucks
Free agent KEN NORMAN, saying he wanted long-term security and the chance to play close to home, signed a six-year contract yesterday with the rebuilding Milwaukee Bucks.
"My mother, my daughter and my brothers and sisters are the most important people on this earth and I wanted to give them the opportunity to see me play," said Norman, a Chicago native who spent his first six seasons with the Los Angeles Clippers.


New I.B.M. Sales Staff: Specialists in Products
Providing the first glimpse of his plans to revive I.B.M., Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chief executive, has decided to overhaul the company's 40,000-member marketing force in the United States.
Instead of continuing to organize the sales staff solely by geographic area and expecting it to sell everything from PC's to mainframes, I.B.M. will increasingly rely on specialists familiar with customers in specific industries and experts on specific computer products.
Company officials and industry consultants said yesterday that the new marketing program, which will be put into effect in the next three months, represents a break with I.B.M. tradition.


CHRONICLE
Ms. magazine will have a new editor in chief starting with the September-October issue, but her name will be familiar to readers of the masthead.
MARCIA ANN GILLESPIE, 49, has already had three terms of duty at the 21-year-old magazine.
The executive editor since October, Ms.
Gillespie previously held that post from 1988 to 1990.
She also did two stints as contributing editor and in the mid-1980's shared a column called Personal Words with two other writers.
She succeeds Robin Morgan, who is stepping down to return to writing and acting.
Ms.
Gillespie, who was the editor in chief of Essence magazine from 1971 to 1980, said she considered herself lucky to have been involved with "the two publications that are closest to my heart." Because Ms. stopped accepting advertising when it was reorganized three years ago, Ms.
Gillespie has a measure of "freedom that is almost indescribable," she said.


Immigration Strains California Resources
To the Editor:
That Americans increasingly favor reduced levels of immigration, as a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows (front page, June 27), should come as no surprise.
However, it is unfortunate that you use the unnecessarily pejorative terms "anti-immigrant feelings" and "hostility."


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


At G.O.P. Meeting, an Uninvited Guest
It was business as usual for the Republican Party at the opening of its annual meeting here today.
Once again, Haley Barbour, the party chairman, offered President Clinton mock praise for uniting the Republicans.
But lurking upstairs was the unusual: a Democrat.
Soon after Mr.
Barbour got through assailing the Democrats, David Wilhelm, the Democratic chairman, held a news conference of his own to fight back.


People
*
Ira Carlin, executive vice president and media director at McCann-Erickson North America and media director at McCann New York, was named to the additional position of worldwide media director at McCann Worldwide, New York.
Mr.
Carlin, 45, succeeds Gordon L. Link, 56, who retired and will serve as a consultant to McCann Worldwide.


CANDIDATE TO LEAD NEW YORK SCHOOLS WITHDRAWS AGAIN
Bernard R. Gifford, the California professor who was the leading candidate to be New York City's next schools chancellor, removed himself from consideration today for the second time in 10 days, this time calling his decision final.
In a letter that plunged the search for a new chancellor into confusion, Dr.
Gifford said he had pulled out because of the same commitments to his family and to his new computer software business that he had cited in his first letter, last week.
Then, in one 24-hour-period, he formally withdrew from consideration, then seemed to contradict himself by flying to New York City to be interviewed for the chancellorship anyway.


Rising Volume
The number of shares traded daily on the New York Stock Exchange has bounced up and down this year, but it has stayed steadily above last year's average daily volume of 202 million shares.
One reason is that the number of listed companies has increased -- by 251 last year and by 139 as of June 30, to 2,218.
Another reason is the increased popularity of stock investing.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Charles H. Keating Jr. was sentenced to nearly 13 years in Federal prison for defrauding investors.
The leading figure in the savings and loan debacle is already serving a 10-year sentence for violating California securities laws.  [ Page D1. ]
Sales at retailers climbed 5.6 percent in June, the fourth consecutive monthly increase, as department stores showed greater gains than apparel chains.
The figures suggested the possibility of a stronger economy in the second half of the year.  [ D2. ]


Rebuking the U.S., Jury Acquits 2 In Marshal's Killing in Idaho Siege
In a strong rebuke of the Government's use of force during an armed siege, a jury in Boise, Idaho, acquitted two men today in the slaying of a Federal marshal last summer that set off an 11-day standoff in the Selkirk Mountains.
After 19 days of deliberation, virtually all of the Government's case against Randy Weaver, 45, a white separatist, and Kevin Harris, 25, a family friend, was rejected by the Federal court jury.


Diner's Journal
Hotel Perceptions
In recent years, Manhattan hotel dining rooms have struggled to shed the image of bland, formal predictability.
Some, like Les Celebrites in the Nikko-Essex House and Lespinasse in the St.
Regis Hotel, have succeeded admirably.
Fifty Seven Fifty Seven in the new Four Seasons Hotel, 57 East 57th Street, (212) 758-6560, looks like no other hotel restaurant (and though the name of the hotel sounds like another restaurant, the two are unconnected).
It has a vaguely Egyptian feel: bare floors, a soaring 22-foot coffered ceiling and the echo of Deco in its handsome details.
Yet thanks to the honeyed tone of polished woods and the superb lighting, the setting is warm and welcoming.
The food, orchestrated by Harry Gabel, who comes to New York from a stint at the Four Seasons Wailea on Maui, is also less formal than most.
Grilling and roasting highlight a contemporary menu (main dishes $21 to $28) that avoids the overreaching complexity often typical of American cooking.
Well-executed fried calamari, shrimp-and-artichoke risotto, and roasted filet steak with peppered mushroom stew are a few examples.
Baked halibut with roasted vegetables suffered from the merest overcooking.
Vichyssoise did not benefit from a seared sea scallop moored in the middle of the soup.


Dinkins Leaves Israel, Still Hearing About Crown Hts.
At the Tel Aviv Museum of Art the other day, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his large entourage from New York City were about to leave when they spotted Adah Ackerman and her two small sons.
The political antennae lost no time homing in.
As a mass of people, cameras and microphones rumbled toward her, Mrs.
Ackerman, a visitor from Ames, Iowa, did the only sensible thing for a mother pushing one child in a stroller and holding the other one's hand: She moved back.


Nike Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Art in Review
Donald Lipski  'Pieces of String Too Short to Save' Brooklyn Museum 200 Eastern Parkway  (at Prospect Park) Through Sept. 5
Donald Lipski is best known for transforming everyday objects, from matchbooks to tractor tires, into sculptures at once strange and decipherable, usually by ingeniously combining them with something else equally mundane.
For example, a Lipski sculpture with an exotic, vaguely African look might turn out simply to be a garden trowel wound with a tape measure to give it a long, tapering snout.
Fusions like this require a talent for seeing unusual possibilities in the obvious and a surplus of randomly collected things to choose from, both of which are the subjects of "Pieces of String Too Short to Save," Mr.
Lipski's sprawling installation in the Brooklyn Museum's Grand Lobby.


Advance Seen in Finding 'Magic Bullet' for Cancer
After years of hopes raised and hopes dashed that a magic bullet against cancer could ever be invented, scientists have reported an impressive advance in using a sort of molecular sharpshooter to destroy tumor cells.
In the new research, scientists have designed so-called monoclonal antibodies that seem to be considerably more effective in wiping out cancer than were previous efforts to target malignant tissue with other antibody proteins.
But the latest results have been seen only in rodents, and even if the new approach proves valid, much work must be done before the technique can be used on patients.


Rich Nations' Declaration: A Commitment to Democracy and Human Rights
1.
We, the leaders of our seven countries and the representatives of the European Community, reaffirm our commitment to the universal principles of freedom, democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
Since we last met in Munich, the process of democratization and economic reform has further advanced.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about Dr.
Roald Hoffmann, a chemist and poet, misidentified his daughter.
She is Dr.
Ingrid Zabel, not Ingrid Hoffmann.


Losing the Paper Chase
The National Archives and Records Administration is America's memory bank: the repository of billions of official documents, the manager of the Presidential library system and of a dozen regional archives.
Nearly six months on, the Clinton Administration has yet to announce its choice for National Archivist.
The cost is a loss of momentum for an agency sorely in need of leadership.
Today, as computers supplant old file drawers, the national memory is especially imperiled.
The National Archives has never gotten the attention it deserves.
Founded by Franklin Roosevelt in 1934, it was for decades a neglected ward of the General Services Administration, the Federal housekeeper.
A fresh start seemed possible when Congress re-established the National Archives in 1985 as an independent agency under an archivist to be confirmed by the Senate for no fixed term.


At Home Abroad; Reason For Hope
"They have made the transition from heroism to politics," a lawyer said.
He was speaking of Nelson Mandela and the others who spent years in prison or exile or jeopardy for resisting apartheid.
The three years since the prisoners were released have been a time of violence and thwarted plans for political change.
But now at last change is coming, in good part because Mr.
Mandela and other leaders of the African National Congress have moved it from the romance of liberation to the give-and-take of politics.


Nigerian Opposition Accord Brings Pressure on Military
Officials of Nigeria's two opposition political parties said today that their agreement to form an interim government would raise pressure on Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida to return Nigeria to civilian rule by Aug. 27.
As the two parties began efforts to form the interim government, the streets of Lagos were generally calm after four days of violent protests against the military Government's decision to annul the presidential elections last month.


Treasury Prices Swing in Session
Prices of Treasury securities rebounded from an early selloff yesterday to close modestly higher.
In a day of light trading, securities dealers said the bond market's fluctuations were more indicative of short-term trading strategies than of shifts in investor sentiment or changes in the economic outlook.


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


On My Mind; Taking Back the Streets
In 1989, police in New York City made 94,490 narcotics arrests.
In 1990, the first year of David Dinkins's term as Mayor, the figure was 68,276.
It stayed in that range the next two years -- a three-year total of about 75,000 fewer arrests.
Each street pusher who escaped arrest carries out thousands of deals each year.
The total they committed without ever being taken to the precinct house is -- fill in your own estimate, nobody else really knows either.


Corrections
An article and a chart about Adobe Systems Inc. in Business Day on Wednesday gave an incorrect figure in some copies for the decline in the company's stock price.
The stock fell $3.375 to close at $55.75 in Nasdaq trading on Tuesday.
All copies of the article gave an incorrect percentage decline in the stock price.
It fell 5.7 percent.


At the Bar; A demand for a cease-fire on lawyer-bashing puts a bar president in the line of fire.
Harvey Saferstein, the energetic president of the California Bar Association, had already had it up to here with lawyer jokes.
So a few weeks ago, after seeing an advertisement for Miller Lite beer in which a rodeo cowboy lassos a fat-cat lawyer, he complained to the company.
Last week a disgruntled businessman named Gianluigi Ferri shot and killed eight people, including three lawyers and a law student, at the San Francisco law firm of Pettit &amp; Martin.
Within hours of the carnage, Mr.
Saferstein had heard his first ghoulish lawyer joke about it, then learned that an anonymous prankster had offered the San Francisco District Attorney's office a group discount on bulletproof vests.
It convinced Mr.
Saferstein that something had to be done.


Sports-Betting Legislation Heads Into Bottom of the 9th in Trenton
The Assembly Appropriations Committee threw the issue of sports betting into legislative limbo today by doing nothing about a bill that would allow voters to decide the issue in November.
Sports-betting proponents acknowledged that today's events were probably a setback to their efforts to make New Jersey the second state, after Nevada, with legalized sports betting in casinos.
Nonetheless, they promised a desperate three-week fight to save the legislation before Aug. 2, the last date that the issue may be placed on the Nov. 2 ballot.


For Children
'Antarctica'
American Museum of Natural History  Central Park West at 79th Street  (212) 769-5800  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through December
One way to keep the junior crew cool is to see a movie about a land of ice.
This documentary, shown in the museum's glacially cold Naturemax theater, has many elements of a Hollywood movie, without the sticky floor or the high admission price of a commercial cinema.
"Antarctica" offers humor, death, danger and sadness; it's missing only love. (But you could fall in love with the place.)


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW  14th STREET FESTIVAL: Fourteenth Street will be closed from Second Avenue to Avenue of the Americas from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SUNDAY  THIRD AVENUE STREET FESTIVAL: Third Avenue will be closed between 42d and 57th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
CAPTIVE NATIONS WEEK RALLY: Fifth Avenue will be closed between 59th and 72d Streets from 9 A.M. until completion.


Parrying Iraq, U.N. Will Seek to Seal Missile Sites
In an effort to break the stalemate with Iraq over permanent monitoring of the country's missile testing sites, the United Nations sent a team of inspectors to Baghdad today with instructions to put seals on the sites and to stop all testing of rockets temporarily.
The move came three days after the United Nations Special Commission on Iraq withdrew its inspectors from Baghdad because they were prevented from installing remote-control cameras to monitor activity at the missile sites.


Student Shoots 3 at Hearing In Utah, and Is Then Killed
A student grievance hearing erupted into a shootout today at Weber State University north of here, killing one student and injuring a campus police officer, a university lawyer and another student.
The student, Mark Duong, 28, a computer science major in his senior year, was shot to death by the officer after Mr.
Duong suddenly stood, drew a .22-caliber revolver and began firing on participants at the hearing, said a spokesman for the Utah Department of Public Safety, Gary Whitney.


Shaken Board Members Left With 'Pie in Our Face'
When the tangled courtship between the New York City Board of Education and Bernard R. Gifford ended yesterday, the board was left shaken and embarrassed, scrambling to find new candidates for schools chancellor.
"We got pie in our face, all seven of us," said Victor H. Gotbaum, the retired labor leader and an appointee of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
"We have to take it like good people and see where we go from here."


James P. Cooney, 90, Army Radiation Expert
James Patrick Cooney, a retired major general who was one of the Army's top authorities on radiology and the medical effects of atomic explosions, died on Tuesday at Wesley Woods Health Center in Atlanta.
He was 90.
His son, Dr.
James P. Cooley Jr., dean of the College of Health Sciences at Georgia State University, said the cause was complications related to Alzheimer's disease.


TV Weekend; 2-Part Portrait of a Black Working-Class Family
If done right, a television drama can hold its own with the best in theater or film.
"Laurel Avenue," on HBO at 10 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday, does it just right, wonderfully so.
In several respects, this three-hour portrait of a black working-class family is a breakthrough.
Black people on television rarely seem connected to the real world.
Too often they are reduced to snappy one-liners on sitcoms.
Once in a while, as in "The Cosby Show" or "The Fresh Prince of Bel Air," they are transported into upper-class settings, valuable as possible role models, no doubt, but still distant fantasies for the majority.


CHRONICLE
Oh, the tangled web we weave: RAINE SPENCER, stepmother of the Princess of Wales, was married to a French count yesterday, 15 months after the death of her second husband.
Countess Spencer, 63, married Count JEAN-FRANCOIS DE CHAMBRUN, 57, in a civil ceremony.
Her second husband, the 8th Earl Spencer, the Princess's father, died in March 1992.
Neither the Princess nor her three siblings attended the wedding, the Associated Press reported.
They were said to have harbored ill feelings for their stepmother, nicknaming her "Acid Raine" and criticizing her for selling off family treasures.


King World Productions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sports of The Times; A Return Trip From Paradise
THE good news is that nobody bought the house.
Thanks to the wonders of the real estate marketplace, it has remained the property of Joe and Marty McIlvaine long enough to provide a familiar place when their family makes its return from San Diego to Westchester.


Federal Paper Board reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam; Hold Out for P.O.W.'s
To the Editor:
The American Legion takes exception to "Stop Punishing Vietnam" (editorial, June 27).
We should stop punishing ourselves.
The right thing to do in our relationship with Vietnam is to achieve the fullest possible accounting for Americans held prisoner of war and missing in action from the Vietnam War.
Specifically, Hanoi must release Americans held prisoner, provide their remains or tell us why neither is possible.
To accept anything less is to perpetuate the emotional agony Americans have endured for more than two decades.


Critic's Choice/Film; A Rich Array of Italian Concerns
Starting today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater is a monthlong feast of films covering those subjects most precious to Italian cinema: politics, love, religion and food (probably not in that order).
"The Italian Summer Festival: 30 Days of Italian Cinema at the Public" begins with Pupi Avati's charming 1984 film, "We Three," best described as an antidote to "Amadeus." Based on the 14-year-old Mozart's brief stay in Bologna while on an Italian tour, the film portrays the composer as an earnest and normal adolescent.
His father reminds him to practice his music; he makes a friend of a young man his age, and they both have crushes on a girl from a neighboring estate.
Except for an occasional reference to his fame, and the way he is addressed as "Signore Amade," you'd never know he was the Mozart.
Like Mr.
Avati's 1991 film, "The Story of Boys and Girls," this one is richly photographed in the Bolognese countryside, and populated with enticing, eccentric minor characters.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  AGREEMENT AT TOKYO TALKS  Leaders of the world's seven major industrial democracies, meeting in Tokyo, agreed to give an immediate $3 billion in aid to Russia and pledged to push for economic growth while lowering barriers to trade.
A1  The meaning, and differences, of change in the U.S. and Japan.
A6


2 Brooklyn Women Are Felled On Streets Ruled by Weapons
One woman had just hugged her mother goodbye.
The other was out for a late-night walk.
Suddenly gunshots rang out on the Brooklyn streets, fatally wounding one of the women as she pushed a toddler in a stroller, with a 3-year-old at her side, and critically injuring the other.
Both women, the police said, were unintended victims in separate shootings in Brownsville and nearby East New York involving the kind of wild, random gunfire that has traumatized some of the toughest parts of New York as drugs and guns have proliferated.
By a stroke of fate, both had stepped into the paths of bullets aimed at others, which in the East New York shooting also killed one man and injured another, both of whom the police say were ambushed in what may have been a feud over drugs.
Single Shot to Chest
"It's tragic," said Sgt. John McCluskey, a spokesman for the Police Department.
"It's one of the things we try to control," the sergeant said.
"But it's hard. We do our best. That's the most we can do. We try our best."


Rodriguez Is Leading; Nicklaus Is Charging
The United States Senior Open produces the matchups fans want to see better than any other championship in golf does.
Today's opening round was a prime example, as Chi Chi Rodriguez, Jack Nicklaus and Lee Trevino rose to the top of the leaderboard.
The lowest scorer of the three, and the leader of the tournament after one round, was Rodriguez.
He toured the Cherry Hills Country Club course with a smooth, four-under-par 67 that featured finely wrought iron shots and some solid putting with a club recently pulled out of a bargain bin.


Harkes Unsigned
JOHN HARKES, a star midfielder for the U.S. national soccer team, may leave his club team, Sheffield Wednesday, after rejecting the English team's latest contract offer.
Harkes, who helped lead Sheffield Wednesday to the Football Association and League Cup finals last season, is currently on a week-to-week contract.
He is still in the United States, and will be playing for the U.S. national team in the CONCACAF Gold Cup through July 25. (AP)


State-O-Maine reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Smith C.B.A. Coach
Former N.B.A. all-star guard RANDY SMITH has been named coach of the Hartford Hellcats, the Continental Basketball Association team said yesterday.
Smith, 44, played 12 seasons in the N.B.A. and holds the record for consecutive games played, 906. (AP)


Review/Music; Chamber Works Under Sky And Trees
As befits a series founded by the feisty violinist and conductor Alexander Schneider, the Washington Square Music Festival has never lacked nerve in its 40-year standoff with weather and urban decay.
So the program on Tuesday evening, led by Henry Schuman, the festival's longtime oboist and conductor, seemed unsurprising for all its progressive audacity.
The first work, Mozart's Serenade in E flat for wind octet (K. 375), made good sense on any terms.
With Mr.
Schuman a strong first oboist and William Blount a fine first clarinetist, the performance hung together well despite occasional lapses in ensemble.


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; A Pair of Zany Satirists (And Audience) at Work
When Sarah Skaggs and Dance noise performed on Monday night at Irving Plaza, it was like something out of the Renaissance.
Well, maybe not quite.
But consider the similarities.
During the Renaissance, dance productions were sometimes staged in palatial halls, with the audience seated at the sides or in galleries above the floor.
At the program's conclusion, spectators were invited to join in the dancing.
Theatergoing thereby merged with partygoing.


INSIDE
On Streets Ruled by Guns, 2 Women Are Hit, One Fatally
Two women were shot, one fatally, in separate Brooklyb incidents involving the kind of wild, random gunfire that has traumatized some of the toughest parts of New York.
Both stepped into the paths of bullets that were aimed at others.
Page B1.
Advance on Cancer Cure
Scientists are encouraged by the ability of special antibodies to attack cancer cells but caution that human treatments may be distant.
Page A10.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT B. WALLACE is gathering no moss.
After six years as executive editor and vice president at Rolling Stone magazine, he figured it was time to move on, he said yesterday, "when I was mistaken for Elvis at a Caldor in Newburgh, N.Y."
"I took that as a sign that it was time to leave rock-and-roll," he added.


COMPANY NEWS: The Evolution of Barney; Playskool Gives Voice To Purple Dinosaur
Barney is the kinder, gentler dinosaur of the "Jurassic Park" summer.
If the more savage, man-eating creatures have kept audiences fixated for weeks at movie theaters, it is the quirky-looking purple dinosaur that has captivated the hearts of children.
So it was inevitable that Barney, already the star of home videos and his own show on public television, would evolve yet again: a Talking Barney stuffed animal is being shipped to stores nationwide this week.


Corrections
The Strategies column in the "Your Money" pages on Saturday, about Social Security and divorced women, misstated the effect of women's earnings on the benefits they are entitled to collect.
A woman who was married for at least 10 years and divorced for at least 2 years is entitled to part or all of her former husband's benefits, but the payments may be reduced if the woman is earning substantial income.


President Hears Complaints On Doing Business in Japan
President Clinton today got an earful of complaints from American business people about barriers to Japan's markets, as well as some strong endorsements for his efforts to negotiate a new trade agreement with Japan.
In a meeting with Americans who are trying to penetrate Japan's market, the President and Cabinet officials were told that it is possible for a foreign company to succeed in the world's second-largest market.


Executive Changes
GUNDLE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS INC., Houston, named Thomas Caltrider president and chief executive.
HESS'S DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Allentown, Pa., named John J. Rahilly president and chief operating officer.


Yeltsin Arrives in Tokyo As Aid Plan Is Prepared
Arriving at the economic summit meeting as leaders of the seven leading industrial nations were preparing a new aid package for his country, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia offered unusually conciliatory words today in an effort to warm decades of icy relations with Japan.
The financial package, announced as a near certainty late today by Treasury Secretary Lloyd M. Bentsen, includes funds for training, grants and loans to help put Russia's state-owned companies into private hands.


Buying Spree Pushes Dow Over 3,500
Investors shrugged off inflation jitters and began buying stocks in earnest yesterday, pushing up all major market indicators.
As the prices of gold and other commodities eased, the Dow Jones industrial average, lifted by banking and retail stocks, broke the 3,500 barrier and stayed above it.
It finished at 3,514.42, up 38.75 points.


Seattle's Kemp Injured During Filming
Lights, camera -- hospital.
That's how it went yesterday for Shawn Kemp of the Seattle SuperSonics, who was lucky to escape serious injury during the filming of a Reebok sneaker commercial at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn.
Kemp, a 23-year-old all-star forward who helped the Sonics reach the Western Conference finals this season, had to be rushed by stretcher to Bellevue hospital after attempting a reverse slam dunk, pulling down the front end of the rim and crashing to the floor head first in a sweltering gymnasium filled with friends, film crew members, fans waiting for autographs and even Kemp's mother, Barbara, all of whom watched in stunned disbelief.


For Those Who Wish to Fly and Breathe
To the Editor:
"Fresh Air in the Air" (editorial, June 24), together with related articles, is on track, but late in acknowledging the problem.
Some five years ago various experts had already raised questions about cabin air quality in connection with the ban on smoking aboard aircraft then proposed.
They also linked poor air quality to planes using only half their capacity for air purification and circulation to save fuel following the energy crisis.
In other words, even when older planes had a larger capacity for replacing air fast, the airlines chose to use only half of it.
The newer but more limited ventilation equipment simply reflects a practice introduced some 10 years ago.


NAMIC U.S.A. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


GTE PLANS TO TAKE A $46 MILLION CHARGE
The GTE Corporation, the nation's largest local telephone company, said yesterday that it would take a $46 million after-tax charge against earnings for the second quarter.
The costs are related to incentives for the "voluntary separation" program to reduce GTE's management and staff.


Marriott Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


Art in Review
'High-Heeled Art'
Charles Cowles Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 23
Technology and the absurd are dominant themes in this energetic, if disjointed, show of fashion photographs.
Stephane Sednaoui's seamless collages, made up of hundreds of tiny images of male and female models in silver jump suits or gold evening dresses, look like microscope slides of colorful squirming things; Geof Kern's black-and-white photographs show a model in unlikely poses, among them standing on top of a tree and dangling sideways from a ladder.


Sofia Journal; An Old Red Fumes in His Villa Prison
Nearing his 82d birthday and in his fourth year under house arrest, Todor Zhivkov, who ruled Bulgaria with a strong hand for 33 years until his ouster in 1989, lives in high comfort, enjoys apparent good health and exudes bitterness and anger.
In his living room in the mountainside suburb of Boyana, the nesting place of the elite before, during and after the Communist era, sitting at a picture window that allows a view of the capital below through a screen of tall birches, lime trees and rose bushes, the former leader bridled when a visitor mentioned the name Andrei Lukanov.


Change, and Japan
Change means something very different on Tokyo's streets than on Washington's streets.
And President Clinton, who campaigned on the promise of change, may have some trouble in communicating his version of it in getting Japanese consumers to join in his effort to break down trade barriers.
Most Japanese say that what really needs to be changed in Japan is the one-party rule.
Article, page A6.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.39
3.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.02
3.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.10
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.38
5.42
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.65
6.67
7.59
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.38
7.41
8.53
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.71
5.71
6.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Skills Serve as Passport To a Liberal Education
To the Editor:
Tony Kushner deplores the recommendation of W. Ann Reynolds, Chancellor of the City University of New York, to eliminate 97 degree programs "chiefly in the humanities" in institutions "with the highest percentages of African-American and Latino students" ("University or Trade School?", Op-Ed, June 28).
These programs would be replaced by "technical and occupational programs." Beyond question this is unfortunate.
However, the point is not that minority students need not be trained, as Mr.
Kushner says, "as thinkers, writers and artists but rather as service-economy employees," but that they, like all students, must first have the skills and means to do so.
Students need the sense of well-being and self-reliance that comes through learning a marketable skill.


Excerpts From Letter of Withdrawal
Following are excerpts of a letter, dated July 8, from Bernard R. Gifford to Carol A. Gresser, president of the New York City Board of Education, withdrawing his candidacy for Schools Chancellor:
As you know, on the morning of Tuesday, June 29, I faxed a letter to Dr.
Janet Greenwood for transmittal to Dr.
Frank Macchiarola, Chair of the Chancellor's Search Committee, requesting that my name be removed from consideration.
In my letter, which I sent a few days after my meeting with the Search Committee, I cited two overriding reasons for what has been the most difficult decision of my professional life -- family obligations and an irrevocable and precluding commitment as Founder of the ACADEMIC SYSTEMS CORPORATION, which is dedicated to developing the next generation of technology-mediated instructional support systems for underprepared college students.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Aristar Inc., Cordova, Tenn., a unit of Great Western Financial Corp., is offering $150 million of 5.75 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.846 to yield 5.786 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's, A- by Standard &amp; Poor's and A by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $250 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 5.24 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is callable in a year.


7 Executed in Egypt In Sharp Crackdown On Islamic Militants
The Egyptian Government hanged seven militant followers of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman today for attacks against foreign tourists and conspiring to overthrow the Government of President Hosni Mubarak.
It was the largest number of executions for a political crime in more than four decades.
The decision to execute such a large group of militants is a turning point for the President, who has in the past refused to carry out executions for political crimes.
Egyptian officials, worried about inflaming the Islamic militant movement, have hesitated to confront their adversaries head on and provide the radicals with martyrs.


Passion and Practicalities In Collecting Photographs
LIKE other characters in the drama of the art world, collectors are seen in conflicting, and not always flattering, stereotypes.
In one view, collectors are both insecure and greedy.
Not only are they desperate to impress others with evidence of their taste and wealth, but they also lust to control the anarchic power of art by owning it, much the way prehistoric hunters sought to capture the magic of animals by tracing their outlines on the walls of caves.


Graying of the Greens: Marketing Makes the Cut
As cigar aficionado Larry Laoretti defends his United States Senior Open title this weekend at the Cherry Hills Country Club in Englewood, Colo., he, Jack Nicklaus, Lee Trevino, Gary Player and Chi Chi Rodriguez will appeal directly to their personal age group: the nation's fastest-growing segment of golfers.
Those qualifying for American Association for Retired Persons membership neatly match the Senior PGA Tour's makeup and can fantasize about swinging a Big Bertha driver with ex-unknowns like Laoretti and PGA Seniors winner Tom Wargo.


Television Chief For Baseball
Kenneth Schanzer yesterday was named president of Major League Baseball's recently formed joint venture to broadcast games on network television with NBC and ABC .
He is faced with the task of changing advertiser and viewer attitudes toward the sport, which has suffered as baseball's network ratings have fallen.
"The overall job is very daunting," said Mr.
Schanzer, who is leaving his position as executive vice president of NBC Sports.
"Despite all the talk about the problems baseball has, one thing that can't be denied by anybody is baseball is a sport with enormous root strength."


Albany All-Nighter: Cleared Desks and Unresolved Issues
As it closed its 1993 session this morning, the New York State Legislature passed legislation to create a fund to preserve environmentally sensitive lands across the state, but failed to decide how to dispose of radioactive waste from power plants and hospitals.
In a challenge to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic-controlled State Assembly also passed legislation to divert savings from closed psychiatric hospitals to community mental health services, virtually defying the Governor, also a Democrat, to veto a proposal he has consistently opposed.
The bill has already passed in the Republican-controlled Senate.


No Headline
"When you retire, you go to the World Trade Center, maybe the museums, but once you've done that, what do you do? You go to the courts." -- LEONARD GREENBERG, who spends his days watching trials at Manhattan's Federal courthouse.  [ B3:5. ]


Mets Won't Be Rebuilt in a Day, Says McIlvaine
The announcement, like so much of the rest of the season for the Mets, lacked all suspense.
Joe McIlvaine, who had effectively been put in charge of the baseball operation before he took the title or the microphone yesterday, was officially named general manager of the Mets.


100degrees of Lassitude in a New York Meltdown
Lillian Wexler, 82, lunched naked on cold borscht in her Upper East Side apartment.
David Carney, 24, strolled through Manhattan with an oversized wet washcloth draped over his head like a soggy tortilla.
Snow Lily and Blizzard, the polar bears at the Bronx Zoo, hid in the shady outcroppings of their fabricated Arctic habitat.
As the sun baked the pavement yesterday with an insufferable and record heat, many New Yorkers devised unique urban strategies for coping with the indolence and depletion that the tropical weather wrought.


U.S. TEAM BEGINS MIDEAST SHUTTLE
A team of American officials arrived in Israel today and met with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin at the start of a shuttle effort to break the impasse in the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
The team, headed by Dennis B. Ross, the coordinator of the talks, is to meet Palestinian representatives on Friday before going to Egypt, Syria and Jordan.


Road Kill: Yanks Get Run Down Again
Another nightmare appeared before the Yankees tonight and it was not a dream.
Melido Perez was cruising along with a two-hitter and a two-run lead when the Yankees entered the bottom of the ninth inning against the Angels.
They never made it out of the inning alive.
The Angels erupted for three runs in the ninth off Perez, Steve Howe and Steve Farr and swiped a 4-3 victory over the Yankees tonight at Anaheim Stadium.
Instead of inching to within one game of the first-place Blue Jays, the Yankees sputtered to their sixth loss in their last seven games on the road trip and remained two games back.


Stolt-Nielsen reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Baseball's Ritual Of Snubs And Subs
The Philadelphia Phillies, easily the best team in the National League until a recent cold streak, have four players on the league's All-Star team, but the omission of two other team members raised questions yesterday.
Bobby Cox, the National League manager, chose three of his Atlanta Braves starting pitchers, but shunned Tommy Greene, whose 10-2 record is the league's second best.


Smith C.B.A. Coach
Former N.B.A. all-star guard RANDY SMITH has been named coach of the Hartford Hellcats, the Continental Basketball Association team said yesterday.
Smith, 44, played 12 seasons in the N.B.A. and holds the record for consecutive games played, 906. (AP)


Review/Film: In The Line of Fire; Eastwood Slips Easily Into Town
CLINT EASTWOOD'S timing is uncanny.
After all the noise and hot air attending the releases of the somewhat less than perfect "Jurassic Park," "Last Action Hero" and "The Firm," he slips into town, almost modestly, giving the "True Grit" performance of his career in the most uproariously entertaining movie of the summer so far.
"In the Line of Fire" is not exactly "Potemkin." It's movie making of the high, smooth, commercial order that Hollywood prides itself on but achieves with singular infrequency.


Review/Television; Fighting Homosexuality With Words
Meet the Rev.
Fred Phelps, whose method of fighting homosexuality is to call one opponent "a Jezebellian, switch-hitting whore" and another "a fat, ugly sodomite" and still another, a county district attorney, "a depraved, adulterous, whorish woman." On tonight's edition of "20/20" he characterizes his approach as "moral persuasion."
Mr.
Phelps operates out of a Baptist church in Topeka, Kan., with a congregation of his nine grown children and their spouses and children.
They attack by fax, picket those they find objectionable (including people who have died of AIDS) and to judge by John Stossel's vivid report, make life a torment for anybody on their list.


Six to Enter Hall Today
JULI FURTADO of Durango, Colo., who won her third world women's downhill last year, will be inducted today into the Mountain Bike Hall of Fame in Crested Butte, Colo.
The other inductees will be JIMMY DEATON, OTIS GUY, GARY HELFRICH and ALAN ARMSTRONG, all pioneers in the sport, and Charlie Litsky, the sport's leading athletes' agent, television analyst and race announcer.
Litsky died eight weeks ago of a heart attack at age 33.


Series in Last Year
The American Championship Racing Series, an innovative attempt to link traditional stakes races in the handicap division, is going out of business at the end of this year.
The series chairman, DAVID VANCE, said yesterday that all the participating tracks decided to end the series, which was started in 1991 to sharpen attention on top races for older horses.
This year, $1.5 million will be awarded in bonuses in the nine-race series. (AP)


Review/Music; Big Forces And Small In Requiem By Faure
John Rutter, the conductor and composer, has made himself almost synonymous with the Faure Requiem, performing it on many occasions.
He has prepared his own edition of the work, based on a chamber orchestra version that Faure produced in 1893.
The Requiem, a work of intimate spiritual intensities, benefits greatly from this treatment.
It is strange, then, that Mr.
Rutter seems to favor large choruses alongside his chamber forces.
On Monday night at Carnegie Hall, he led the New England Symphonic Ensemble, which blended nine choruses from around the country.


Claims of Bias Are Coloring 2 Los Angeles Beating Cases
As two racially charged cases growing out of the beating of Rodney G. King approach their court dates, lawyers in one of them are playing up a volatile theme that underlies much of the anger that burst into rioting last year: the argument that the legal system treats black defendants more harshly than whites.
At a hearing on Wednesday, the lawyers said their clients -- three black men who beat a white truck driver, Reginald O. Denny, during the riots -- unfairly faced more serious charges than the white police officers who had beaten Mr.
King.


It's Batten-Down, Button-Down Time at Apple
The era of Silicon Valley's Magic Kingdom may finally be drawing to a close.
Apple Computer Inc. has long been revered as a special company, successfully violating many norms of corporate behavior with its blue jeans and T-shirts culture.
But the new chief executive, Michael Spindler, has sent what some consider his first clear signal that the new Apple will increasingly fit the Corporate America mold rather than break it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CFM INTERNATIONAL, a joint venture between General Electric Co. and the French national engine maker Snecma, won a $187 million contract to supply 59 jet engines for installation on United States Air Force planes.


Home Video
Whatever the latest big movies on tape, the good small ones invariably stand out on best-renter lists.
Now there are "Reservoir Dogs," "Bob Roberts" and "The Player." Next will come "The Crying Game," one small film that grew large in theaters, released on tape this week by LIVE.
Arty movies with edge have a secure video niche, said Ronna Wallace, senior vice president of production and acquisitions at LIVE Entertainment, whose video division released "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" but also specializes in smaller movies from independent film makers.


The Spoken Word
"CYBORG ESTHETICS: REDEFINING THE SENSUAL," New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
A discussion about the impact of technology on esthetics.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $3.50; $2.50 for students and the elderly; children under 12 free.
Information: (212) 219-1222.
"ALTERNATIVE SCHOOLS," New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, at Broadway, SoHo.
Jerry Mintz discusses alternative education and home schooling.
Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $12.
Information: (212) 219-2527.


Accounts
*
Perkins Family Restaurants, Memphis, to Hameroff/Milenthal/Spence, Columbus, Ohio, to handle national advertising and promotion, previously at Weinstock &amp; Associates, Memphis.
To serve the account, Hameroff/Milenthal opened an office in Memphis.
Billings were estimated at $12 million. *
Quaker Oats Co., Chicago, to Leo Burnett Publicidade Ltd., Sao Paulo, Brazil, to handle advertising for its Gatorade sports drink in Latin America, previously divided among various local agencies.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.


Court Decision Saves Band Shell


METRO DIGEST
CANDIDATE FOR CHANCELLOR WITHDRAWS
Bernard R. Gifford, the California professor who was the leading candidate to be New York City's next schools chancellor, has removed himself from consideration for the second time in 10 days, this time calling it final.
A1.
With the tangled courtship between the New York City Board of Education and Bernard R. Gifford ended, the board is left shaken.
B2.


Harold Suttle, 87, Dies; Was a Food Executive
Harold L. Suttle, a retired Lipton food company executive, former college athletics star and Olympics official, died on Sunday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Suttle worked for 33 years in the management of the Thomas J. Lipton Company, the tea and soup company, in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Art in Review
'Arthur B. Davies' 'Landscapes in the Metropolitan Museum of Art'  Metropolitan Museum of Art Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street Manhattan Through Sept. 5
The painter Arthur B. Davies (1872-1946) figures in the history of American art primarily as an organizer of the 1913 Armory Show, the exhibition that brought the full force of European modernism to the United States.
He is also known as perhaps the most idiosyncratic member of the Eight, a painter of mythical landscapes populated by idealized nudes or, in the case of his most famous canvas, nudes and unicorns.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "LATER LIFE," Playwright's Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A comedy by A. R. Gurney about a man and a woman who meet after a 30-year separation.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
Reopens on Aug. 9 at the Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"ITALIAN OLD MASTER DRAWINGS FROM THE COLLECTION OF JEFFREY E. HORVITZ," National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today, noon to 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; free for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 369-4880.
Closing Next Weekend  PILOBOLUS DANCE THEATER, Joyce Theater, Eighth Avenue and 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through July 17.
Performances: Weekdays at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


Suburban Journal; Down-to-Earth Methods On a Back-to-Earth Farm
LET the backyard gardeners sing their saccharine rhapsodies of the rediscovered earth.
Here at Hawthorne Valley Farm, one of the Hudson Valley's oldest "biodynamic" farms, where a spiritual, ultra-organic connection with the land is part of the farm's definition and culture, they don't have time for such sentimentality.
Here the mysticism comes as matter-of-fact as an old boot: Plant with the moon in Sagittarius if you can, but if the weather is right, go with your instincts.
Fertilize with manure fermented in cow horns and stirred with alternating vortex and chaos motions to "concentrate the cosmic forces in the manure," as Christoph Meier puts it, but don't skimp on the compost, either.


The Midwest Flooding


Total System Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE ART
A Michelangelo
After a rough spring filled with embarrassing misattributions, fakes and mediocre sales figures, Christie's finally has some good news.
A Michelangelo drawing was sold in London on Tuesday for $6.32 million, the highest price ever paid for an Old Master drawing at auction.
The drawing, "The Holy Family With the Infant Baptist on the Rest on the Flight Into Egypt," was bought by the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.
While Christie's has refused to identify the seller, word in the art world is that the drawing was sold by the estate of a British collector.


Clinton's Welfare Planners Vow an Open Process
The Clinton Administration's welfare-reform planners are pledging to be an open bunch, so open they even held a briefing today to announce, among other things, their openness.
They issued a press release to celebrate their "open and collaborative process," and promised to consult many "real people" and provide "a series of working papers" to anyone interested.


Critic's Choice/Theater; Culture Clash Comes to East Coast
For audiences who don't keep up with the latest developments in performance art and experimental music and dance, the annual Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center is the perfect place to catch up with what used to be called the avant-garde.
This year's series, the seventh, began last night with the first of two performances of Diamanda Galas's audio-visual spectacle "Insekta." The second performance is tonight.
The series, with most shows at Alice Tully Hall and a few at the Walter Reade Theater, will continue through July 30, offering 19 evenings of cutting-edge performance.
Among the high points will be performances by the Reduced Shakespeare Company (July 21-22), the minimalist musical pioneer La Monte Young (July 28) and the primal comic food-throwers the Kipper Kids (July 30).


Seaway Food Town (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Review/Revue; Lerner and Loewe of Late
Certain song lyrics require a heroic voice to prevent them from seeming hopelessly overblown.
Take "If Ever I Would Leave You," the most famous ballad from "Camelot." The song, which is performed by Martin Vidnovic in "The Night They Invented Champagne -- the Lerner and Loewe Revue" at Rainbow and Stars, speaks hyperbolically of a lover with "lips red as flame" and a "face with a luster that puts gold to shame."
In Mr.
Vidnovic's rugged performance, which builds to an impassioned peak, the strained comparisons make sense, because the singer communicates the emotions of a man so overcome with admiration that he is awkwardly trying to express feelings that are beyond words.


WSMP Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


Gladys Hobby, 82, Pioneer in Bringing Penicillin to Public
Dr.
Gladys Lounsbury Hobby, a microbiologist who helped to move penicillin from a laboratory discovery to mass production during World War II, died on Sunday at her home at the Crosslands retirement community in Kennett Square, Pa.
She was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, Pfizer Inc. said.
She had worked at Pfizer's Brooklyn plant.


On Stage, and Off
The Whole Show in Their Hands
There's only one way to keep a small Broadway play up and running after mostly enthusiastic reviews but a Tony nomination that didn't reap an award: Producer, director, cast and author must be thoroughly committed to the show.
Belt-tightening, not squabbling, must be their top priority.
In fact, this has been the survival strategy over at the Helen Hayes Theater for "Shakespeare for My Father," Lynn Redgrave's solo show about her battle for independence from her emotionally absent father, the actor Michael Redgrave.
Squabblesuppression has been possible thanks to the show's credits: Ms.
Redgrave and her husband of 26 years, John Clark, are the producer, director, author and entire cast.


Savings and Loan Deals Were Above Politics
To the Editor:
"Government Conceals Campaign Fund Tracks" by Joseph Belluck (letter, July 1) perpetuates a myth.
He claims he was not able to establish a link between political contributions and "particular Government actions" respecting 1988 savings and loan recapitalizations by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
The reason?
Mr.
Belluck was denied access to "key documents."
On the contrary, the reason is far from obscure.
There was no linkage.
Virtually every transaction was approved by all three members of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (predecessor to the Office of Thrift Supervision and the F.S.L.I.C.'s operating head): one Democratic and two Republican appointees.
Political favoritism should have produced dissents, not assents.


Review/Art; Explosive Painting: The Path to Pop
"HAND-PAINTED Pop: American Art in Transition, 1955-62," organized by the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art and opening today at the Whitney Museum of American Art, handsomely recalls American painting at one of its most fulminatory moments.
Even decades after the works on view here were first exhibited, you can still sense the spunky rebelliousness, and in some cases outrageousness, that inspired them.
Right off the bat is one of the most calculatedly outrageous paintings of the era, Larry Rivers's "Washington Crossing the Delaware," a work that seemed to critics when first shown in 1953 to mock the heroic aspirations of Abstract Expressionism (not to mention one of America's heroes).
In the next gallery is Robert Rauschenberg's "Small Rebus" (1956), with its melange of pseudo-Abstract Expressionist squiggles and drips, its incongruous collage of sports figures and its reproduction of Titian's "Rape of Europa" (amusingly misidentified in the show's catalogue as "a Baroque painting of a woman on the back of a bull").


Connors at Open?
JIMMY CONNORS, who has put golf before tennis lately, said yesterday in Los Angeles that he still might enter the United States Open.
He did not request wild-card entries into either the French Open or Wimbledon this year, but something about the New York humidity and La Guardia flight pattern turns him melancholy.
"I'm considering the Open, yes," said Connors, 40, who currently is playing TeamTennis for the Phoenix Smash, wants to go 18 holes with the Suns' CHARLES BARKLEY and is about to start his own "Infinite Champions" senior tour.


U.S. Team Plays Like a Dream; Gabon in 122-55 Nightmare
The emblem was the same, the uniform was the same and the easy-going, yet dominating play was identical.
Like the Dream Team at the Olympics last summer, the United States men's basketball team at the World University Games is the overwhelming favorite to win the gold.
And on the first day of competition today, the Americans made like the Dreamers in Barcelona, crushing the opposition and enjoying every minute of it.


Houston Knows Murder, but This . . .
The discovery of the bodies of two teen-age girls in the woods along the White Oak Bayou here last week brought Houston another set of grim crime statistics: its 250th and 251st homicides this year.
But it was not until the next day, when the police announced arrests, that the most profound horror of the case began to unfold.
The crime has brought a particularly strong wave of anguish, revulsion and soul-searching to Houston, in part because of the tender age of the victims, ages 14 and 16, and the suspects: six teen-age gang members, the youngest 14 years old, all charged with raping and strangling the two girls.


Global Campaign Set for Cinzano
The Lowe Group has been awarded an assignment by the International Distillers and Vintners Ltd. unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. to create the first worldwide advertising campaign for its Cinzano brand.
Billings were estimated to exceed $15 million.
Louise Higgins, a spokeswoman for Lowe in London, said on Wednesday that the assignment was intended to complement work for Cinzano created by local agencies in various countries where it is sold.


AC&amp; R, Revamping, Names a New Chief
Steve Bennett, an executive vice president and management supervisor at AC&amp; R Advertisingin New York, yesterday was named president and chief executive as part of a restructuring meant to identify the agency's next leaders.
Mr.
Bennett, 45, assumes the duties of chief executive from Alvin Chereskin, 65, who continues as chairman and becomes executive creative director, a position vacant since January, when Paul Cappelli unexpectedly left the agency after eight months.
Harry J. Koenig, 54, the subject of widespread speculation in trade publications that he would be promoted, continues as vice chairman and chief operating officer and will report to Mr.
Bennett.


Revenue Up, Profits Down At Top Firms
The nation's 100 largest law firms collectively took in a record $14.3 billion for the fiscal year 1992, but they continued to suffer in profitability, according to the annual survey by The American Lawyer magazine.
Revenue grew 3 percent over 1991, the same rate as the year before; those were the smallest gains since the magazine's first survey, in 1985, and barely enough to compensate for extra lawyers hired by the firms.


Essex County Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Richard R. Walton, 84, Inventor Of Fabric Processing Devices, Dies
Richard R. Walton, a college dropout who became an inventor of fabric processing devices, washing machines and many other products, died on June 24 at a hospital in Boston, where he lived.
He was 84.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Cash-Poor Cities Still Face Hard Choices
After three difficult years, most American cities are learning to make do with less, according to an annual survey made public yesterday by the National League of Cities.
But with virtually no growth in revenues in the fiscal year 1993, there has been a price to pay: most cities balanced their budgets by moderately reducing such services as garbage collection and fire fighting while also raising taxes.
Others reined in expenses even more by streamlining services and reducing labor costs.


Questions About Airport and Candidate
Westchester County Airport, with its battered Quonset hut of a terminal and its wildcat parking arrangements, would have made barnstormers, like Charles Lindbergh, proud.
But this area's Fortune 500 corporate executives and other travelers have long needed something more up to date.
A modernization that would include a new terminal and a 1,069-space garage is just now taking off, but it has been caught up in the crosswinds of this county's tangled politics.


Keating Sentence: 12 1/2 Years
Charles H. Keating Jr., the leading figure in the nation's savings and loan debacle, was sentenced to 12 years and 7 months in Federal prison today for defrauding Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and its investors.
Federal District Judge Mariana R. Pfaelzer said she doubled the sentence recommended under Federal sentencing guidelines because the crimes of Mr.
Keating, Lincoln's former chairman, were "staggering in proportion."
The judge also ordered Mr.
Keating to pay $122.4 million in restitution to the Government stemming from fraudulent land deals that created phony profits at Lincoln.
Mr.
Keating has said, however, that he is already $10 million in debt and has no assets to liquidate.


Review/Art; Back to Innocence in Burchfield's Spiritual Landscapes
Charles Burchfield's ecstatic, neurotic, empathetic eye was made for the world of fairy tales.
If he had chosen to be an illustrator of children's books, he would probably have been one of this country's greatest, and a treasured household name today.
Instead, he became a painter, and an eccentric one, and he remains on the margins of American art.
Personality and fashion often collaborate in such decisions.
A retiring, often melancholic man, Burchfield, who lived from 1893 to 1967, sustained little contact with the New York art world, preferring to live in a Buffalo suburb, within easy reach of the countryside.
He did most of his work in the underprivileged medium of watercolor, and his expressionistic naturalism was out of sync with the contemporary movements of his day.
Such isolated individualists as Arthur Dove, Morris Graves and Georgia O'Keeffe are the only real points of comparison for his career.


East Still Hot, Midwest Still Wet and Here's Why
At first glance, the catastrophic floods of the Midwest and the miserable but not-so-unusual heat wave in the East may seem unconnected, remote from each other.
But they are part of one gigantic continental weather pattern that shows no sign of breaking up any time soon, though there are hints that it might moderate next week.
The floods may owe their extraordinary character, meteorologists say, partly to the delayed impact of two global climatic events of last year: El Nino, the pool of warm water that develops every two to seven years in the eastern Pacific Ocean off South America, setting off a chain reaction that reverberates around the world, and Mount Pinatubo, the volcano in the Philippines that erupted in June 1991, thrusting a cooling haze into the atmosphere.


Tests of Hepatitis Drug Are Stopped as 2 Die
An experimental drug intended to treat a common liver disease, hepatitis B, has killed two patients because of an unexplained medical failure in Federal tests.
The chief researcher in the case called the failure a "catastrophe."


GZA Geoenvironmental Tech (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Catching Matinee At the Courthouse; A Group of Regulars Keeps Watching
Henry Gold likes bank fraud.
Leonard Greenberg favors insider trading.
William Kramer gravitates toward money laundering and Leonard Henigson is enamored of the small-time con.
Benjamin Shine likes everything, except the jury system, which he believes this country would be better off without.
No rogues' gallery, this is the spectators' gallery in the Federal courthouse in lower Manhattan.
These five fans of crime and punishment are court buffs, observers of the criminal-justice system and the way it plays on Foley Square.
They savor juicy trials the way others relish a blockbuster summer movie.


Jack in the Box Franchisees Cite Parent Concern in Suit
Foodmaker Inc., operator of the Jack in the Box restaurant chain, said today that it had been sued by a group of franchisees claiming losses exceeding $100 million because of a food poisoning outbreak at their restaurants.
Beginning in December, contaminated hamburgers sold at Jack in the Box outlets in Washington State, Idaho and Nevada left 400 ill and led to two deaths.


Boys and Their 'Fun'
Some of the boys who swim in New York City's crowded municipal pools play a really swell game they call "the whirlpool." Linking arms and turning themselves into a kind of floating posse, they fondle every girl who gets too close.
Last Monday, in the South Bronx's Crotona Pool, a 50-member grope group circled a 14-year-old girl.
Several boys ripped off her bra top, and one of them stuck his finger in her vagina.
No lifeguard jumped in to rescue the girl.
Her mother did.
The next day Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum described the incident as "some ordinary horseplay that got out of hand." Doubtless some New Yorkers think so, too, since horseplay is an almost invariable concomitant of boys' raging hormones.
But what happened at Crotona Pool is a long way from the kind of horseplay memorialized by Andy Hardy movies.
In fact, it was sexual assault.


Alice Magdol Conrad, Executive Recruiter, 52
Alice Magdol Conrad, who ran her own executive recruiting firm, Magdol &amp; McCone, died on Wednesday at her country home in Bridgehampton, L.I.
She was 52.
Her family said the cause was cancer.


1874 Pact May Bar Cleric's Extradition
As the United States and Egypt struggle over how to deal with Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Muslim cleric, a new problem has emerged: senior Administration officials say the extradition treaty between the two countries does not appear to offer legal justification for returning him to Egypt.
The treaty, signed in 1874 in Constantinople by the Administration of Ulysses S. Grant and the Ottoman Empire, does not include as an extraditable offense the only charge that Egypt has seriously mentioned against Mr.
Abdel Rahman: that a speech he delivered in a mosque in Egypt four years ago incited his followers to riot.


Hyping the Trade Agreement
Mickey Kantor, the U.S.
Trade Representative, declared the trade agreement announced by the industrialized countries in Tokyo the "biggest tariff-cutting agreement in history." Not to be outdone, John Major, the British Prime Minister, declared that the pact was "infinitely bigger than anything we have seen before."
But the extravagant rhetoric owes more to the desperate need of leaders to boost their sagging popularity at home than to the modest accord itself.
None of the announced tariff cuts will take place unless the all-important Uruguay Round of international trade talks is successfully completed.
And for that to take place, these leaders will have to summon far more courage than so far displayed.





Adoption Won't Cause Criminal Behavior
To the Editor:
Your identification in a July 1 news article of Joel Rifkin, the Long Island man who confessed to 17 murders, as someone who was adopted is irrelevant and potentially hurtful to young people in the New York area who are themselves adopted.
You cite Dr.
James A. Fox, an authority on criminal behavior, as an "expert" and an appropriate source on how adopted people might behave as a result of their adoption.
Would you also use him as a source in stories about former President Gerald Ford, the baseball star Jim Palmer, the Olympic champion diver Greg Louganis, the figure skaters Kitty and Peter Carruthers, to name a few?


Art in Review
'The Body in Nature'
James Danziger Gallery  415 West Broadway  (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 16
The joys of the great outdoors are the focus of this entertaining summer show.
Not surprisingly, many of the photographs here are of people swimming or at the shore, among them Judith Joy Ross's atmospheric black-and-white shots of shivering adolescents in swimsuits; Henri Cartier-Bresson's 1933 photograph of the rippling figure of a nude woman under water, and Corinne Day's image of the model Kate Moss at the beach with her arms wrapped around herself.


Restaurants
Mexican food brings to mind rice and beans, corn-scented tortillas, lime and chili peppers.
Not mashed potatoes.
But Terry Frankenberger, the chef and co-owner of the four-month-old Mission Grill in SoHo, has a vision of perfect California-style Mexican cuisine.
He sees potatoes.


Rexall Sundown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Digital's Return Starts With Hope
Philip Caldwell, former chairman of the Ford Motor Company and a longtime director of the Digital Equipment Corporation, recalls the moment a few weeks ago when he felt a rare surge of confidence in the computer maker's future.
It was at a board meeting on June 17, and Digital's directors had just heard executives' detailed plans for the reorganization of a company that lost $2.8 billion in the 1992 fiscal year.


Holdout No More: U.S. Grabs Narrow Trade Deals
A tariff-reduction agreement reached on Wednesday at the economic summit meeting in Tokyo signals a shift in the United States' negotiating stance toward pragmatically seizing opportunities to grab narrow but important deals instead of holding out indefinitely for broad ones.
Several politically complicated industrial issues, like European tariffs on computer chips or American textile barriers, were excluded from the deal in Tokyo in favor of cutting levies on other manufactured goods.


7 Nations Hasten Aid to Russia; Will Push for Growth and Trade
Leaders of the world's seven major industrial democracies agreed today to provide an immediate $3 billion in aid to Russia and pledged to push for economic growth and lower trade barriers.
The leaders also agreed to send senior officials to the United States this fall for what Administration officials have described as a "jobs summit" that would address the problem of unemployment that persists even when economies are growing.


8 Years Later, Odyssey Gets Berger Back
After years of working at a giant corporation and a huge municipal bureaucracy, Stephen Berger has decided to return to a much smaller home at a buyout boutique.
Mr.
Berger, until recently an executive with the GE Capital Corporation and formerly the head of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, is returning to Odyssey Partners L.P. after an eight-year absence, the firm said yesterday.
The move is part of a decision by Odyssey to expand its corporate investments business by tapping Mr.
Berger's expertise.


Market Place; Wall St. gives Ericsson a second look, and likes what it sees.
AS cellular telephone service continues to explode in the United States, with some 11,500 new subscribers every day, the companies that supply the radio transmitters, telephones and computer switching equipment that make wireless calls possible are also thriving.
L.
M.
Ericsson of Sweden is an unheralded success story in cellular, unlike its dominant rival, Motorola Inc.
Ericsson has been piling up an impressive record of fat contracts -- it won more than $1.6 billion worldwide in the last 90 days, many of them from new customers in the United States, like a $150 million contract in Dallas two weeks ago.
Much of the recent order growth, analysts say, is coming at Motorola's expense.


Corrections
The main article yesterday about the Group of Seven economic summit meeting in Tokyo referred incorrectly in some editions to the last time a woman led a delegation to the annual meeting.
Margaret Thatcher led the British delegation to the Houston meeting in 1990, before her ouster that year.


Dole Food Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Clinton to Seek Federal Aid For Midwest Flood Victims
President Clinton said today that he would ask Congress to approve emergency Federal disaster aid for victims of the Midwest flooding, which experts called one of the worst on record.
The flooding, afflicting eight states, has already claimed 16 lives and caused property damage estimated at more than $1 billion, Federal officials say.
The President toured the area last weekend and pledged $1.2 billion in emergency funds for crop loss and damage to homes and businesses.


Success Is Reported With Prototype AIDS Vaccine
Researchers today reported the development of a potential AIDS vaccine, the first genetically engineered compound to produce consistently high levels of potent antibodies against H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Scientists from Johns Hopkins University's Center for Immunization Research and other institutions said the vaccine had caused human volunteers to develop antibodies in their blood that neutralized H.I.V. in laboratory tests.


Books of The Times; For the Royals, A Vita Horribilis
The Rise and Fall of the House of Windsor
By A. N. Wilson
Illustrated. 211 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.  The Tarnished Crown
Diana and the House of Windsor
By Anthony Holden
Illustrated. 401 pages. Random House. $23.
These two new books on the House of Windsor and the crisis of the British monarchy agree on practically nothing.


Sounds Around Town
Forecast: Persipitation
Charli Persip and Persipitation, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at West 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
The be-bop drummer Charli Persip has been in the forefront of jazz since the early 1950's, when he toured and recorded with Dizzy Gillespie's most celebrated big band for five years.
Unlike most early bop drummers, who worked in small groups, he preferred playing with big bands and in 1980 formed Superband.
He now splits his time between a descendant of that big band, Superband II (a 17-piece group that played on Wednesday at Yardbird Suite, the new club at 35 Cooper Square, in the East Village), and a five-piece group called Persipitation, which features Sue Terry, an imaginative young saxophonist who has been with Mr.
Persip for several years.
Persipitation, which includes Carlton Holms on piano, Leon Lee Dorsey on bass and Eli Fountain on percussion, is at Birdland tonight and tomorrow for shows each night at 9 and 10:30 P.M. and midnight.
There is a $10 music charge at tables and a $10 minimum.
At the bar, the music charge is $5 and the minimum is one drink.
Tal Farlow at Zinno
Tal Farlow, Zinno, 126 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-5182.
Tal Farlow is in the midst of his second successful career as a guitarist.
The first ran from 1944 to 1957, including four years when he was a member of one of the most highly regarded trios in jazz, led by the vibraphonist Red Norvo, with Charles Mingus on bass.
Then he returned to his original trade, sign painting, for 24 years until he was lured back to music by an appearance in a film for which he played an enthusiastically received concert at the Public Theater in 1980.
Since then he has been performing regularly with the bassist Gary Mazzaroppi.
One of their earliest engagements was at Zinno, where they still play several weeks a year.
Tonight and tomorrow they will do four 40-minute sets there starting at 8 P.M.
There is a music charge of $5, and a food and drink minimum of $15 in the Music Room, where dinner is served, and a music charge of $10 with a $10 drink minimum at the bar.


Times Square Exhibit Demands a Closer Look


Court Blocks Plan to Raze Band Shell
The New York State Court of Appeals has blocked the demolition of the Naumburg Bandshell in Central Park, ending a four-year battle between preservationists who wanted to save it and park officials who wanted it razed.
The court, announcing Tuesday that it was refusing to hear an appeal by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation and the Central Park Conservancy, upheld a lower court ruling that the department could not demolish the 69-year-old limestone band shell because of a city law requiring the protection of gifts.


Home Depot Picks Richards Group
Home Depot, the home-improvement retail chain based in Atlanta, said yesterday that it had selected the Richards Group in Dallas to handle the creative portion of its broadcast account, which had been handled by Admarketing in Los Angeles for almost five years.


T. D. Clareson, 66, A Leading Scholar On Science Fiction
Thomas D. Clareson, a scholar of science fiction who recently retired as a professor of English at the College of Wooster, died on Tuesday at Wooster Community Hospital in Ohio.
He was 66 and lived in Wooster.
The cause has not been determined, said Wes Tree, a spokesman for the college.


Upper Mississippi's Hemorrhage Poses No Threat to Old Man River
The floods plaguing the upper Mississippi Valley are posing no threat to flood-prone New Orleans, the river's major port, where high water is a way of life.
The reason, hydraulic engineers say, is that the Mississippi is actually two rivers, above and below Cairo, Ill.
At Cairo, the river joins forces with the Ohio River, after having already taken on the waters of the Missouri, Illinois and Iowa Rivers.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Meeting on Jordan
The National Basketball Association said yesterday it would meet with representatives of RICHARD ESQUINAS Monday to discuss his allegations that MICHAEL JORDAN was a compulsive gambler who lost $1.25 million to him in golf wagers in September 1991.
The league has retained FREDERICK LACEY, former federal judge and United States attorney, as a consultant to represent it. (AP)


Coors (Adolph) Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Don't Foist the Electric Car on Taxpayers
To the Editor:
"Jump-Starting Electric Car's Future" (Business Day, June 28) is very unrealistic.
In addition to the high initial cost, limited range, massive batteries required and poor operating characteristics you note, there are more important shortcomings to the "clean," quiet electric cars.
What is "clean" about lead-acid batteries, which must be replaced at least every two years?
How does the electric car industry deal with the contamination inherent in the disposal of used lead-acid batteries?
The only contaminated waste more difficult to dispose of than battery acid is nuclear waste.
Even the lead and plastics in the battery present disposal and recycling problems.


Review/Pop; X Dives Back Into the Turbulence
On Wednesday night at the Academy, John Doe of X looked down at the slam-dancers and said: "Now don't anybody hurt themselves down there. I know you kids are probably new at this." His tone was fatherly, and no wonder; as prime movers in Los Angeles punk-rock, X has seen uncounted slam-dancers since the band formed in 1977.
The group disbanded after releasing a live album in 1988, but has reunited for a new album, "Hey Zeus!" (Big Life/Mercury), and a tour.
Although X helped create a wave of California punk-rock, it was always an idiosyncratic band.
It revolved around the wide-spaced vocal harmonies and fractured, neo-Beat lyrics of Exene Cervenka and John Doe.
The songs were usually loud and fast, but they were rarely symmetrical; they hurtled from one section to the next, earnest and urgent, revealing West Coast roots from Bakersfield-style country music to San Francisco psychedelic rock.
And with Mr.
Doe on bass and D.J.
Bonebrake on drums, X boasted one of the best rhythm sections in punk-rock, at once driving and limber.


Rio Hotels and Casino (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Actidev Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Wabash National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tale of Two Games: Mets Make Jump From Dreadful to Wonderful
Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' new head of baseball operations, last night saw the flaws in his ball club: the erratic pitching, the defensive mix-ups, the failure to dig deep and find something extra when a game is on the line.
The Mets' dreadful 11-8 loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers in the opener of a doubleheader at Shea Stadium did little to ease any jitters that McIlvaine might have had over taking charge of a last-place ball club.


New Turmoil At Hospital In Brooklyn
The city's Health and Hospitals Corporation yesterday informed the private organization that provides doctors and other medical personnel to the long-troubled Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn that it was being replaced.
It will be only the second time in at least 15 years that the corporation has chosen to discontinue a relationship with such an organization at any of its hospitals, officials said.


Universal Electronics Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jersey Sues Top Executives In Mutual Benefit's Collapse
The State of New Jersey filed suit yesterday against three dozen former executives and directors of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, charging them with mismanaging the company's finances and driving the nation's 18th-largest life insurer into insolvency.
The suit seeks to hold an impressive list of prominent business leaders responsible.
If successful, the suit could make the defendants personally liable for more than $1 billion in company losses.
Insurance covers only $20 million of the directors' liabilities.


Madison Square Garden Bids Bittersweet Adieu to Sweet Science
In the locker room before the main event, the world's No. 1 featherweight contender, Kevin Kelley of Flushing, waited.
"I won the Golden Gloves here," he said, "and now they're closing the door on me."
Kelley wondered what would happen to all the other young fighters with dreams of making it to Madison Square Garden.
This was the place where a parade of ethnic newcomers fought their way to the American middle class.


Protest of Atlanta Olympic Site
A group of about 50 protesters moved onto the site of the planned Olympic stadium for the 1996 Games this afternoon and vowed to stay through the groundbreaking ceremony on Saturday.
The protestors, who had a variety of objections to the Olympic stadium, began setting up tents late today.
Some of the protesters said they represented residents of the largely black, low-income areas surrounding the stadium; they claimed the construction over the next three years will further degrade their neighborhoods.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 639 retail money market mutual funds increased $8.34 billion, to $391.13 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 399 taxable retail money market funds rose $5.21 billion, to $307.86 billion, while the assets of the 240 retail tax-exempt funds increased $3.13 billion, to $83.27 billion.


Youth Is Held In an Assault At Bronx Pool
A 14-year-old boy was arrested on Wednesday and charged with sexual abuse in an assault on a 14-year-old girl earlier this week at a Bronx swimming pool, the police said yesterday.
The youth, whose name was withheld because of his age, is the second suspect to be charged in the case.
On Monday, 17-year-old Philip Munoz was arrested and charged with assault after he was accused of touching the girl's genitals.
Mr.
Munoz was identified by the girl, who also picked the 14-year-old boy out of a lineup on Wednesday.
The police said they were still seeking other suspects in that case.


Albany Term: Much Undone
With a few notable exceptions -- primarily the creation of a tenuously financed environmental fund -- the 1993 New York legislative session may be remembered most for what did not get done.
After a prolonged session, already one of the longest in the country, the Legislature deferred action on the biggest health-care issue before it, revamping a hospital-payment system that expires at the end of the year.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Rookie Has Share of the Lead in Virginia
Rookie John Flannery shook off an early double bogey and shot a five-under-par 66 for a share of the lead after yesterday's steamy first round of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va.
Flannery, the player of the year on the 1992 Hogan Tour, birdied three of his last four holes at Kingsmill Golf Club to tie Jim Gallagher Jr. and Trevor Dodds.
Flannery, Gallagher and Dodds began their rounds in the afternoon, when the temperature had climbed into the upper 90's and a thick haze had settled over the 6,797-yard course, which is along the James River. (AP) TENNIS  Magdalena Maleeva Upsets Fernandez
Magdalena Maleeva ousted No. 2 seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the Gunze tournament in Tokyo.
Top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini needed a second-set tie breaker to beat Nicole Provis, an Australian, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4).
The Argentine player next plays American Lisa Raymond as the tournament moves to Osaka on Friday.
Rusedski downed Shuzo Matsuaku of Japan, 6-7 (1-7), 6-4, 6-4, and the fifth-seeded Antonitsch beat fourth-seeded Grant Stafford of South Africa, 6-4, 4-6, 6-1. (AP) FOOTBALL  Ottawa Spoils American Debut in Canada
Tom Burgess threw three touchdown passes and Wayne Walker scored twice Wednesday night as Ottawa, the host team, spoiled the debut of the Canadian Football League's first American-based team by beating Sacramento, 32-23.
Sacramento's offense staggered in the beginning, going just under 24 minutes before gaining a first down, and quarterback David Archer was sacked four times in the second quarter. (AP)


Nets Get Edwards for Petrovic's Spot
In a move designed to help fill the void on their team left by the death of Drazen Petrovic, the Nets yesterday signed Kevin Edwards, a free-agent shooting guard who played five seasons for the Miami Heat.
Edwards was an unrestricted free agent who lost his starting job with Miami midway through last season.
General Manager Willis Reed indicated that Edwards would be designated to start alongside point guard Kenny Anderson.


Study Criticizes Minority-Hiring Level
The hiring of minority-group members as coaches and front office personnel in professional sports has improved only slightly in the last year, according to a report issued yesterday by a study group at Northeastern University in Boston
"On the field we're looking at the most integrated workplace in this country, but off the field, except for the N.B.A., we see what is more representative in America," said RICHARD LAPCHICK, whose Center for the Study of Sport in Society issued its fourth annual report.


'Clustering' of Whites By Schools Is Barred
The Richmond school system violated Federal civil rights laws last year when it grouped white students in the same classrooms within two largely black elementary schools in a practice known as "clustering," the Department of Education said yesterday.
But the department, which released its findings to the school board after a four-month investigation, said the district had already corrected the problem by discontinuing the practice after some parents complained.
It said no further action was necessary.


Listerine, a venerable brand of mouthwash, has been rejuvenated by its minty line extension.
A BRAND born of anxiety, which found fame by persuading people it could cure a problem they never knew they had, is finding relief from anxieties of its own with a variation of its venerable formula.
A year after the Warner-Lambert Company introduced Cool Mint Listerine, a bluish, minty variety of its 115-year-old Listerine antiseptic, the new flavor is selling strongly.
It has so far avoided significantly cannibalizing its amber-colored parent, the country's best-selling mouthwash, by stimulating garglers to buy more bottles or switch from rival brands.


Oil but Not Order: A special report.; War and Politics Clog Azerbaijan's Road to Riches
All former Soviet republics have been dealt their share of problems and prospects.
But not many can boast of an assortment quite like Azerbaijan's.
In less than two years of independence, this little republic by the Caspian has known war, elections, coups, pogroms, corruption, Islamic revival, resurgent Communists, international intrigue, economic chaos and the promise of wealth -- great gobs of oil wealth, waiting to be tapped if only all the rest could be sorted out.


Art in Review
'Artists Respond' 'The "New World" Question'
Studio Museum in Harlem  144 West 125th Street  Through Aug. 22
In a Columbus quincentenary that has been heavy on rhetoric but short on memorable political art, one hoped that "Artists Respond: The 'New World' Question" would bring a fresh approach to the issues at hand.
It does not.
The contributions of these seven artists are for the most part as unfocused as the exhibition's perfunctory title.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Brady Anderson, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Leo Gomez, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Bill Wegman, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Matt Maysey, pitcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.


Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam
To the Editor:
The change in United States policy to permit loans by the International Monetary Fund to Vietnam (front page, July 1) is welcome news to the many American nongovernmental organizations with projects in Vietnam.
They will provide more than $15 million in relief and development assistance this year.
Press accounts make it seem as if debate over this issue is a self-interested controversy between business on the one hand and prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action family groups on the other.
A third dimension is reflected in the 200 organizations and institutions represented at the fourth annual conference of the United States Nongovernmental Organization Forum on Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos that was held at Marymount University in Arlington, Va., June 17 to 20.


SUMMIT IN TOKYO: Reshaping Japan; Clinton Pushes Free Trade to a Nation More Interested in Cleaner Politics
From the moment Air Force One touched down here three days ago, President Clinton has been riding the wave of change sweeping through Japan's political system, hoping to seize the moment by talking directly to Japanese voters about why they pay so much for food and feel so poor in one of the world's richest countries.
Already he has begun to win some praise: Newspapers are blaring the Japanese word for change -- henka -- across front pages here just a week and a half before the most critical election in Japan's post-war history.


Miller (Herman) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


The Gay Rights Debate That Wasn't
In killing important gay rights legislation without so much as one word of public debate, the Republicans who control the New York State Senate cast shame on themselves and their party -- and on the closed, secretive way they conduct the public's business.
First proposed in 1971, the overdue measure would have expanded the state's civil rights law to bar discrimination in employment, housing, public accommodations, education or credit on the basis of sexual orientation.
It was approved by the Democrat-controlled Assembly in February and would have stood a decent chance of passage in the Senate, too, had it been allowed to reach the Senate floor for a full debate and a recorded vote.


Hyman Rosenblatt, 85, Is Dead; Detective Who Led Mob Inquiry
Hyman Rosenblatt, a retired detective who led New York State's investigation of the 1957 organized-crime summit meeting at Appalachin, died on Tuesday at Staten Island University Hospital.
He was 85 and lived on Staten Island.
He died of lung cancer and heart ailments, his family said.


Helen of Troy (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Euro Disney's Bad News Includes a Sizable Loss
Euro Disney's troubles deepened today as the company announced an unexpectedly severe third-quarter loss of about 500 million francs ($87 million), predicted further losses through the rest of the summer and said its plans for expansion were under review.
Shares in Euro Disney plunged 6.6 percent on the news, to 63.7 francs, on the Paris Bourse.
Before the theme park opened in April of last year, the shares had traded as high as 160 francs.
Common shares of Euro Disney's parent, the Walt Disney Company, were unchanged at $38.75 each after declining in recent trading sessions.


Stores' Sales Climbed Again in June
Consumers demonstrated a willingness to spend more money in retail stores for the fourth consecutive month, but more often in department stores than in apparel shops.
Retail sales climbed 5.6 percent in June, as recorded by a Salomon Brothers monthly index that measures sales at stores open at least a year.
In June 1992, this same-store growth index was up 3.8 percent.


Clinton Ratings Fall on T-Shirt Index
First there were bumper stickers that gushed "Clinton-Gore, The Dream Team" and "Clinton the Comeback Kid." There were also buttons with photographs of the newly elected President cradling his beloved saxophone.
"Blow Bill Blow," one said.
"Clinton, the Cure for the Blues," said another.
Then there was the travel office debacle, the $200 airport haircut and Lani Guinier, and before a voter could say "Nannygate," positive buttons were out and negative ones were in.
An example: "Don't blame me, I voted for George Bush."


Indictment Says B.C.C.I. Was Bribe Victim
By doling out bribes and claiming assets they did not have, two brothers illegally secured $28 million in loans from five banks, including B.C.C.I., prosecutors charged yesterday.
Robert M. Morgenthau, Manhattan District Attorney, said the case had come to light during his office's investigation into the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
He said the men had turned the tables on the outlaw bank, fraudulently obtaining $16.8 million in loans from B.C.C.I.


White's Mission Most Possible
Part of Reggie White's mission when he was scouring the National Football League free-agent market was to find a place where he could establish his ministry and work in inner-city neighborhoods, as well as play defensive end.
A few critics scoffed at that notion when White left Philadelphia and signed a four-year, $17 million deal with the Green Bay Packers, eschewing teams near large urban areas, like the San Francisco 49ers, the Jets and the Washington Redskins.


Student Loan Marketing Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Immigration Board Rejects Sheik's Plea for Asylum
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Islamic cleric whose followers have been linked to two bombing conspiracies in New York City, suffered a setback yesterday in his efforts to stay in the United States as the Board of Immigration Appeals in Washington rejected his request for political asylum.
The board also upheld an earlier order by the Immigration and Naturalization Service that he be expelled.


Fine Sought For Insurer In Bias Case
The California Insurance Department is seeking to fine the California Insurance Group $2.5 million, contending that the insurer refused to sell policies in gay, minority and low-income neighborhoods of southeast San Francisco.
State authorities say it is the largest case of insurance discrimination in state history, and insurance industry officials say the penalty is the largest ever levied.


Outlook Graphics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bosnia Refuses 3-Way Partition And Appeals to U.S. for Support
The Muslim-led Bosnian Government announced today that it would reject a Serbian and Croatian proposal to end the 15-month-old war in this former Yugoslav republic by dividing it into three ethnic states.
The Bosnians appealed to the United States for political and military support in the fight to maintain Bosnia as a country in which all three ethnic groups could live together.


Review/Music; Chamber Art: Unanimity or Debate?
In this public world, the chambers of chamber music have gotten bigger and the performances along with them.
Thursday's Mostly Mozart concert at Avery Fisher Hall began, however, with Mozart at a distance.
The Mendelssohn String Quartet -- more elegant and not nearly as driven with its new violinist, Nick Eanet -- was pretty much smothered by the big space in which it played.
An example: the finale of Mozart's D-Major Quartet (K.499), which with some straining of the ears became playing of admirable high-speed precision but which reached normally attentive listeners as a kind of blur.
Felix Mendelssohn's E-Flat Octet enjoyed, by sheer size alone, a more competitive muscle.
It was also supported by a robust and joyful performance, one that mixed the best elements of shared gesture and individual free enterprise.
Questions along this line -- the ones that ask whether chamber-music playing should be uniform or argumentative, a unanimous chorus or a colloquy between differing personalities -- were more fully explored in the Mozart G-minor Piano Quartet occupying the middle of this program.


Sara Dadourian, Educator, 65
Sara K. Dadourian, superintendent of an Armenian day school, died at her home in Manhasset, L.I., on Saturday.
She was 65 and also kept a home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The cause was cancer, family sources said.


Corrections
A review in Weekend yesterday about an exhibition of Charles Burchfield's work at the Drawing Center in SoHo rendered the name of an illustrator incorrectly.
It is Leon Bakst.


George J. Daly, Foundation President, 85
George J. Daly, the president of the New York Foundation for Senior Citizens for the last 10 years, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was respiratory failure, said Linda Hoffman, executive director of the nonprofit agency that provides thousands of the city's elderly with social services, employment and housing.


Safety-Kleen reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Weather, Piazza, Managers Hot. Mets Not.
The Mike Piazza story isn't a bad one.
It begins modestly, but gains quickly in plot and momentum.
There was his selection in the 69th round of the draft, late and done mostly as a favor to Manager Tommy Lasorda of the Dodgers.
There was the temporary decision to quit baseball in the minors.
There was his intriguing tutorial in the Dominican Republic, the first baseman turned catcher becoming the first North American graduate of the club's academy there.
There were bus rides in Mexico during his tenure as a player for the club in Mexicali.


Miami's Cuban Exiles May Lose TV Station
In a striking illustration of the waning influence of an organization that has dominated Cuban exile politics here and in Washington for a decade, Congress is making its most serious effort to eliminate TV Marti and drastically cut funds for Radio Marti, the last vestiges of cold-war broadcasting to the Soviet bloc.
The exile organization, the Cuban-American National Foundation, successfully lobbied the Reagan Administration to begin the broadcasts in 1985.
Both the foundation and the advisory board of the Marti stations are led by Jorge Mas Canosa, a multimillionaire Cuban contractor who has built a power base here that resembles a government in exile, waiting for the fall of President Fidel Castro.


Observer; Still, Papa Was Right
People who believe in U.F.O.'s demonstrated at the White House the other day demanding that the Government come clean.
Their placards said the Government knew U.F.O.'s "are real," and they want it to quit pretending they're not and tell what it knows about these visitors from out yonder.
I tend to believe almost anybody who says the Government is suppressing the facts.
That's what comes of living through the Vietnam War, Watergate and the C.I.A.'s reporting on the robust health of the Soviet Union.


Alcoa reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.09
3.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.00
3.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.08
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.37
5.38
6.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.63
6.65
7.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.37
7.38
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.71
5.71
6.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Death After Anesthesia at Abortion Clinic
A 33-year-old Bronx woman who had entered a Queens abortion clinic went into cardiac arrest under anesthesia yesterday and was rushed to a local hospital where she was pronounced dead less than an hour later, the police said.
The woman, who was identified by hospital records as Guadalupe Negron, was a patient at the Metro Women's Center at 102-21 Roosevelt Avenue in Corona early yesterday afternoon, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Celtics Complete Radja Deal
Croatian forward DINO RADJA signed a three-year contract yesterday with the Boston Celtics, nine days after the team announced an agreement in principle.
The signing apparently was delayed by uncertainty about when Radja would be freed from his contract with Vitrus Roma in Italy.
That team had given him until July 15 to get out of that deal.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Waterbury, Conn., completed an acquisition of Society for Savings BancorpInc., Hartford, for $240 million in stock.
Bank of Boston exchanged 0.80 share of its common stock for each share of Society for Savings common.
ROLLS-ROYCE P.L.C., London, the aerospace and military company, received an order worth up to $:255 million ($377 million) for aircraft engines from Emirates Airlines.


Body of Missing Transit Officer Is Found at Montauk Lighthouse
The body of a troubled Muslim transit police officer has been found on a ledge overlooking the Atlantic Ocean, where he appears to have killed himself with a single bullet.
Though the circumstances of the death of Officer Mahamoud Tamer, a two-year veteran of the New York City transit police, are unclear, his colleagues are investigating the possibility that he may have been tormented by harassment from other officers.
Reports have suggested that other officers called him "camel" and "Mahamoud the bomber" in the weeks after the Feb. 26 bombing of the World Trade Center, which the police have tied to Islamic terrorists.


CHRONICLE
"There was a reason why people had sewing circles," EMILY LLOYD, the New York City Sanitation Commissioner, said the other day.
"There is something wonderfully soothing about sewing and talking."
Two years ago, the Commissioner and two friends, ANN McIVER, a health-care consultant, and MARY ANN POLICASTRO, a management consultant for not-for-profit organizations, organized a sewing circle that they call Bitch and Stitch.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about flooding on the Mississippi River referred imprecisely to Jefferson City, Mo.
The city, the state capital, is on the Missouri River, not the Mississippi.


Agassi Has Streisand But Loses Bollettieri
Since bizarre behavior and Zen moments seem to be his touchstones, it doesn't come as a great surprise that Andre Agassi, in a polar twist on the usual severance methods for coach-player associations, was fired yesterday by his longtime mentor, Nick Bollettieri.
"To help him get back to where he used to be, which was No. 3 in the world, there would have to be close contact," Bollettieri said yesterday from North Carolina.
"But he's based in Vegas, I'm at the academy in Bradenton, and there's a space between us. It's not like it used to be. Whether he'll ever reach his greatest potential, no one knows."


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
An accord between the U.S. and Japan on a "framework" for resolving a series of trade disputes was announced after the three-day economic summit meeting in Tokyo.  [ Page 1. ]  The U.S. appeared to have scaled back some of its demands.  [ 4. ]
By achieving an agreement with Japan over its trade imbalance, President Clinton accomplished far more in Tokyo than George Bush did in his 1992 visit.
News Analysis.  [ 1. ]
President Clinton's international conference on job creation announced before the Tokyo summit is part educational seminar, part public relations and part pep rally.
News Analysis.  [ 39. ]
Asia's big airlines are joining to overturn what they say are one-sided agreements that favor American carriers.  [ 39. ]
Employees of Hungary's oldest factory have high expectations for a new employee stock-ownership program.  [ 41. ] The Economy
The White House is consulting with business and labor on measures that would assure medical coverage for workers who retire before they are eligible for Medicare.  [ 39. ]
The Fed's policy committee voted in May to lean toward raising interest rates if inflation did not slow.
Many economists said the committee probably maintained that position this week.  [ 39. ]  Companies
Merck's president and chief operating officer resigned in a surprise move.
Richard J. Markham was the heir-apparent to the giant drug company's chairman, P. Roy Vagelos.  [ 39. ]
The New York Post suspended publication after its operator, Rupert Murdoch, said he had failed to win sufficient cost savings from the unions of the 192-year-old newspaper.  [ 1. ]
Jack in the Box's parent, Foodmaker, seems to have made a comeback after stumbling badly in the first days after an outbreak of food poisoning at some of its restaurants six months ago.  [ 39. ]
Olympia &amp; York's founders, the Reichmann family, objected to a plan for operating the company's American branch.  [ 41. ]
California Insurance Group was accused of refusing to sell policies in gay, minority and low-income areas.  [ 41. ]
McDonald's is sponsoring a 30-minute television infomercial to burnish its corporate image among black consumers.  [ 41. ]
A Salomon Brothers investment banker was named dean of the University of Virginia's graduate business school.  [ 41. ]  Markets
Stocks turned in a solid but uninspired performance.
The Dow industrials gained 6.64 points, to 3,521.06.  [ 40. ]
The long-term Treasury bond yield fell to a record low for the second straight session on optimism over lower inflation.  [ 48. ]
Soybean and cotton prices surged in reaction to the abnormal weather occurring across the country.  [ 50. ]
The dollar surged to a 20-month high against the mark on talk of further German interest-rate cuts.
Gold prices fell.  [ 50. ]  Your Money
Five mutual fund experts, asked to invest $50,000 for retirement in 20 years or more, generally adhered to the maxim that stock funds are best for long-term investments.  [ 33. ]
The clearest predictor of a mutual fund's return is its expenses -- the higher the expenses, the worse the performance.  [ 33. ]
Junk bond mutual funds, which buy high-yield, high-risk corporate debt, have returned to favor since 1991.  [ 34. ]
Municipal bond funds are increasingly popular among investors seeking to shelter income from higher taxes.  [ 35. ]


Cambex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 CLINTON CLAIMS VICTORY ON TRADE
President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa agreed on a "framework" for resolving trade disputes, with Mr.
Clinton declaring that his first major effort to create jobs through international trade talks was a success.  1


Chris Steinbrunner, 59, an Expert On Mystery Films and TV Shows
Chris Steinbrunner, an authority on mystery films and mystery shows on radio and television, died on Wednesday night at his home in the Middle Village section of Queens.
He was 59.
The cause was a heart attack, said a friend, Robert Madison.


Beethoven's 9 Symphonies in Y Season
The complete Beethoven symphony cycle, played by the New York Chamber Symphony with Gerard Schwarz conducting, is the centerpiece of the 1993-94 music schedule at the Tisch Center for the Arts at the 92d Street Y. Also notable among the center's plans are a traversal of Shostakovich's 24 Preludes and Fugues by the Russian pianist Tatyana Nikolayeva, a Bach series by the pianist Vladimir Feltsman and a three-concert overview of the guitar repertory by John Williams.
After two seasons in which economic pressures led the center to trim its offerings, the Y has reconsidered its balance of orchestral programs, recitals and chamber music.
In the new mix, two orchestral performances that were dropped last year have been restored.


BPI Packaging Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


SUMMIT IN TOKYO: The Overview; CLINTON ACHIEVES TRADE FRAMEWORK IN JAPANESE PACT
President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa reached a major accord this morning on a hard-fought "framework" for resolving a series of mounting trade disputes between the two nations.
Mr.
Clinton said it committed Japan to bring about "a highly significant reduction" in Japan's huge trade surpluses with the United States and the world.
The accord was announced after negotiations that lasted all night -- including a decisive 2 a.m. meeting in the President's hotel suite -- and hours after the Group of Seven summit meeting ended Friday, with Mr.
Clinton declaring that his first major effort to create jobs through international trade negotiations had been a success.


Crew Keeps Close Watch On Hydrants
The chatter kept coming over the radio in Larry Sypowicz's truck.
One hydrant has been taken out by a car, three others were reported broken, and then major news: a fire had broken out at a nearby warehouse and seven gushing hydrants nearby were sapping the water pressure.


Italy Finds Goldoni as Timely as Ever
Although the 18th-century Italian playwright Carlo Goldoni is not often performed in the United States and Britain, his reputation is sharply higher on the European continent.
As one approaches his native land, Goldoni's stature becomes downright majestic.
Nearly every Italian city, and especially his native Venice, is festooned with Goldoni statues, piazzas and boulevards.
And in this, the 200th anniversary year of his death, stages all over Europe have been crowded with Goldoni's works.
Despite Venice's claims to primacy, no Italian city has been a more active champion of the playwright and his works than Milan.
The reason is simple: Milan is where Giorgio Strehler, far and way the most important Italian theater director of the last half-century, began the modern-day tradition of Goldoni performance in 1947 with his production of "Arlecchino, or, the Servant With Two Masters." The city is the site of Mr.
Strehler's Piccolo Teatro, where three major Strehler Goldoni productions for this anniversary year, including a new "Arlecchino," have been presented.


Goodfellow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Board of Education Defends Selection Process for Chancellor
As the Board of Education revived its search for a new schools chancellor for New York City, board members yesterday defended the process that led to an informal agreement to select Bernard R. Gifford, a California professor, who then turned down the job.
"We have been accused of secrecy," the board's president, Carol A. Gresser, said yesterday.
"If anything the whole process was too darn open. Perhaps that is how you drop stitches."


Corel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


COMPANY NEWS: The Following McMercial . . .; McDonald's Promotes Image Among Blacks
The McDonald's Corporation is sponsoring a television infomercial but not to sell Quarter Pounders, Happy Meals or even restaurant franchises.
Instead, the 30-minute program-length commercial is intended to burnish the McDonald's corporate image among black consumers.
The infomercial, believed to be the first with that purpose, is to run at 7:30 P.M. next Saturday on Black Entertainment Television.
It will be repeated at least once more on that national cable network.


Review/Music; A Diva Makes a Cage Her Vehicle
The appeal of the diva is partly the appeal of the extreme.
Exquisite vocal beauty is mixed with overwhelming horror or overbearing passion.
The diva's voice is always on the edge, touching on the forbidden, breaking the boundaries of ordinary earthly melody.
In her roles, the diva often leaves behind rationality, emulating madness.
By those standards the performance artist Diamanda Galas, whose new composition "Insekta" received its world premiere at the opening of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival on Thursday night in Alice Tully Hall, is unmistakably a diva.


Stocks Hit Right Notes, Gaining 6.64, to 3,521.06
Like an aging lounge act, the stock market turned in a solid but uninspired performance yesterday.
No trumpets sounded, but no screams were heard, either, as rising bond prices and good results earlier in the day on overseas markets helped lift most leading market indicators.
For the first time since June 4, the Dow Jones industrial average finished higher than it did on the previous Friday, gaining 6.64 points, to 3,521.06.
For the week, the Dow gained 37.09.


Yemen's Democracy Gives U.S. the Jitters
To the Editor:
The first true multiparty democracy in Middle Eastern history has emerged in the mountain country of Yemen, despite the best efforts of the United States to abort it.
With almost no natural resource base, Yemen has until recently sustained a growth rate rivaling that of the "dragons" of east Asia, more than 6 percent a year from 1970 to 1988.


Horizon Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Agassi Has Streisand But Loses Bollettieri
Since bizarre behavior and Zen moments seem to be his touchstones, it doesn't come as a great surprise that Andre Agassi, in a polar twist on the usual severance methods for coach-player associations, was fired yesterday by his longtime mentor, Nick Bollettieri.
"To help him get back to where he used to be, which was No. 3 in the world, there would have to be close contact," Bollettieri said yesterday from North Carolina.
"But he's based in Vegas, I'm at the academy in Bradenton, and there's a space between us. It's not like it used to be. Whether he'll ever reach his greatest potential, no one knows."


METRO DIGEST
THE WICKED WEATHER: HEAT'S GRIP BEGINS TO STRANGLE
As the temperature in New York City hit the 100-degree mark for the second day, the heat wavegripping the metropolitan region became increasingly grim and dangerous.
Page 1.
Even with round-the-clock hydrant patrols and new valves designed to thwart adversaries, the water still flows.
Page 25.
With the help of blinking lights, wailing alarms and a handful of experts, an engineer in Con Edison's control center keeps track of how much electricity New Yorkers are using.
Page 25.
Some advice on surviving the heat. Page 25.  NEW YORK CITY  NEW YORK POST IS SHUT DOWN
Rupert Murdoch, who swooped into the confused New York Post drama as an ostensible savior, suspended publication of the 192-year-old newspaper, saying he had failed to win the savings he wanted from the newspaper's unions.
Page 1.
At 210 South Street, employees feared the roller-coaster ride was finally really over.
Page 22.
A chronology of The New York Post. Page 22.  CLERIC'S APPEAL IS DENIED
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Islamic cleric whose followers have been linked to two bombing conspiracies in New York City, has suffered a setback in his efforts to stay in the United States as the Board of Immigration Appeals in Washington rejected his request for political asylum.
Page 23.
TRUSTEE FOR CITY CONCRETE COMPANY
A court trustee has been appointed to oversee a bankrupt concrete company that was created by New York City and sustained by more than $3 million in city subsidies.
Page 23.
BODY OF MUSLIM OFFICER IS FOUND
The body of a troubled Muslim transit police officer has been found on a ledge overlooking the Atlantic Ocean, where he appears to have killed himself with a single bullet.
Page 22.
LAW PROFESSOR SLAIN
A Hofstra University law professor who was a former Federal prosecutor was found bludgeoned to death in a bathroom of his house in Holliswood, Queens, the police said.
Page 23.
REGION
SPORTS BETTING DECLARED DEAD
New Jersey Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian declared sports betting in casinos a dead issue, saying he would not bring the measure before the full Assembly.
Page 24.
TRASH PICKUPS, AND TALKS, CONTINUE
Union workers returned to clear away trash in Paterson as talks began again between union officials and representatives of 39 trash haulers in the ninth day of a strike affecting at least 14 New Jersey counties.
Page 24.
FUND TO BUY PINE BARRENS HAILED
Long Island business and environmental leaders hailed the New York State Legislature's approval of a trust fund that will help to preserve tens of thousands of acres of the fragile Pine Barrens of eastern Suffolk County.
Page 24.
REVOCATION OF CITIZENSHIP URGED
The United States Department of Justice is seeking to have the citizenship of an accused Nazi war criminal summarily revoked.
Page 24.
About New York by Felicia R. Lee 23
Traffic Alert 23


CHRONICLE
The message about the need to find a cure for AIDS has probably never been carried so high.
Last month nine Princetonians, including six new graduates and three current students, set off on a sponsored climb of Mount McKinley, in Alaska, the highest peak in North America, to raise awareness of the disease and funds for Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research.


Burger Chain Confronts Nightmare
After stumbling badly following an outbreak of food poisoning six months ago at Jack in the Box restaurants, Foodmaker Inc., the fast-food chain's parent, seems to have made a comeback.
Aggressive marketing and public relations have helped woo wary customers back to the restaurants and restore most of the lost sales.


Stewart Has a Heart Condition
PAYNE STEWART said yesterday he has a heart condition that has forced him to make some minor changes in his life style but will not curtail his golf schedule.


Industry Too Must Share National Park Costs
To the Editor:
There are several reasons visitors to our national parks should not be forced to pay the full cost of operating them, as Terry L. Anderson suggests in "The Forest and the Fees" (Op-Ed, June 28).


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Muni Funds Provide Hideaway From Taxes
President Clinton's pledge to increase the top income tax rate from 31 to 36 percent (39.6 percent for the wealthiest) has many investors scrambling for shelter.
One good place to hide is a municipal bond fund, which invests in the bonds and notes of states and municipalities.
The issues, used to finance public projects and services, are backed by the taxing power of issuers or by revenues from toll roads or other projects.


Errol Flynn? No, It's a Swashbuckling Rodriguez in Lead
With his often nervous putting stroke soothed by a grandmother's putter, Chi Chi Rodriguez withstood the dragon fire in Cherry Hills' greens today to maintain his lead after two rounds of the 14th United States Senior Open.
The 57-year-old Rodriguez did his trademark celebratory sword dance with happy regularity on his way to a one-under-par 70 that gave him a 36-hole total of five-under-par 137.


President Clinton on Summit Conference: 'We Have Made a Serious Start'
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference yesterday in Tokyo after the 19th summit meeting by the Group of Seven industrial nations, as recorded by the Associated Press: STATEMENT
The summit we have concluded sends a message of hope to America and to the world.


Corrections
A report in the Q &amp; A column of the "Your Money" pages on July 3, about reporting profits on convertible bonds, misstated the effective date of a change in how their profits are taxed.
For bonds issued after July 18, 1984, and purchased at a market discount, the gains are taxed as ordinary income, not capital gains, to the extent of the discount.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
14th STREET FESTIVAL Fourteenth Street will be closed from Second Avenue to Avenue of the Americas from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
TOMORROW  THIRD AVENUE STREET FESTIVAL Third Avenue will be closed between 42d and 57th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
CAPTIVE NATIONS WEEK RALLY Fifth Avenue will be closed between 59th and 72d Streets from 9 A.M. until completion.


Rudy's Restaurant Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 14


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


3 Israeli Soldiers Killed in a Rocket Attack
As a team of senior United States officials continued efforts here to give a kick-start to the stalled Middle East peace talks, three Israeli soldiers were killed today in southern Lebanon by rockets fired by pro-Iranian Islamic guerrillas.
The attack brought to five the number of Israeli soldiers killed in the last two days in the self-declared "security zone." The two days of attacks, which left eight wounded, led to retaliatory raids by Israeli forces, whose artillery pounded villages north of the zone dominated by the Islamic Party of God.


Review/Music; From Half a World Away, Tuva's Unearthly Songs
On a plateau in southern Siberia, at the border of Mongolia and Russia, lies Tuva, a region surrounded by mountains and largely populated by nomadic herdsmen.
Tuvan music is filled with natural sounds: the twitter of birds, the clip-clopping of horses, the lowing of livestock, the hiss of wind through a mountain pass.
Six musicians from Tuva, which is now an autonomous part of Russia, performed on Thursday night at the World Financial Center; Ted Levin, an ethnomusicologist, provided commentary between songs.
Like a handful of other groups in the world, notably Tantric Buddhist monks, Tuvans have developed the ability to sing two and three notes simultaneously, a low tone and a harmonic or two up above.
One Tuvan throat-singing style, called karagiraa, sounds like a low growl accompanying a wooden flute; another, called sigit, uses a higher fundamental tone and might be a Gregorian chant below a whistle.
And in another style, borbannadir, both the fundamental and the overtones quiver and pulsate.


John Murray Reynolds, Shipping Executive, 92
John Murray Reynolds, a retired New York shipping executive, died on Tuesday at his retirement home in Deerfield Beach, Fla.
He was 92.
A native of New York City, he was a 1922 graduate in geology from Princeton University.
He then went to work for the old Munson Line, spending a year in Cuba before moving to the company's New York office.


Fed Leaned Toward Higher Rates in May
The Federal Reserve announced today that its main policy-setting committee voted in May to lean toward raising interest rates if inflation did not slow.
Many economists said the committee probably maintained that position when it met again on Tuesday and Wednesday.
According to a summary of the May 18 meeting that was issued today, couched in the Fed's typically elliptical prose, the policy-making committee voted 10 to 2 in favor of language that would leave the Fed poised to raise short-term interest rates, but only if there was more bad news about inflation.


Steel of West Virginia reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beliefs
In late February 1992, Bishop Gerard O'Keefe, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Davenport, Iowa, opened a letter marked "Personal and Confidential." It came from Jeffrey R. Anderson, a Minnesota lawyer with a national reputation for suing what he recently called "the rats" in the church's basement -- priests accused of sexually abusing minors.
The letter was three sentences long.
It notified Bishop O'Keefe, then 74 years old, that he was being sued.
The accusations: that he had molested two young girls 30 years earlier, when he was an Auxiliary Bishop in the St.
Paul and Minneapolis Archdiocese and rector of that Archdiocese's cathedral.


Guy Noyes, 79, Dies; Economist for Bank And Federal Reserve
Guy Emerson Noyes, an economist who directed research and analyzed trends for the Federal Reserve Board and later for the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, died on Sunday at the Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
He was 79 and lived in Naples.
His wife, Irene, said the cause of death was massive infection.


Morgan's Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 25


At The Post, Quiet Resignation and Meager Hopes
After 44 years with The New York Post, John Fontana could not muster surprise, or frustration, or anger yesterday as he stood outside the newspaper with a few unhappy friends, wondering what he would do if this time the paper's demise was for real.
At 60, he is too young to retire, he said.
But who wants to hire a 60-year-old photo retoucher?


So Many Funds, and So Much Advice
Get ready for a little humiliation.
In this case, you'll be pleased to hear, we're talking about my humiliation.
But if you follow my example and set out with a middling amount of money and a staggering reserve of ignorance to find the best mutual fund, you can expect to experience some of your own.


Computer Research reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Youths With Potential Honor a Helping Hand
IT was the year that both the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy were slain, the musical "Hair" enthralled Broadway and defiance marked attitudes.
It was also the year that 14 male New Yorkers gathered to consider being young, gifted, black and Catholic in a time of turmoil.
The men will come together a week from today to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Archbishop's Leadership Project, which began in June 1968 under the Archbishop of New York, Terence Cardinal Cooke.
Initially archdiocesan leaders planned to use the group to promote the priesthood as a vocation among blacks, but it quickly became a kind of crucible for personal development.


Esiason Predicts Easy Transition to Jets
Of all the veteran quarterbacks who have switched teams this offseason, Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason thinks he might be in the best position to hit the ground running.
The reason is simple: his familiarity with the system that New York Coach Bruce Coslet employs.
Esiason, a nine-year veteran of the Bengals, came to the Jets in a trade with Cincinnati in April.
Coslet was the Bengals' offensive coordinator before taking the head-coaching job with the Jets in 1990.


Court Names Trustee for Concrete Company
A court trustee has been appointed to oversee a bankrupt concrete company that was created by New York City and sustained by more than $3 million in city subsidies over the last seven years.
A city official, Rudolph J. Rinaldi, said yesterday that the court action placing the West 57th Street Concrete Corporation in involuntary bankruptcy raised questions about the city's future support and use of a plant built by the company.
The company has accumulated $4 million in debts, according to records filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan.


CYCLING: The Bicycle as Hardware; Rominger Tests His Computer-Style Training in the Tour
Tony Rominger is man, not computer, right?
Definitely.
He laughs, he sings, he pays his taxes and goes on vacation, he feels pleasure and pain -- especially when somebody with the wrong access code tries to interface his microchip.
"No, no, no, oh, that's not right," Rominger protests.
"Look at me," he commands with a laugh.
"I'm a human. Just like you."


Helionetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  2 Tied for Second-Round Lead  John Adams birdied his last two holes to tie Ted Tryba for the lead after yesterday's hot and humid second round of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va.
Adams, a 16th-year pro without a victory, and Tryba, a Hogan Tour graduate, each shot a six-under-par 65 at Kingsmill Golf Club.
The two finished two rounds of the 6,797-yard layout at nine-under 133.
At 134 were Jim Gallagher Jr., Blaine McCallister, Mark McCumber, Jeff Cook and Tom Byrum, whose career-best 62 tied the course record held by four other players. (AP) Her Best Golf: Missie McGeorge, still without a victory after 10 years on the L.P.G.A. tour, shot the best round of her life yesterday, a seven-under-par 65, for a one-stroke lead in the L.P.G.A.
Youngstown-Warren Classic.
In the 54-hole event in Warren, Ohio, McGeorge mixed nine birdies and an eagle with four bogeys.
Shooting 66's were Dottie Mochrie, Ayako Okamoto, Vicki Fergon and Karen Lunn.
Among the 10 at 67 were Betsy King, Tammie Green and Deb Richard.
Nancy Lopez was in a group of seven at 68. (AP) TENNIS  Easy Victory for Bruguera  Sergi Bruguera, the top-seeded defending champion, breezed into the semifinals of the Swiss Open in Gstaad, with a 6-1, 6-2 victory over Alex Corretja yesterday.
Bruguera, the French Open champion, needed only 59 minutes to set up a match today with Marc Goellner, who overwhelmed a qualifier, Gerard Solves, 6-2, 6-2.
In the other semifinal, second-seeded Thomas Muster will face third-seeded Karel Novacek. (AP) This Time, Carbonell Wins: Tomas Carbonell avenged a loss in last year's final by defeating Magnus Gustafsson, the two-time defending champion, 7-6 (10-8), 6-4, in the completion of their second-round match in the Swedish Open in Bastad.
Carbonell was leading, 7-6, 1-2, when rain stopped play on Thursday.
He completed the victory yesterday, but lost to eighth-seeded Magnus Larsson, 3-6, 6-2, 7-5, later in the day in the clay-court tournament.
Today's semifinals will match Larsson against Ronald Agenor, and No. 5 Christian Bergstrom against Horst Skoff. (AP) Herrera Wins in Three Sets: Second-seeded Luis Herrera defeated Arne Thoms, 7-6 (7-5), 6-7 (7-5), 6-0, in the quarterfinals of the Hall of Fame Championships in Newport, R.I.
In today's semifinals, Herrera will face third-seeded Javier Frana, who defeated Brian MacPhie, an amateur from Southern Cal, 6-7 (7-2), 6-4, 6-3.
In the other semifinal match, No. 5 Alex Antonitsch will face Greg Rusedski.
In the Virginia Slims of Newport Invitational, an eight-woman exhibition tournament, top-seeded Zina Garrison-Jackson defeated Chanda Rubin, 6-3, 6-3, in a semifinal match.
Betsy Nagelsen beat Joanne Russell, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3), in a quarterfinal and will face Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer today in the other semifinal. (AP)


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Heat (101degrees) Refuses to Loosen Its Grip
As the temperature in New York City hit the 100-degree mark for the second straight day, the heat wave gripping the metropolitan region became increasingly grim and dangerous yesterday.
Emergency calls for police and ambulance service were up significantly in the city.
So were visits to the emergency rooms of the 11 acute-care hospitals operated by New York City, particularly by people with asthma and other respiratory ailments, as the city endured its third day of an ozone alert.


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Flooded by Endless Rainfall, Midwest Braces for Still More
Gushing rainfall in the upper Midwest overwhelmed dams and levees tonight and is threatening to unleash flooding not seen in more than a century.
Record floods had broken along the Mississippi River from south of Rock Island to St.
Louis, as many of the straining levees broke under the torrents or were overrun by the waves.


Sports of The Times; Same Game, But With New Players
AS major league baseball prepares to celebrate All-Star week, the nation's pastime continues to be haunted by the legacy of segregation, which it formally brought to an end in 1946 with the signing of Jackie Robinson.
This morning, the Baltimore Orioles will hold a breakfast for 25 veterans of the Negro Leagues.
Later this afternoon, before a game with Chicago, the Orioles will honor the men who competed in a league that flourished because of segregation, then eventually folded because of integration.


Chatham Journal; Sunken U-Boat You Say? Out There?
As sunbathers along the beaches here flip through John Grisham's latest thriller, this quiet Cape Cod town has been caught up in a real summer tale.
It began last month when Edward Michaud, a commercial diver, said he had found the wreck of a Nazi submarine, the U-1226, four miles off the coast in only 41 feet of water.


Searching for a Clean, Well-Air-Conditioned Place
The room was cool, one of the few places on campus that was air-conditioned.
Erik Sullivan, a volleyball player from San Diego, lay in a corner on a bare mattress.
He opened his eyes occasionally to see what was on MTV on a big-screen television set, but mostly he just lay there, relaxing in the cool air.
"This is where most of us sleep," Sullivan said.
"It's too hot to sleep in our rooms, so we usually come down here for a couple hours a day, then sleep here at night."


Russian Parliament Votes a Claim to Ukrainian Port of Sevastopol
The Russian Parliament passed a resolution today declaring the Crimean port city of Sevastopol, which is within Ukraine, to be a Russian city.
The resolution was not likely to have much impact, since Ukraine has no intention of ceding Sevastopol and President Boris N. Yeltsin, who is in Tokyo attending the Group of Seven meeting, is unlikely to try to enforce it.


Baghdad Journal; A New Graphic Message From Saddam Hussein
President Saddam Hussein's latest attempt to get even with the man who forced him out of Kuwait is a larger-than-life mosaic of a snarling George Bush on the floor at the entrance to the Rashid Hotel, the best in Baghdad.
Visitors leave dusty footprints on the image of Mr.
Bush, who led the allied coalition in the Persian Gulf war.
"Bush Is Criminal," says the legend underneath.


Sports Betting Proposal Declared Dead in Trenton
Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian declared sports betting in Atlantic City casinos a dead issue today, saying he would not bring the measure before the full Assembly for a crucial vote.
"Legalized sports betting has no future in New Jersey," Mr.
Haytaian said at a news conference.


Time to Ban Plutonium Production
It takes only 11 pounds of plutonium or 33 pounds of highly enriched uranium to make an atomic bomb.
In trying to stop the spread of nuclear arms, the U.S. has tried hard to keep such plutonium and uranium out of the hands of would-be bomb-makers.
That becomes harder to do as more and more nuclear material is produced.
The obvious answer is to ban the production of any more weapons-grade uranium or plutonium and deplete the world's existing stocks.
Until recently the U.S. and its allies have hesitated to take such a step, believing that they might run out of uranium to fuel their nuclear power plants and would need to rely on plutonium.
That fear is no longer valid.


Gay Cause Is the Same as Black Cause
To the Editor:
Re "Blacks Reject Gay Rights Fight as Equal to Theirs" (front page, June 28) and your news article of the same day on New York's gay pride march: Your coverage of the human rights issue in the black and gay communities deals a severe blow to the hard-fought legal advances that civil rights groups have made in the last 20 years.


Hofstra Law Professor Is Found Fatally Beaten in Queens Home
A Hofstra University law professor who was a former Federal prosecutor was found bludgeoned to death yesterday in a bathroom of his house in Queens, the police said.
The professor, Dwight L. Greene, 44, was discovered shortly after 11 A.M. by his mother and a neighbor, said a police spokeswoman, Officer Merri Pearsall.


Dutoit Gets Post in Tokyo
Charles Dutoit, the music director of the Orchestre Symphonique de Montreal, will take on the post of principal conductor of the NHK Orchestra in Tokyo, beginning in 1996.
His contract calls for him to spend eight weeks each season with the Japanese orchestra.
Mr.
Dutoit is also the music director of the Orchestre National de France and the artistic director and principal conductor of the Mann Music Center in Philadelphia and the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., the two summer residencies of the Philadelphia Orchestra.


Gennum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


FastComm Communications Corp. reports earnings for Year to April 30


Charging War Crimes, U.S. Seeks to Revoke Citizenship
The United States Department of Justice sought yesterday to have the citizenship of an accused Nazi war criminal summarily revoked on the ground that his audiotaped confession to taking part in a massacre of about 50 Jews at a concentration camp was so incriminating that the charges did not require a formal trial.
Department officials said the case against the defendant, Jack Reimer, 77, of Carmel, N.Y., was one of those rare instances when an accused war criminal actually confessed to his participation in the Nazi extermination of Jews, even though he attempted to exonerate himself repeatedly.


Classical Music in Review
Douglas Drake Organist St. Michael's Church Amsterdam Avenue and 99th Street


Carolina Freight Co. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


INSIDE
Priest Admits Sexual Abuse
An Orange County priest pleaded guilty to taking at least 11 boys from his parishes to engage in sex with them over the last decade.
Page 21.
Bones of Czar Are Confirmed
Scientists said they had proved with over "98.5 percent" surety that bones found in Russia are those of Czar Nicholas II and his family.
Page 3.
Rallying for New Jobs
President Clinton's international conference on job creation is shaping up to be, in part, a pep rally for new strategies.
News analysis, page 39.


American Winner Is Favored
American Winner, coupled with High Noon Star in the wagering, will leave from the inside post in tonight's $313,699 Yonkers Trot as the overwhelming 3-5 favorite.
High Noon Star will be right there with him, leaving from the No. 2 spot at Yonkers Raceway in the first leg of the triple crown for trotters.
"I like the rail," said Ron Pierce, American Winner's driver.
"But this colt doesn't need it. He has a lot of stuff, a lot of ability." This season, the ability has translated into eight victories, a second and a third in 10 starts and a current seven-race winning streak.


DeOssie and Guyton Signed by Giants
The Giants, with the start of training camp and a new era just over a week away, signed two veterans yesterday -- linebacker Steve DeOssie and safety Myron Guyton.
Although there are still some key players without contracts, including running back Dave Meggett and offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott, and although no rookies have yet to sign, the two signings yesterday are a good start to the holdout-contract game that happens annually at many training camps.
Given the rookie situation, it is likely that the day before the Giants' camp opens July 18, there will be a signing frenzy by the new players.


Scientists Confirm Identification of Bones as Czar's
Claiming to have cracked a 75-year-old mystery, British scientists said today that advanced forensic techniques had proved "virtually beyond doubt" that bones unearthed in a Russian forest two years ago belonged to Czar Nicholas II and his family.
The scientists used new and established procedures to draw out genetic material from the bones and compare the DNA with samples from known living relatives of the Czar's family.
The family was killed in the Russian Revolution.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TECSYN International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Reporter's Notebook; Democrats Report Another Burglary
The Democrats suggested dirty tricks.
The Republicans dismissed it as a third-rate burglary.
Sound familiar?


Priest Enters Plea of Guilty To Sex Abuse
A veteran Roman Catholic priest in Orange County pleaded guilty today to taking at least 11 boys from his parishes to a condominium in New Jersey and motels in Cape Cod and engaging in a variety of sexual acts with them over the last 10 years.
The carefully arranged plea, in which the Rev.
Edward A. Pipala, a 54-year-old priest who had been a pastor in Goshen and an assistant pastor in Monroe will serve 6 1/2 to 8 years with no chance of parole, comes as Pope John Paul II and the leaders of the American Catholic Church are painfully and publicly struggling with how to deal with priests who have sexually abused children and teen-agers in their trust.


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


SUMMIT IN TOKYO: How It Happened; U.S. Appears to Retreat From Setting Targets to Increase Japan's Imports
In reaching an agreement covering trade relations with Japan today, the United States seems to have backed down from its earlier efforts to establish numerical targets for increasing Japan's imports and reducing its trade surplus.
The agreement, announced by President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, contains wording that will allow both sides to claim victory.
American negotiators said the agreement goes much further than ever before in being "results-oriented."


Pep Rally for Jobs; Clinton Plan for Unemployment Conference Is Aimed at Stirring Up Public Support
President Clinton's international conference on job creation, announced on the eve of the economic summit meeting in Tokyo, is shaping up as part educational seminar, part public relations for the White House and part pep rally to get people and governments to support new and perhaps expensive strategies to fight unemployment.
The meeting, which some call a "jobs summit" to heighten its significance in the public mind, will bring together labor, education and economics ministers from the seven most powerful industrial nations in an effort to get them to explore the causes of stubbornly high unemployment and to push for strategies to combat this problem.


Argonaut Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SUMMIT IN TOKYO: News Analysis; A Clinton Debut: Fancy Footwork and a Bow
TOKYO, Saturday, July 10 -- Even before his negotiators wrested a last-second agreement from the Japanese on how to attack its enormous trade imbalance with the United States, it had been a big week for Bill Clinton.
Achieving the long-sought breakthrough with Japan, however tentative a first step it represents in an arduous process, sent the President and his entourage away from his debut in summit diplomacy in an ebullient mood.
Even the determinedly dour Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, permitted himself the faintest touch of braggadocio.


A Weekend Tribute to Ashe
Arthur Ashe would have been 50 years old today, and family and friends are planning a weekend tribute in his memory in Richmond.
Gov.
L.
DOUGLAS WILDER, poet MAYA ANGELOU and ANDREW YOUNG, the civil rights leader and former Mayor of Atlanta, were among those expected to be at a private service to dedicate a granite monument at Ashe's grave.


Asians Seek To Restrict U.S. Airlines
In a spirit of unity never seen in the Asian airline industry, most of Asia's large airlines are banding together to overturn what they consider to be one-sided agreements that give American airlines the right to pick up passengers in Asia and fly them to other destinations in Asia, a right Asian carriers do not have in America.
Fifteen major Asian carriers here have announced that they will lobby their governments to scrap, or at least drastically revise, decades-old air-service accords with Washington that date to when the Asian carriers were in their infancy.


Do the Chancellor Search Carefully
Bernard Gifford has done New York City's Board of Education a favor.
Dr.
Gifford, a professor and businessman, has withdrawn from consideration for Schools Chancellor -- for the second time in less than two weeks.
He was the leading candidate for the job, but his mercurial temperament suggests he was not the best choice.
Now, the board should take this opportunity to reopen the search and make a determined effort to find the best person for the job.
The board has been formally looking for a new schools chief since March, after a bitter 4-to-3 vote against renewing the contract of Joseph Fernandez.
A search committee considered more than 100 names before recommending Dr.
Gifford and two other educators as the finalists.


Selecting Your Funds With an Eye on Costs
FUNDS with high expenses usually claim that they have expert management, able to produce returns that justify their fees.
Seldom so, researchers now say.
Current studies point to expenses as the clearest predictor of a fund's returns -- the higher the expenses, the worse the performance.


Stranded Town's Stoic In the Face of Disaster
With the main road here under several feet of water, a boat across flooded cornfields is now one of the few ways to reach this historic wine-making town on the swollen Missouri River, 80 miles upstream from St.
Louis.
The disaster that hit this town of 2,700 people this week is, in microcosm, the story of the entire Missouri River, from Nebraska to St.
Louis.


Bosnia Threatened With U.N. Pullout, 2 U.S. Reports Say
As the humanitarian crisis in Bosnia worsens, two classified Administration reports say the international mediators in the Balkans are holding out the threat of seeking United Nations withdrawal from the country unless the Bosnian Muslims agree to negotiate on a partition plan.
In recent days, the mediators representing the United Nations and the European Community in the 15-month-old war have publicly warned that the deteriorating conditions could lead the United Nations to reconsider its mandate.
Bosnian Government officials interpret the remarks as part of a pressure campaign intended to force them to accept the partition plan.


New York Restores the Catskills Into a Synthetic Wilderness
To the Editor:
As author of the "locally notorious article in The New Yorker" that declared New York's Kaaterskill Falls "all but unreachable behind a newly grown-up wilderness" (news article, July 1), I'm writing to object to the adjective "notorious."


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Signing Day in Green Bay
The Green Bay Packers signed first-round draft pick GEORGE TEAGUE yesterday, along with a number of other draft picks and free-agent running back ALAN PINKETT.
Green Bay spokesman LEE REMMEL said he believed it was the first time ever that the Packers had signed contracts with all of their draft picks before the start of training camp, which begins next week.


Plotting a Course to a Secure Retirement
Saving for retirement has become a critical issue for Americans.
Companies are slashing pension benefits; the Federal agency that guarantees corporate pensions, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, is struggling, and the Social Security system faces the burden of an aging population.
Personal savings will almost certainly have to fill any gap between benefits and needs.
But most Americans are in dismal shape.
People 25 to 44 are saving at a rate that will provide them with only about a third of what they will need to maintain their current style of living when they retire, a recent study commissioned by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company found.


Pope, Evans &amp; Robbins reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Outrighted Paul Abbott, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
Recalled Jeff Mutis, pitcher, from Charlotte.
National League
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Optioned Rick Parker, outfielder, to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Shane Reynolds, pitcher, from Tucson.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Activated Ray Lankford, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Les Lancaster, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 7.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Released John Candelaria, pitcher.
Activated Randy Tomlin, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Midwest League
BELOIT BREWERS -- Activated Darryl Meek, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Released Keith Schmidt, outfielder.


Bridge
All tournament players know about lead-directing doubles, like the Lightner double in slam situations.
Many know about lead-directing bids, which can occur in a number of competitive situations.
But what seems to be an entirely new lead-directing action was invented on the diagramed deal during the international playoffs in Memphis in June, which determined the American representation in the 1993 world championships.
East and West were using a modern device favored by a few experts: the two-under pre-empt.
Three clubs showed a hand that for most players would be a three-heart opening, and that bid was made in the replay.
One of the purposes of this is to transfer the contract, making partner the declarer: The opening lead will then come around to honor any holdings in the partner's hand.


Review/Film; Bon Vivant Still Lives. Or Is It Dies?
Easily the funniest performance in the frantic sequel to the 1989 hit comedy "Weekend at Bernie's" is Terry Kiser's droll impersonation of a dead bon vivant who becomes a lurching, limbo-dancing zombie whenever calypso music is in the vicinity.
Mr.
Kiser isn't the only actor who appeared in the original film who has returned for the sequel.
Jonathan Silverman and Andrew McCarthy are back as gung-ho Abbott and Costello-like sidekicks who will do anything to find $2 million that the dead man embezzled from the insurance company in which they worked.


T. Harris Jackson, Editor, 74
T.
Harris Jackson, a retired Associated Press editor who shaped the news agency's foreign report for 33 years, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 74 and lived in Ocean Bay Park on Fire Island, L.I.
The causes were complications from lung cancer and emphysema, his family said.


Real Estate Investment Trust of California reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Industry Too Must Share National Park Costs; Dedicate the Fees
To the Editor:
I take strong exception to Terry L. Anderson's "Forests and the Fees" (Op-Ed, June 28).
Mr.
Anderson mistakenly chastises "environmentalists," whom he disparagingly describes as subscribers to Sierra mag azine, for not wanting "their constituents to pay the costs of services at the national parks."


New York Restores the Catskills Into a Synthetic Wilderness; Grande Dame Hotels
To the Editor:
I played piano in the house band at the Laurel House in the Catskills the summer of 1964, just before New York State bought the grand old hotel and, in a sadly unimaginative mood, burned it down (news article, July 1).


High Bidder Reneges on Calculator
The Swiss dealer who set an auction record at Chistie's in London in May with his bid of $11.8 million for a 19th-century German calculator now says he cannot pay for it.
The buyer, Edgar Mannheimer, a Zurich dealer in watches and scientific instruments, said yesterday that he was in default because his client, whom he did not identify, had abandoned the deal.
The talks ended yesterday, Mr.
Mannheimer said, when the client told him he was prepared to buy the calculator for a much lower price of around $300,000, should the auction house now decide to put it up for sale again.


Short-Term Investing
What's the best way to invest money that might be needed in three to five years?
Most experts say the stock market is too risky, except in small doses, so they recommend conservative stock or bond funds.
Conservative stock funds will give you some stock market exposure, but not too much.
Returns of growth-and-income funds, for example, are supported by dividend payments that also stabilize the fund's share price.
Balanced funds combine stocks and bonds.
Even so, they should make up no more than one-third of a short-term portfolio, said Sheldon Jacobs, who edits The No-Load Fund Investor.
He recommends Vanguard Windsor II and Mutual Beacon.
Eric Kobren, president of Insight Management, likes Fidelity Balanced.


Battle Likely Over Nominee fro Surgeon General
Another battle appears to be brewing over a top nominee of President Clinton.
A number of conservative groups are mobilizing to block the President's choice for Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, asserting that she wants to bring sex education to kindergartners.
Her defenders contend that the religious right is trying to smear one of the most innovative thinkers on sexual responsibility for the young.


Collaborative Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


No Headline
We're in a weather system that doesn't want to change. -- CHRISTA TUCKER, a National Weather Service meteorologist.  [ 1:6. ]


Agassi Has Streisand But Loses Bollettieri
Since bizarre behavior and Zen moments seem to be his touchstones, it doesn't come as a great surprise that Andre Agassi, in a polar twist on the usual severance methods for coach-player associations, was fired yesterday by his longtime mentor, Nick Bollettieri.
"To help him get back to where he used to be, which was No. 3 in the world, there would have to be close contact," Bollettieri said yesterday from North Carolina.
"But he's based in Vegas, I'm at the academy in Bradenton, and there's a space between us. It's not like it used to be. Whether he'll ever reach his greatest potential, no one knows."


It's Johnson Against Reynolds, With the 400 Mark in Danger
Michael Johnson, two sprinters in one, has rebounded from the ignominy of Olympic failure by taking charge of the 400 meters and making it this year's marquee event in track and field.
Johnson won the national title three weeks ago in Eugene, Ore., in 43.74 seconds, the fastest 400 ever run in the United States.
He defeated Quincy Watts, the 1992 Olympic champion, and Butch Reynolds, the world record-holder (43.29).
Primarily a 200-meter runner, the 25-year-old Johnson switched events because of a hamstring injury that curtailed his training.


Scientists Confirm Identification of Bones as Czar's
Claiming to have cracked a 75-year-old mystery, British scientists said today that advanced forensic techniques had proved "virtually beyond doubt" that bones unearthed in a Russian forest two years ago belonged to Czar Nicholas II and his family.
The scientists used new and established procedures to draw out genetic material from the bones and compare the DNA with samples from known living relatives of the Czar's family.
The family was killed in the Russian Revolution.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mexico Rejects U.S. Request To Hold Chinese Found at Sea
The Mexican Government tonight refused a request by the United States to detain three shiploads of illegal Chinese immigrants intercepted this week by the Coast Guard.
Earlier in the day, the Administration had asked Mexico to allow the ships to dock in Mexican port, presumably under armed escort by the Coast Guard, which intercepted the ships on Thursday and discovered 659 Chinese aliens on board.


CenCor Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Murdoch Closes New York Post, Citing a Failure of Labor Talks
Rupert Murdoch, who swooped into the confused New York Post drama as a savior in March, halted publication of the 192-year-old newspaper yesterday, saying he had failed to win the savings he wanted from the newspaper's unions.
The Post did not print this morning's issue, and confused employees trickled out of its South Street building yesterday after they were told by Mr.
Murdoch's representatives to clear out.
Some carried bags of possessions from their desks, unsure if they would ever return.


Lowell Nesbitt, a Realist Painter Of Flowers, Is Found Dead at 59
Lowell Nesbitt, a realist painter known for his large-scale images of flowers, was found dead on Thursday in his loft in SoHo.
He was 59 and also had a home in Kent, N.Y.
He died of natural causes, the police said.


Escagenetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reichmanns' Objections Delay Olympia Accord
Objections by the Reichmann family, the founders of the Olympia &amp; York real estate empire, yesterday delayed a Federal bankruptcy judge's final approval of a plan for the future operations of the troubled company's United States branch.
But lawyers connected with the case said final approval of the plan was likely.
The bankruptcy court judge had given preliminary approval to the plan two weeks ago and reiterated that approval yesterday, subject to certain conditions.


Classical Music in Review
The Auryn Quartet Frick Collection 70th Street and Fifth Avenue


Henry Hazlitt, 98, a Journalist Who Concentrated on Economics
Henry Hazlitt, a self-taught economist who popularized the subject as a journalist and wrote a best-selling book about it, died yesterday at the Carolton Chronic Convalescent Hospital in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 98 and had lived at the hospital for nearly seven years.
"Economics in One Lesson," the best-known of Mr.
Hazlitt's 17 books, was unstinting in its praise of free markets.
In the simplest language, rarely citing statistics, he laid out what he called the fallacies of regulating economic activity -- like trying, for example, to raise wage levels through minimum wage laws or union bargaining.


Oleg Kerensky Is Dead; Writer on Arts Was 63
Oleg Kerensky, a British-born writer on dance, music and theater, died yesterday at his Greenwich Village apartment.
He was 63.
The cause was AIDS, said a friend, Arthur Lambert Jr.


Golden Enterprises (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gay Cause Is the Same as Black Cause; Prominent Supporters
To the Editor:
Your front-page article on African-American views of the gay rights movement (June 28) bore the headline "Blacks Reject Gay Rights Fight as Equal to Theirs." But when an article quotes such prominent leaders as the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, Coretta Scott King, Roger Wilkins and William Gibson, chairman of the N.A.A.C.P., as supporting a unity between black and gay struggles for civil rights, such a categorical headline is surely misleading.


Gay Cause Is the Same as Black Cause; In a Double Bind
To the Editor:
As an African-American gay man, I was pleased to see you focus on the tensions between the leaders of the black civil rights movement and the lesbian and gay civil rights movement (front page, June 28).
However, I am disappointed you not only fail to question the stereotypes many African-Americans have about the lesbian and gay movement, but actually perpetuate them by rendering black lesbian and gay activism invisible.


New Dean For Virginia Via Wall St.
Leo I. Higdon Jr., co-head of investment banking at Salomon Brothers Inc., has been named the dean of the Darden Graduate School of Business Administration at the University of Virginia.
The appointment, announced Thursday, comes at a critical time for Darden.
The school has been torn since last year, when a committee of five outside academics appointed by the provost to investigate accusations of longstanding problems in tenure, sexual harassment and discrimination found that a hostile climate for women faculty members existed at Darden.


The G.O.P. Pioneers a New Loophole
The Republican National Committee has chosen a strange way to appeal to voters attracted by Ross Perot and his flaying of Washington influence-peddling.
It is creating a sly new way for corporations, labor unions and wealthy individuals to make unlimited, undisclosed political contributions for party purposes.
The R.N.C. chairman, Haley Barbour, announced last month that the party was establishing a new entity called the National Policy Forum, which will hold meetings across the country on a variety of issues, with the aim, at least in part, of luring Perot supporters to participate in the G.O.P.


Learning Homelessness First-Hand; HUD's Secretary Spends the Night at a Shelter in Queens
Impeccably dressed in a dark blue suit and a white shirt, the nation's Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Henry G. Cisneros, went to spend the night in a shelter for the homeless in Queens on Thursday, looking, he said, to educate himself about their problems.
He shooed away a bevy of city officials who greeted him as he drove up to the Briarwood shelter in a chauffeured car about 10 P.M.
Then he spent a few hours bantering with the children and gently grilling their parents about what landed them there.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Thursday's stock market trading misstated the earnings per share of the Bankers Trust Company in 1992.
The figure was $7.34.
The article also misstated an analyst's projections for loan-loss provisions at Bankers Trust this year.
Paul A. Mackey, first vice president at Dean Witter, expects the bank to set aside $137 million this year, compared with $225 million in 1992.


Muni Funds Provide Hideaway From Taxes
President Clinton's pledge to increase the top income tax rate from 31 to 36 percent (39.6 percent for the wealthiest) has many investors scrambling for shelter.
One good place to hide is a municipal bond fund, which invests in the bonds and notes of states and municipalities.
The issues, used to finance public projects and services, are backed by the taxing power of issuers or by revenues from toll roads or other projects.


Health Limbo for Early Retirees
The White House is consulting with business and labor groups on measures that would assure medical coverage for millions of workers who retire before they are eligible for Federal Medicare insurance.
Although no decisions have been made on how to pay for care for either active or retired workers under the proposed national health-care plan, Clinton Administration officials are discussing ways of raising money for the program, according to people who attended meetings in the last 10 days with Ira Magaziner, the White House health-care adviser.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Longstreet Hinton, a former banker who died on June 24, misstated the year of his retirement.
It was 1967, not 1976.


Trust Fund To Purchase Pine Barrens Is Hailed
Long Island business and environmental leaders today hailed the State Legislature's approval of an environmental trust fund that will help to preserve tens of thousands of acres of the fragile Pine Barrens of eastern Suffolk County.
The leaders, appearing at a news conference here, said that land acquisition from private owners could begin as early as next year.
They said they expected the trust fund to match the $10 million that Suffolk County has set aside for that purpose.


ReadiCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Corrections
A report by The Associated Press in the Company News column of Business Day on July 2, about E. I. du Pont de Nemours's swap of its acrylics business and $315 million for the nylon operations of Imperial Chemical Industries, misstated the regulatory action taken.
The deal was not approved by the Federal Trade Commission.
The F.T.C. reviews such transactions but does not formally approve them.
In the Du Pont-I.C.I. case, I.C.I. agreed to sell part of its acrylics operations to a third party.
That satisfied an F.T.C. complaint that the transaction would have combined the two leading competitors in the United States acrylics industry.


Q &amp; A
A Long-Term Advantage
Q Do mutual funds offer a better rate of return than certificates of deposit over the long term?
PHILIP VENTRICELLI, Staten Island.


Megawatts Falter, and Blackouts Begin
In an exceptionally chilly room atop a major electric substation on Manhattan's West Side, Charles Weliky is watching you turn on your air-conditioner.
With the help of blinking lights, wailing alarms and a handful of engineers and other experts, Mr.
Weliky keeps track of how much electricity New Yorkers are using and makes sure demand doesn't exceed supply.


American Health Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mayor Flynn's Diplomatic Career Begins


Key Pitches Yanks Past Stubborn Angels
Orchestrate an uplifting team meeting before the game, send the reliable Jimmy Key to the mound, cross your fingers and pray for a homer by Danny Tartabull.
That was the strategy Buck Showalter used tonight as the Yankees tried desperately to erase the countless problems that have plagued them on this road trip.
Guess what?
It worked.


English Teacher, 30, Is Buyer of the Ticket Worth $111 Million
An English teacher and his fiancee are in hiding somewhere on the west coast of Florida after buying the richest lottery ticket in the nation's history -- $111 million.
The couple said in a telephone interview tonight that they were still recovering from the shock of the windfall but that they had made some decisions about how to spend the money.
They said they would share the winnings with relatives and friends.


Haskell Cohn, Lawyer, 91
Haskell Cohn, a past president of the Boston Bar Association and a founder of the Boston law firm Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky &amp; Popeo, died on Sunday at his home in Westwood, Mass.
He was 91.
The cause was a heart attack, said Francis X. Meaney, a spokesman for the firm.


Nationwide Protests Start at Abortion Clinics


From Bad to Worse in Albany
Conventional wisdom holds that legislatures get their most difficult work done in years when they're free from the tyranny of the ballot box.
But the unimpressive New York State Legislature got even less done in this non-election year than usual.
As The Times's Kevin Sack writes, the session of 1993 will be known for what it didn't do.
After six months, it left the New York City schools bereft of reform.
It didn't approve a new governance system for the schools, and didn't agree on either how to rein in powerful school custodians or on the Assembly's plan for eliminating corrupt practices of the city's community school boards.
It didn't even repeal the Wicks law, which burdens local governments with wasteful construction practices.


Clinton and Yeltsin to Meet in Moscow
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia announced today that they will meet in Moscow for their second formal summit conference, probably later this year.
The two men conferred for more than an hour today after the conclusion of the summit meeting of the leaders of the world's seven leading industrial democracies and pronounced themselves pleased with the outcome of Mr.
Yeltsin's appearance at the meeting.


Andover Togs (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


President Of Merck Quits Post
In a stunning move, Richard J. Markham, the heir apparent to the chairman of Merck &amp; Company, resigned last night as president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Markham, 42, also resigned as a board member, the company announced in a terse three-paragraph statement released shortly before 8 P.M.


Hunt to Enter Another Hall
Hall of Fame inductions aren't exactly new to LAMAR HUNT.
The Texas businessman was enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1972 for helping to found the American Football League.
A decade later, the National Soccer Hall of Fame tapped him for helping to establish the North American Soccer League.
Today, Hunt will take his place in the International Tennis Hall of Fame as founder of World Championship Tennis in Newport, R.I.


Dreyfus: All Dressed Up, With Few Places to Invest
INVESTORS apparently love the Dreyfus Growth and Income Fund five times as much today as they did at the end of December: assets have soared to $703.7 million from $137.1 million on Dec. 31.
Richard Hoey, the economist who runs Growth and Income, launched in December 1991, said it isn't impossible to find places to invest all that dough.
But it isn't as easy as it used to be, either.
"I'm having a problem finding good values," he said last week.
"And I'm buying a much smaller percentage of the initial public offerings coming out."


Pull Up To the Table, Classy Baby
Away with those monstrous chrome and plastic highchairs.
This one, made of pine, is high enough -- and what's more, nice enough -- to pull up to any dining table.
Adapted from an 18th-century Shaker child's chair design, it has a rubbed buttermilk-color paint finish and natural splint seat.
The splayed legs add whimsy, the finials on the ladderback, style.
At the Bellport General Store, $200.


A Rivalry Is Dusted Off By Borg and Connors
Bjorn Borg can walk unrecognized through airports and tennis matches.
His hair is tugged back in a ponytail and his forehand no longer strips the fuzz from a heavy-duty ball, but, on the other hand, he and Jimmy Connors just drew the largest crowd in World TeamTennis history here Friday night, 7,693.
Connors still grunted, Borg still did not, but, otherwise, their duel was no sequel to their last meeting in this country: a 1981 United States Open semifinal.
Borg won that one in straight sets, with a wood racquet, but Connors won this one, 6-1, in 21 minutes, using a plexiglass racquet painted pink.


Hanford Nuclear Site Acts to Reduce Risk of Blast
After months of frustrating delays, workers at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington State have installed a mixing pump in a giant tank of nuclear bomb waste, the first step toward greatly reducing the risk of explosion.
Officials at Hanford have long argued that the risk of fire or explosion is low.
But outside experts have been troubled by recent disclosures about an explosion of wastes in tanks in the former Soviet Union in the 1950's.
Moreover, the experts have found that there are questions about just what is in the dozens of waste tanks at Hanford, in southeast Washington.


A Disabled Moviegoer Pleads for Seating
In regard to "Sunday Morning at the Movies"  [ The View From Scarsdale, June 6 ] :
What Lynn Ames's article did not reveal is that people using electric wheelchairs are unwelcome at the Fine Arts Cinema in Scarsdale, unless they agree to sit directly under the screen (stiff necked and crosseyed).


Late Kick Vaults Nicklaus Into Lead
With the thunderclap of three straight birdies that both closed out a great round and evoked his prime, Jack Nicklaus dramatically took the lead today after three rounds of the 14th United States Senior Open.
The 53-year-old Nicklaus, who has not won an official event since this championship in 1991, fired a four-under-par 67 over the Cherry Hills Country Club for a 54-hole total of five-under-par 208.


A Blanket of Darkness Prolongs a City's Misery
Heat gives the night an edge.
At the Monster in the West Village, the bar's doorman, Sacha Loren, was a little nervous asking customers to pay a cover charge on Friday night.
In Brighton Beach, residents griped and milled grumpily around Consolidated Edison workers trying to restore power to their homes.
And in Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, three police officers grew weary of an urban cat-and-mouse game in which they chased dozens of teen-agers who tried to sneak through the dark, soggy air into the relief of the park pool, closed since sunset.


Nephew of Victim in Gay-Bias Slaying Is Beaten
The nephew of an emotionally troubled Vietnam veteran who was hunted down and stabbed to death on a Staten Island beach three years ago -- because his assailants believed he was gay -- was himself beaten by a group of young men last week, some of whom made remarks about his sexual orientation, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch, said the attack occurred at 10:30 P.M. on Monday on Gervil Street in Rossville, S.I., against Michael Zappalorti, 22 years old, the nephew of James Zappalorti, who was slain in 1990.


Climbers to Pay For Insurance
The National Park Service, which spent $3 million last year on 5,000 missions to rescue visitors in parks, is working on a plan to have climbers and other adventure travelers pick up the tab.
The plan will be tested beginning next spring for the 1994 season at Mount Rainier National Park in Washington and at Denali National Park in Alaska, for Mount McKinley climbers.


BUSINESS DIARY
COMPANIES Apple Computer, All Alone and Shrinking Fast Apple Computer was, and is, a one-of-a-kind company.
But while uniqueness was its glory when it burst forth from that proverbial garage, its separateness now is an increasing liability.
As Microsoft and Intel barrel ahead in creating a standard for business computing, Apple is going it alone -- and showing the scars.
John Sculley, who just gave up the chief executive's reins, has even pondered a merger with I.B.M. or A.T.&amp; T. Last week, Apple revealed its latest wound, saying it would cut 2,500 workers, or 16 percent of its payroll.
And the new chief executive, Michael Spindler, froze the pay of those who remain -- unless they're vice presidents or higher, who got a 5 percent cut.
When Apple announces its earnings this week, the job-cut damage could hit $300 million, and mean a quarterly loss.
Many eyes now are on the fruits of a joint venture with I.B.M. and Motorola, a line of computers due next year.  [ Page 10. ] New Hope at Northwest Air The airline industry has been on a pendulum in recent years.
Saddled with high costs, airlines have swung in and out of bankruptcy, with bankrupt carriers, out for quick cash, igniting repeated fare wars.
But last week Northwest just may have taken a step toward breaking that cycle, striking a deal with its pilots that could head off what had seemed a likely bankruptcy.
The pact involves big concessions from both sides -- pilots give up $365 million in pay and work-rule changes over three years, but the unions could end up owning 37.5 percent of the company.
Now the machinists need to go along, and the Administration is watching keenly -- Transportation Secretary Federico Pena, in fact, called managers and labor leaders to Washington to push things along.
Any pact would put pressure on the industry's Big Three -- American, United and Delta -- to cut costs, too.
And if the pact holds, of course, the bad news for travelers is that fare-war bonanzas are a bit less likely.
Euro and Disney Don't Mix How do you say "Magic Kingdom" in French?
Maybe the answer is that you don't.
Euro Disney said last week that it lost $87 million in its latest quarter -- more than expected -- and saw no end in sight to the bad results.
Europe's decidedly unmagical economy these days just doesn't seem to fit Euro Disney's script, and the resort even expects a loss for the peak summer season.
To top it off, it now appears that completion of the resort's second phase, a movie-based theme park, will be delayed another year, until 1997.
You Break It, You Pay for It If you run a company badly, you should pay -- right out of your own pocket.
That was New Jersey's message last week as it sued three dozen former executives and directors of Mutual Benefit Life, saying their mismanagement had plunged the insurer into insolvency and that they should be liable for $1 billion in losses.
Mutual Benefit was taken over by the state in 1991, after years of heavy investment in real estate and other speculative ventures, and most of its 700,000 policyholders are still waiting to be made whole.
There are some big names among those sued: Richard Furlaud, former American Express chairman; Leon Hess, owner of the New York Jets, and Christopher Bond, the Missouri Senator.
For Keating, Double the Pain Elderly investors whose savings vanished after they bought American Continental junk bonds would probably like to pull out Charles Keating's fingernails one by one, sloooowly and paaaainfully.
But they'll have to be satisfied with this: Last week a Federal judge in Los Angeles, deciding that sentencing guidelines just didn't fit crimes so "staggering in proportion," doubled the recommended amount.
She sentenced Mr.
Keating, 69, who is already serving a state prison term, to 12 years and 7 months in Federal prison for defrauding investors.
She also ordered him to pay $122.4 million in restitution to the Government, but it'll be hard getting blood from this particular stone: Mr.
Keating insists that he's broke.
But lest we forget that no man could wreak such havoc alone, here's the last word: "What happened," asked a lawyer for bondholders, to "all the public officials who looked the other way?" A Farewell to The Post?
Has anything been clear at The New York Post lately?
An odd parade of would-be owners come and go with dizzying frequency.
An editor-for-a-day sets up shop in a diner.
Rupert Murdoch saves the day -- then doesn't quite.
For now, though, this much is clear: Mr.
Murdoch, unable to strike a deal with the unions to cut costs, pulled the plug on Friday.
Now, with no new bidder in sight, the paper has no owner but the bankruptcy court, which is unlikely to keep publishing at a weekly loss of $300,000.
So, after 192 years, is this an obituary?
Again, unclear.
"It's over," said Mr.
Murdoch's spokesman.
But a lawyer for the paper's creditors said, "Murdoch has not closed the door." So at press time on Friday, the muddle was as thick as ever.
THE ECONOMY When in Doubt, Buy a Car The economy still looks shaky, and on the horizon loom higher taxes, not high times.
But some things cannot wait.
Americans have to have their wheels, and when the old car starts to wheeze -- you know, the one you would have traded in two years ago if it hadn't been for the recession -- it's off to the showroom.
So while most economic signposts point downward, car sales keep climbing, with Detroit's Big Three last week reporting a 10 percent rise in June.
Imports fared less well, though, as drivers increasingly turn to domestic models, with Chevrolet's Cavalier steadily gaining ground and Honda's Accord, the king of the road a year ago, falling further behind.
Today's buyers are determined to root out the best value, and these days they are finding it in Detroit.
If It's Hot, This Must Be the Mall Is there anything good about a heat wave? (Or are you too hot to think about it?) Answer: It could just help the economy.
Look at it this way: last week an index showed that retail sales rose 5.6 percent, the fourth straight monthly increase, with leading department stores showing the biggest gains.
And that was for June.
Just think what the July numbers will bring.
After people hide in air-conditioned movie theaters until the managers eject them, where do you think they go?
Why, the air-conditioned mall, of course.
And what do they do in that one-climate-fits-all oasis?
They whip out their little plastic cards, and they spend, spend, spend.
Those July numbers, if we survive to see them, could go through the roof.
The Rich Get Healthier It's no surprise that the rich are healthier than the poor, but a Government study out last week shows that the rich, by comparison, are rapidly getting even healthier.
In fact, between 1960 and 1986, the inequality in death rates more than doubled, according to the data, published in The New England Journal of Medicine.
It reached the point that those with family income below $9,000 had more than triple the death rate of those above $25,000.
And it's not just that affluence buys more health care -- that's always been true.
Much of the difference lies in the tendency of more affluent, better-educated people to take better care of themselves, whether through diet, exercise or quitting smoking.
Remember Gold?
It's Back Gold is hard to define.
Is it more like a pork belly, or more like cash in the mattress?
It's both, of course, which makes investing in it tricky indeed.
Beyond its jewelry value, at politically stormy times people see it as a haven for cash -- on the theory, presumably, that governments come and go, but gold is forever.
It fell out of favor in recent years, though, partly because there was just too much gold around after Russia dumped tons of it on the market when the Soviet Union collapsed.
But suddenly, because of falling production, there's less supply than the market demands, and gold has rallied and is a hot investment again.
Last week, in fact, it neared the $400-an-ounce level, for the first time in almost three years, after being as low as $325 last fall.
It may soon be time to search the dresser drawers again for those old gold rings and cash them in.
The Name's Chicago, Pardner What if the New York Stock Exchange were called, say, the Northeast Stock Exchange?
Sounds imprecise, doesn't it?
A bit mushy even.
Not the strong, crisp image the times demand.
That must have been what the folks at the Midwest Stock Exchange were thinking last week when they went back to a name they'd used in simpler times: the Chicago Stock Exchange.
In 1949, the exchange took the Midwest name after absorbing regional exchanges in St.
Louis, Cleveland and Minneapolis-St.
Paul.
But since then, the city's name has gained global force with the rise of powers like the Chicago Board of Trade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
And now the stock exchange, the nation's largest outside New York, hopes to cash in on some of that new magic.
INTERNATIONAL The World Still Has Problems Leaders of seven powerful nations put their heads together in Tokyo last week to tackle the world's economic problems.
The problems survived, pretty much unscathed.
The mighty seven did agree to a quick $3 billion in aid to Russia, but that aid was mainly just a rearranging of prior commitments.
What's new is that it will get to its target more quickly, and its focus will be on transforming state companies.
And newly private industries, President Clinton predicted, his finger solidly on the domestic pulse, will eventually provide "a huge new market for American goods and services." The leaders also vowed to "curb protectionism in all its manifestations" -- a hot topic as America and Japan haggle over their hefty trade imbalance.
There is progress on the trade front, mainly because the United States has seemingly become more realistic about what it can and can't get.
Last week it reached a compromise with Japan, Canada and Europe that will cut many tariffs but will not touch issues that regularly set off political fireworks, like American textile barriers.
Not Made in China Once, everything said "Made in China"; in China, though, a great wall kept imported goods out.
Trade deficit?
You couldn't say it in Chinese.
But China has gone on a spending spree recently, and its trade gap quickly took on American proportions.
Last week, China said its deficit had doubled in two months -- and disclosed a new austerity plan.


At Work; Speaking for the Working Woman
THERE is a telling story about Karen Nussbaum, says Ellen Bravo, who recently succeeded Ms.
Nussbaum as head of 9 to 5, the National Association of Working Women.
More than 20 years ago, when Ms.
Nussbaum was a secretary at Harvard, a fellow walked into the office where she was working, looked for her absent boss and said, "Isn't anybody here?"
Ms.
Nussbaum hasn't been invisible since, and she's spent the better part of two decades working to make sure other women aren't either, first by organizing a group of female office workers in Boston and then taking the organization national in 1977.
Three weeks ago, she formally became the 13th director of the Women's Bureau, a smallish entity within the Labor Department concerned with women's employment issues.
She may not, as some of her activists-in-arms suggest, be the Mother Teresa of progressive politics, but she will, by all accounts, bring a steadying, working-person's perspective to an office that has suffered through a series of less-than-attentive, let-them-eat-cake administrators for roughly a dozen years.


A General Store for Light Housekeeping
BELLPORT, L.I., the modest 19th-century sailing village tucked behind the malls and diners along Sunrise Highway in Suffolk County, has become Seventh Avenue's summer outpost.
Bruce Weber, the photographer; Anna Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue, and Isabella Rossellini, the actress and model, have homes in the area, spearheading an influx of designers, publicists, models, photographers and people in the advertising business.
"You come into this town on a weekend and say, 'Where am I?' " said Diane Schwartz, a resident of nearby Bay Shore, who was standing in front of the not-yet-open Bellport General Store last weekend.


Ole Nashville Is Still Grand
NASHVILLE is a serious music town, and we are a family that loves music.
We have been known to listen, on trips to English country houses, to tapes of Bob Wills's Western swing.
During long journeys across the Midwest our 7-year-old son asks for the end of "Don Giovanni," when the Commendatore returns to claim the Don.
So with two sets of grandparents' agreeing to join us there, and stacks of tapes for the journey, my husband, son, 3-year-old daughter and I set out last month for the country music capital of the world.
Our branch of the clan arrived at lunchtime with hungry children in the Music Row district, just southwest of downtown Nashville.
Before we'd been served our iced tea we were treated to a free performance in the courtyard in front of the local outpost of Gilley's, the Texas dance hall made famous in "Urban Cowboy." Singers, working for tips only, were scheduled throughout the day and into the evening.
While we waited for hot dogs, our son rode Gilley's trademark mechanical bull.


Karen Darby and Matthew Scott
Karen Linda Darby, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Darby Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Matthew Thompson Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Scott of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Malcolm Sutherland, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Middlesex School Chapel in Concord, Mass.
Mrs.
Scott, a graduate of Smith College, was until recently a designer for Aquascutum in New York, a clothing manufacturer and retailer.
Her father is an executive vice president of U.S.
Trust Company of New York.


Children of Immigrants Excel in English; Quick to Assimilate
To the Editor:
According to "A Fervent 'No' to Assimilation in New America" (news article, June 29), Guilienne Audelin, a 15-year-old Haitian-American, thinks assimilation is a dirty word.
She apparently represents a new wave of immigrant children who refuse to let go of their heritage.
Your article reflects confusion about assimilation.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen109.94
108.58
125.15
per Dollar
German Mark1.7227
1.6878
1.4937
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2785
1.2873
1.1946
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4805
1.5080
1.9235
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$391.25
$386.00
$348.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


E. M. Andresen, Mark Massey
Elisabeth Maria Andresen, a daughter of John A. Andresen of New Canaan, Conn., and Carin M. Andresen of Bedford, N.Y., was married to Mark Thomas Massey, the son of Marie and William Massey of Richmond.
The Rev.
Heather Cook performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford.
Mrs.
Massey, 26, was until recently the public relations official for Jim Henson Productions in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a private investor.
His mother is a vice president and the director of protocol for Chemical Bank in New York.


Children of Immigrants Excel in English
To the Editor:
As a Hispanic-American, I was encouraged by the findings of the study by Alejandro Portes reported in "A Fervent 'No' to Assimilation in New America" (news article, June 29).
This study shows that children of immigrants not only want to speak English, but also speak it well.
They know speaking English is essential to survive and succeed in our society.


Youth Arrested in Fatal Shooting
A 16-year-old boy who the police say killed a mother of eight this week was arrested early yesterday in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn.
The youth, Derek Anderson, was arrested at his home at 315 Sutter Avenue, in the Brownsville Houses, and charged with second-degree murder, said Sgt.
Daniel Barbero of the Housing Authority Police.


Comic Cretins
SOONER or later, Beavis and Butt-head had to happen.
Think of them as the latest link in the Darwinian descent of the American adolescent: from Huck and Tom to Wayne and Garth to a couple of crudely drawn cartoon teen-agers so crass, so idiotic, so irresistible to their generation that "Beavis and Butt-head" is the top-rated show on MTV.


Sketches of 2 Men and Their Women
BECAUSE the John Drew Theater of Guild Hall has lacked a consistent artistic vision of theater for more than a decade, why not let it serve as a summer stopover for winter companies from Off Broadway?
That's the way it looks this year, with equal summer shares being held by an established company, the Circle Repertory, and an up-and-coming one, Naked Angels, which is co-producing, with the John Drew, a double bill through Saturday.


BEST SELLERS: July 11, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
48
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
6
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
3
17
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
4
4
6
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
5
13
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
7
3
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
7
6
10
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
8
10
3
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
9
9
10
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
10
8
134
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
11
11
5
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
12
1
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $22.) Americans on a holiday in Italy learn a lot about their marriage and themselves.
13
12
12
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
14
1
THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II scandals that could embarrass the British.
15
13
17
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young patent clerk.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
43
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
2
2
4
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
3
4
48
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
4
3
3
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
5
5
5
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
6
9
9
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
8
30
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
8
6
9
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
9
7
21
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
10
11
6
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
11
13
4
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans and suggests ways of addressing them.
12
10
12
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
13
14
34
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
14
12
5
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town.
15
10
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for civility.
16 *
1
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
11
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
1
52
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
4
2
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
4
8
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest.) ANGELS &amp; INSECTS: Two Novellas, by A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $21.) Two long novellas, and very clever ones, in which insect life is an analogue of Victorian society and literary immortality is compared to the real thing.
CRUELTY AND SILENCE: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World, by Kanan Makiya. (Norton, $22.95.) The cruelty is that of the Saddam Hussein regime in the author's native Iraq; the silence, that of the Arab intellectuals who condone or assist it.
DEAD MAN WALKING: An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United States, by Helen Prejean. (Random House, $21.) Governments should stop killing people, says a nun who has often seen death row up close.
DRUMS ALONG THE CONGO: On the Trail of Mokele-Mbembe, the Last Living Dinosaur, by Rory Nugent. (Houghton Mifflin, cloth, $21.95; paper, $10.95.) And was it found?
Well, something was, and the trip was loads of fun.
KING LEOPOLD'S DREAM: Travels in the Shadow of the African Elephant, by Jeremy Gavron. (Pantheon, $23.) An Englishman's boundlessly energetic quest finds elephants distinctly less endangered, in some places, than they used to be.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Mr. le Carre's solution to the disappearance of the Soviet Union is to create an arms dealer-cum-drug lord as smart as the Devil.
PACK MY BAG: A Self-Portrait, by Henry Green. (New Directions, $18.95.) All of his early life the enigmatic novelist (1905-73) chose to reveal; published in Britain in 1940.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
SAVE ME, JOE LOUIS, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Harcourt Brace, $23.95.) The grifters and drifters in this novel think they're pretty good guys, but their actions suggest otherwise.
SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War, by Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of a middleman in the exchange of political prisoners during the cold war.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.
TSVETAEVA, by Viktoria Schweitzer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) The life and apocalyptic times (1892-1941) of a great Russian poet, a woman no revolution could contain.
UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In 40 years of essays and articles, the author expounds on sex, politics, literature, himself and other phenomena.


Focus: Tampa, Fla.; Troubled Island Project on the Upswing
HARBOUR ISLAND, this city's long struggling mixed-use development off the downtown waterfront, appears to have put its worst days behind it.
Buoyed by strong residential sales and downtown growth, the 177-acre island has begun to shed its image as a project unable to meet expectations.


Miss Mackay, Mr. Whittemore
Kathleen Ann Mackay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James G. Mackay of Westerly, R.I., was married yesterday to Laurence Frederick Whittemore 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick B. Whittemore of New York.
The Rev.
Peter J. Andrews performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Watch Hill (R.I.) Chapel.


Terrorism's New Threat Tests Airports' Security
With each fresh eruption of terrorism in the United States this year -- the car-bomb explosion at the World Trade Center in February, the bombing plot aimed at the United Nations and the Hudson River tunnels -- the nation's major airports have gone on security alert.
Some parking lots have been closed, metal detectors have sprouted just inside terminal doors and unattended cars parked at terminals have been quickly towed away and inspected for explosives.


Acoustic Horrors Of the Fitting Room
To the Editor:
Even worse than the lighting, space and mirrors (so that's why I look lumpy) in clothing-store fitting rooms ("Mirror, Mirror," June 27) is the sound.
Awful music is piped in; it frazzles my nerves and I become eager to escape.
At least with catalogue shopping, one can control these elements.
ELIZABETH K. WOY Philadelphia


Home-Team Recognition
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman's "Death in Venice (at the Biennale)"  [ June 27 ]  managed to make sense of this complex and often confusing international art exhibition.


Officials Move to Quell Washington Hts. Unrest
The police, city officials and community groups stepped up their presence on the edgy streets of Washington Heights in upper Manhattan yesterday, trying to calm tensions that flared on Friday night when three firefighters were injured in a firebomb attack on a fire truck.
Residents of the largely Dominican neighborhood said teen-agers threw a Molotov cocktail at the fire truck, set fires in garbage cans and threw rocks at police officers to protest the death of a 20-year-old man who was riding a motorcycle when he was hit by a police car on Thursday night.


Attracted


POSTINGS: Going, Going . . .; A Terra Cotta Splash on 41st
With its turquoise, aquamarine and pumpkin-orange tiles, and its ruddy and ornate terra-cotta ornament, the former American Encaustic Tiling Company building at 16 East 41st Street has offered a striking mid-block splash of color for 73 years.
But the facade is apparently to be lost as part of a storefront renovation that has been approved by the Buildings Department.
One of the owners of the five-story building, Nicholas G. Stratigakis, said of the existing facade: "It's falling off the walls. It's old. It's faded. It doesn't look any good. Half of it is off, anyway."


Russian Entrepreneurial Spirit Steals Into Secret Spy Archives
To the Editor:
"The Spy Who Knew Too Much" (Op-Ed, June 30) by John Costello and Oleg Tsarev, a former K.G.B. colonel who still acts as an intermediary for his former employers, presents a one-sided picture of governmental policies on declassifying intelligence documents.
The authors would have us believe that Russia is a prime mover in declassifying materials relating to the cold war, while Western governments, Britain in particular, are obstinately refusing to disclose intelligence secrets.
The K.G.B. archives, which contain the bulk of cold war era intelligence material, are controlled exclusively by the security services and are closed to researchers, no matter what period they are interested in.


Onslaught


Jostling for Position on the Riverfront
MOTORISTS, yes.
Bicyclists, too.
Strollers, certainly.
Sun bathers, ball players, nature lovers.
They all stand to gain, officials say, from a rebuilt West Side Highway with a new Hudson River park at its side.
But what about developers?


The Sheik Will Be Staying Put, for Now
A LITTLE more than a week ago, American officials abruptly informed Egypt that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman could leave the United States for any country that would accept him unless the Egyptians quickly presented an extradition request, which they reluctantly did.
That was the bad news.
The good news came a few days later, when the Government here learned that the sheik might spend years locked up as an illegal immigrant while his lawyers fought the extradition request in the American courts.
And the really good news came when American legal experts poring over an 1874 treaty said extradition was not only a long way off, but fraught with so many hurdles that the blind and diabetic cleric might never make it back.


U.N. Troops Begin an Effort To Take Over Somali Streets
After weeks of rarely venturing outside their compounds, United Nations troops have begun setting up checkpoints in the streets of Mogadishu as part of an effort to wrest control of the city from Somali militiamen.
The move to re-establish a visible military presence in the capital was the first since June 17, when United Nations troops mounted a ground attack against the headquarters of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, a clan leader whose fighters were held responsible for an ambush on June 4 in which 24 Pakistani peacekeepers were killed.


The Patent System Ain't Broke; Don't Fix It
To the Editor:
A patent is useful precisely because, as property under the owner's complete control, it encourages and protects investment in research and development.
The patent system rewards innovation, and guarantees that the relatively small number of entrepreneurs and innovators among us will continue to take risks, start businesses and produce jobs.
Compulsory licensing would sabotage the ability of small businesses and universities to negotiate reasonable license agreements.
It would devalue the work of innovators.


Reporter's Notebook; Globe-Trotting Clinton Faces Trip's Side Effects
If you are the President of the United States, traveling the world has its benefits.
There are big planes to fly in, large crowds to cheer and police-escorted motorcades that whisk you through dizzying rush-hour traffic.
But there are side effects that even a President cannot avoid.
For Mr.
Clinton and the White House officials armed with briefing books and draft communiques, the chief enemy has been jet lag.
Tokyo and Seoul are seven time zones away from San Francisco.


American Winner Becomes Worldbeater
American Winner weathered a shaky first turn and then stormed to the wire in world-record style tonight, easily winning the $313,699 Yonkers Trot by 10 1/2 lengths at Yonkers Raceway.
An overwhelming 3-10 favorite before the race, American Winner got caught in traffic in the first quarter-mile behind his stablemate, High Noon Star, and Baltic Baby, both of whom broke off stride.
That forced American Winner, who left from the rail, to move to the outside, away from trouble.


A Busted Blimp Releases a Large Giggle Factor
BLIMPS. To some they are stately galleons of the skies. To others, windblown oddities.
When one plummeted into Manhattan on the Fourth of July, crashing atop a West Side apartment building, few people seemed to take the episode too seriously, even though the two pilots were injured.


Can Suns Find Enough Green for A. C.?
The Phoenix Suns have debated the merits of two free-agent forwards, the Nets' CHRIS DUDLEY and the Lakers' A. C. GREEN, and chose yesterday to pursue Green more fervently.
According to a Suns' executive, who requested anonymity, Green "is a guy who, chemistry-wise, fits in with us. He and Dudley are equal rebounders, we think, and while Chris is a banger and a blocked-shot specialist, he won't score you a lot of points."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  CLINTON ASSURES SOUTH KOREA
President Clinton, in South Korea, stepped up pressure on North Korea to quit its atomic-weapons effort.  1
The Clinton team's chief enemy has been jet lag.  8
The Japanese Socialist Party doesn't seem so socialist anymore.  9  IN CAMBODIA, VIOLENCE GOES ON
Much of the violence in Cambodia, U.N. peacekeepers say, is manifested in the wanton, casual brutality of the military and the police.  1  THE MANY WOES OF HAITI
The economic data of Haiti read like those of a country emerging from a devastating war.  3  YELTSIN ASSAILS VOTE ON CRIMEA
Boris N. Yeltsin denounced the Russian Parliament's asserting sovereignty over the Crimean city of Sevastopol, which is in Ukraine.  13  U.N.
ASSERTS CONTROL IN SOMALIA
U.N. troops have begun setting up checkpoints in the capital of Somalia as part of an effort to wrest control of the city from Somali gunmen.  14  SARAJEVO: UNSAFE "SAFE ZONE"
At least 1,500 people have been killed or wounded in Sarajevo since the U.N. declared the city and five other mostly Muslim enclaves to be "safe havens" two months ago.  10  National 16-25  TACKLING RACE AND VOTING
The Supreme Court's recent ruling in a redistricting case may prove to be only one step in a prolonged review by the Court of the role of race in electoral politics.  1  NO RELIEF FROM FLOODS
The flood in the Midwest has breeched levees, washed out highways and railroads, flowed over farms and strained the vast water-control system of the Mississippi.  1
Residents of Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., are watching history wash away.  18  AIRPORT SECURITY TIGHTENS
In a new atmosphere of terrorism, the nation's major airports have gone on a security alert, and officials say the heightened security will continue through the summer.  16  RISK OF NUCLEAR BLAST IS CUT
In the first step toward greatly reducing the risk of an explosion, workers at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington State have installed a pump in a tank of nuclear bomb waste.  17  UNCERTAINTY FOR CHINESE AT SEA
More than 650 Chinese men and women remained aboard three rusty ships about 60 miles west of Mexico as American officials tried to figure out what to do.  20  G.O.P.
CAREFUL ON PEROT
Political memo: Despite some harsh words for Ross Perot at a G.O.P. meeting, Republicans were fully aware of his political strength.  20  BACK-STABBING IN THE SENATE
A dispute over legislation led one senator to drop the usual "you scratch my back, I'll scratch yours" principle of Senate.  24  CONTEMPT THREAT IN DETROIT CASE
The judge in the trial of three white former police officers accused of beating a black man threatened to hold two journalists in contempt after their newspaper published a photograph of a witness.  25  On Wheels: The Oregon high desert seems amiable to a bicyclist.  16  Metro 27-38  THE HEAT WAVE LINGERS
The heat wave that has stalled like an overheated bus over New York City and much of the rest of the East Coast persisted, breaking record temperatures in several cities.  1  COURTING RECAST AS ABUSIVE GAME
In interviews this week after a series of reported sexual assaults by teenagers, many youths say they live in a culture where sexual harassment is viewed as a game and abuse as a team sport.  1  GLIMMERS OF HOPE FOR THE POST
The New York Post has proven that it does not die easily.
Some of those closest to efforts to stabilize the troubled newspaper said it was too early to count The Post out.  27  SCHOOL CHOICE PLANS SPREAD
Will Rogers Jr., former actor and politician.


Nancy Blum, Howard Feinglass
Nancy Lynn Blum, the daughter of Anita Kaskel Roe and Dr.
Morton Blum, both of New York, was married last evening to Howard Paul Feinglass, the son of Leonard Feinglass and Elaine Feinglass, both of Baltimore.
Rabbi Thomas Weiner officiated at the Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is an account executive for the Lois K. Geller Company, a New York marketing concern.
Her father, an asset-management consultant in New York, retired as an attending physician in the department of medicine and gastroenterology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Her mother is an executive vice president of the Carol Management Corporation in New York, real estate developers and owners of Doral Hotels and Resorts.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Alfred L. Kaskel, founded the corporation.


Records Rewritten as East Bakes and Midwest Soaks
The heat wave that has stalled like an overheated bus over New York City and much of the rest of the East Coast persisted yesterday, breaking temperature records and contributing to at least 12 deaths in Philadelphia before giving way to intense thunderstorms that brought a brief respite from the heat but also caused heavy damage and injuries.
For the third consecutive day, temperatures in New York City exceeded 100 degrees -- something that had not happened since 1948.
Just before 3 P.M.
Central Park recorded 102 degrees, tying the record for the day, set in 1936.
At Newark International Airport, it reached a record 105, the fourth straight day of triple-digit heat recorded there.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Gramercy Park
ONCE home to Edwin Booth, Theodore Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy, Gramercy Park, a relaxed neighborhood at the foot of Lexington Avenue and just a mile south of Grand Central Terminal, seems a bit out of place in bustling New York City.
The neighborhood still has a 19th- century atmosphere, enhanced by the large private park that it surrounds.
Two houses on 19th Street -- also known as Block Beautiful for its many plantings -- jut out past others because they were built in 1828, before zoning mandated deeper setbacks.


For the Insatiable Collector
To the Editor:
The review of the Leonard Bernstein discography, "Bernstein: Yet More Surprises?"  [ June 13 ] , covered a lot of ground, but I would like to suggest adding a couple of pieces.


A Comic-Strip Hero Matures (in a Book)
THE first thing that Frederic Tuten does after greeting a guest at his door in Southampton is make coffee.
As readers of Mr.
Tuten's new novel, "Tintin in the New World" (William Morrow &amp; Company) or of of the two books that preceded it will notice, coffee -- "incendiary coffee like simmering tar itself" -- is fuel and elixir, tonic for the soul and antidote against self-pity for the romantics and renegades who people Mr.
Tuten's novels.
It is right up there with wild weather, spicy women and sexy food on his list of rapture-rousers.
Praise From Critics
It has been two decades since Mr.
Tuten set out to bring the boy-hero of the famous French comic strip into adulthood, giving him sex, a soul and some hair on his chest.
"Tintin in the New World" was pronounced "a complex delight" by Larry McMurtry.
Susan Sontag called its creator a magician.
Edmund White praised it in The New York Times Book Review as richly inventive, subtly textured and clearly beautiful.


Russia's Nuclear Transition Ends Economic Security for Scientists
The first to protest were scientists at two top-secret Russian nuclear weapons centers who called thousands of their colleagues into the streets to draw the Government's attention to their demands for a living wage.
In short order, the complaints were echoed by rectors of Russia's institutions of higher education and by a union representing researchers connected to the Russian Academy of Sciences.
The protests struck a common note: Russia's formidable scientific and academic elite is rapidly losing ground financially, and is deeply anxious about its future.


John Ferris, Reporter, 93
John Ferris, a retired reporter and freelance writer, died July 3 at the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 93 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Ferris reported Bruno Hauptmann's trial for the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby in the 1930's for The Associated Press.
He also was a reporter for The Philadelphia North American, The New York Post and The New York World-Telegram and The Sun.


Trapped Weather Pattern Smothers East and Floods Midwest
A stubborn weather pattern that settled over the eastern half of the United States last week caused catastrophic floods in the upper Mississippi Valley while plunging the East into a steam bath.
The continental-scale pattern -- far from global in scope -- was of a well-known type that develops naturally.
Its major element was a huge high-pressure system centered over Chesapeake Bay, with winds pushing heat into the Northeast and moisture into the Mississippi Valley.
The moisture turned nondescript Midwestern weather disturbances into rainstorms that soaked the region daily.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
May 93
May 92
Change
New York
366.7
332.9
+ 10%
New Jersey
183.0
132.4
+ 38%
Connecticut
97.2
89.6
+ 8%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.38
7.47
8.54
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.63
4.64
5.82
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.25
7.35
8.40
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.48
4.49
5.59
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.24
7.34
8.44
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.26
4.25
5.64
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.45
7.56
8.60
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.32
5.38
6.39
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.42
3.53
3.96
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.08
7.08
8.43
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


No Headline
"We're telling the sight-seers to stay home, but people are coming out because they've never seen anything like this." -- MAJ.
WILLIAM RATLIFF of the National Guard, fighting the Midwestern floods.  [ 18:1 ]


Jane Hessmer and Stephen Reilly
Jane Merriman Hessmer, an assistant vice president at the Mitsui Trust Bank (U.S.A.) in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Michael Reilly, a supervisor of tax systems at the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation in New York.
The Rev.
John P. Croneberger performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Atonement in Tenafly, N.J.
Mrs.
Reilly, 28, graduated from Colgate University.
She is the daughter of Zoan F. Hessmer of Cresskill, N.J., and the late Frederick W. Hessmer 3d.
Her father was the president of the Amsco Wire Products Corporation, a supplier of piano parts in Ridgefield, N.J.
Her mother is the vice president of sales at Unisco Inc., a plastics distributor in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
The bride's great-great-great-grandfather, William C. Bouck, is a former Governor of New York.


New Rules Can't Limit Lure of Shark Fishing
In death, the mako shark in the stern of the power boat returning to the Leonardo marina here looked nothing like the deep-water predator of novels and nightmares, just a limp brown carcass waiting to be weighed in a sports fishing tournament.
But alive or dead, sharks like the mako, the hammerhead and the brown have become the objects of intense competition off the Atlantic shores of Long Island, New Jersey and the rest of the East Coast, a big-game fish available even to fishermen of modest means.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
YONKERS FROM 1800 to 1900
Two years ago Philipse Manor Hall in Yonkers was about to be closed for lack of funds.
The Philipse Manor Hall Coalition was formed, and through an agreement between the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, the City of Yonkers and the coalition, the state-owned building, which was constructed in 1683, was rescued.
An exhibition called "Yonkers: From Farmlands to Industrial Center, a Century of Change," is the first venture of the cooperative management, and it will be on view through Jan. 2, 1994.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Harold E. Robles; Honoring Albert Schweitzer's Philosophy
HAROLD E. ROBLES is founder and president of the Albert Schweitzer Institute for the Humanities, which opened its headquarters in a building owned by Quinnipiac College in Hamden earlier this year.
Dr.
Schweitzer (1875-1965) was an Alsatian medical missionary, theologian, musician and philosopher.
He resigned a college position in 1913 to go to a mission in what was then French Equatorial Africa, where he built a hospital to serve the native population.
His personal philosophy was summed up in three words: "Reverence for Life."


From Canarsie to Westport, Via the Fresh Air Fund
Holding balloons and blowing kisses, a buzzing crowd of parents and children waved welcome signs for the busload of New York City children arriving in this Connecticut town to live with local families for several weeks in the Fresh Air Fund's Friendly Towns program.
But the biggest of the homemade signs was for 10-year-old Juanetta Green of Canarsie, Brooklyn.
Adira Sharp, 8, had created it -- backwards J, florescent pink trim and more -- for her friend's fourth stay with the Sharp family here.
This time Juanetta was coming for two weeks of beaches, woods and new playmates.


In America; Violence in Real Life
"Due to some violent content, parental discretion advised."
It's a great disclaimer.
It applies to almost anything.
High school football.
Family gatherings.
Life.


Corrections
The Food column last Sunday, about peaches, carried an incorrect byline.
The writer was Moira Hodgson.


Comic Reversals in 'Arms and the Man'
EVEN at his most lighthearted, George Bernard Shaw didn't let an audience off lightly.
Look at "Arms and the Man," by his own designation a "pleasant play," also an early and a minor one.
It leaps into farce and crosses over into operetta, having inspired the libretto for "The Chocolate Soldier," but that doesn't disguise Shaw's insistence on rationality and his contempt for hypocrisy.
Against a veneer of frivolous dalliance, he was debunking posturing patriotism and the glorification of war and, of course, commenting on class differences, while mocking the shameless romanticism and idealism that suited his story.
Consider the preface, which Shaw says provides a "hint as to what I am driving at."


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES AFGHAN TALES Stories From Russia's Vietnam.
By Oleg Yermakov.
Morrow, $20.


Marci Alboher and Gary Nusbaum
Marci Alysa Alboher, the daughter of Linda Alboher of Wildwood Crest, N.J., and the late Manny Alboher, is engaged to Gary David Nusbaum, the son of Ronni Nusbaum of Hollywood, Fla., and Jack Nusbaum of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Alboher, 27, is an associate in the law offices of Sheldon S. Lustigman in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from American University.
Her mother owns and operates resort properties in New Jersey and Florida.


Living Color
At first glance, it looks like a crash course in color run amok: off-the-chart shades careering from room to room, with a crazy-quilt carpet dashing up the stairs.
But color was the only way to go for a space as idiosyncratic as this one: an 1858 five-story former rooming house on a narrow site, with only one or two irregularly shaped rooms to a floor.
Each room is rather small but has a classic integrity and molding that the designer Carl D'Aquino of Carl D'Aquino and Geordi Humphreys did not want to disturb with a wrecking ball.
And thanks to the house's severe verticality, what might have been a jarring eyeful of color unwinds playfully as you mount the spiral stairs.


Miss Braddock, Mr. Gerber
Jennifer Alice Braddock and Ronald Whitney Gerber, 26-year-old graduates of Princeton University, were married yesterday at Beaulieu Gardens in Rutherford, Calif.
The Rev.
Harry Mack, a Syrian Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gerber, the daughter of Shelley Lewis of Lafayette, Calif., and Richard Braddock of New York, is an associate at Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton, the New York management consulting firm.
The bride and bridegroom received master's degrees in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the chief executive of Medco Containment Services, a health-care cost-containment company in Montvale, N.J.


Writing New Rules For Criticizing Israel From Afar
ISRAEL'S Ambassador in Washington, Itamar Rabinovich, was recently addressing a convention of the America-Israel Public Affairs Committee, the pro-Israel lobby, explaining Israel's peace policies.
He said Israel seeks a package of peace and security, based on a compromise with the Arabs, that, at the end of the day, "might also involve some Israeli concessions."
The huge audience of American Jews greeted his remarks with a stony silence, save one solitary soul in the back of the hall who clapped.
The resourceful ambassador paused for a moment, took in the sound of one hand clapping, and said: "I understand that it is very difficult to get an applause for the term 'concessions' here. So let us applaud the concessions the Arabs will have to make."


RECORD BRIEFS
'Lord Herbert of Cherbury's Lute Book'  Paul O'Dette, lutanist.
Harmonia Mundi France 907020; CD.


A Lark With Kids in London
SOMETIME last January I noticed an ad for amazingly low air fares to London -- $186 round trip from Boston -- and stuck it on my bulletin board.
It was a fantasy, really.
The next time the ad caught my eye was the very day the fares expired -- an hour before my travel agency closed, in fact.
It occurred to me that we could fly to London for the weekend for less than it would cost to go to Washington. (I knew I could never afford such a trip in the summer.) And though I had not once seriously considered the possibility of such an expedition, I found myself suddenly picking up the phone and booking four tickets -- for myself and my kids, only one of whom, my daughter, Audrey, had ever crossed the ocean.
We would be flying on a Thursday night, land in London Friday morning (before 8), spend three nights and set off for home at noon on Monday.
Three nights in a London hotel with a good package deal would cost about $400, breakfast included.
The dollar was up, and I knew from past experience that what I liked to do best in this city -- just walking around and riding the tube -- was free, or at least cheap.
My goal was to make the whole trip for approximately $1,500.


Books in the Ears
To the Editor:
I agree with Rand Richards Cooper's observation on books on tape: they do short-circuit the reader's imaginative interplay with the written word.
But they also appeal to something even more fundamental in human nature: the child's joy of being read to, that primitive joy of sitting back and listening to a tale well told.
DARA KLASSEL Scotch Plains, N.J.


Elizabeth Byrnes, James P. Lane
Elizabeth Valentine Byrnes and James Peter Lane, both lawyers, were married yesterday at the Sacred Heart of Mary Church in Boulder, Colo.
Karl Matz, a Roman Catholic deacon, officiated.
Mrs.
Lane, a daughter of Michael A. Byrnes of Washington and Elena G. Maubrey of Miami, works for the Colorado Commodities Management Corporation, a commodities trading adviser in Boulder.
She graduated from Georgetown University and the Boston College Law School.


Breaking Olympic Ground Over Roars
Riding earthmovers and despite about 50 Atlanta demonstrators who don't want the structure in their neighborhood, Olympic organizers broke ground yesterday for the $207 million stadium that will be the centerpiece of the 1996 Summer Games.
The stadium, which will be the site of the opening and closing ceremonies and track and field events, is scheduled to be completed in the summer of 1995.
It will be built in a parking lot across the street from Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium and after the Olympics will be converted into a baseball stadium for the Atlanta Braves.


'Girl, Interrupted'
To the Editor:
As one who daily fights references to being "crazy" and sometimes to having been in the "loony bin," I was surprised to see these usages in your otherwise helpful review of Susanna Kaysen's "Girl, Interrupted" (June 20).
Just as "retarded" has replaced "imbecile" in educated usage, so these pejoratives, while catchy, should be precluded from polite use.
I hope you will find imaginative replacements for them.
DON DAWIDOFF New York


Nixon Library
To the Editor: On the article "Nixon Library: The Making of the Man" (May 30), I would like to make a point of clarification.
The article says ". . .  Mr. Nixon told the architect, Richard Poulos, that he wanted the center to be unpretentious . . ."


The Uninsured: 37 Million and Growing
"WE have met the uninsured, and they are us," is the message from Hillary and Bill Clinton these days as they try to prepare the public for sweeping health-care proposals this fall.
They are not arguing for spiritual unity with the downtrodden.
Rather, they are drawing on new evidence that startling numbers of even middle-class Americans are finding themselves without the security of health insurance at least temporarily, most often because they have changed or lost their jobs.
And still more say they are suffering from "job lock," afraid to move or quit because they fear for their health coverage.
The estimated number of Americans without health insurance -- some 37 million and growing -- has become one of the verities of the health debate and a marker of national disgrace.
But this snapshot figure conceals as much as it reveals.


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
Certainly a woman who is able to decide how many drinks to consume, where to go and what to do is also capable of forming her own judgments about her experiences.
Roiphe's apparent discomfort with what she perceives as the manipulating influence of the date-rape movement reflects her own doubts about the decision-making capabilities of women.
She fosters the very perspective she claims to oppose.
JOAN NIX Somerville, N.J.


Mutual Funds; Divining the Market's Next Big Turn
WITH the Dow Jones industrial average bouncing over, then under, 3,500 for the last several weeks, investors may well puzzle over its next big move -- and theirs.
Should they avoid a market some call overheated?
Or put more money into equities to catch the next big jump others say is ahead?
For guidance, The New York Times turned to eight top-flight mutual fund managers who have run their funds for at least a decade -- in two cases, for nearly a quarter of a century.
As a group, they range mostly from neutral to bullish, with just two bears among them, both of whom are bargain hunting among unloved stocks.
Here's what the eight had to say:


Streetscapes: The Liberty Theater; Unlikely 42d St. Revival
THE 42d Street Redevelopment Corporation is confident that it can solve its big problems -- reviving the street temporarily until the office market recovers, keeping the street clean and safe and restoring its majestic collection of theaters.
But what of the deteriorating painted scene of early Manhattan in the Liberty Theater, at 234 West 42d Street.


At The Post, Slightest Hint Of Heartbeat
The New York Post has proven many times that it does not die easily.
Yesterday, with no issue on the streets and none planned for tomorrow, it may have seemed closer to death than ever before.
But there were new signs of a possible deal between Rupert Murdoch and The Post's production unions.
And some of those closest to the situation said it was too early to count the troubled newspaper out.


Jackets Off! Ties Next!
A heat wave is one of the few forces known to alter the dress code of executives and professionals.
During last Tuesday's morning rush hour, after the long holiday weekend, a few men were observed carrying their suit jackets on their walk from air-conditioned trains to air-conditioned offices.
By Wednesday, many men and women were carrying their jackets, suspended by the finger of an outstretched hand to keep them from wrinkling.
One man used a walking stick resting on his shoulder as a place to hang his jacket.
By Thursday, neckties were being carried, too.
On Friday, the short-sleeve shirt was emerging as a compromise with the weather.


Athletics and Twins Playing Their Way Into a Strange Situation
The two teams that between them have won the American League West championship the past six seasons reach the All-Star Game break occupying the last two spots in the division standing.
Their location, however, does not exclude them from the race that will ensue after the break.
That development, bizarre though it may be for the Oakland Athletics and the Minnesota Twins, can be viewed from different perspectives.
For the Athletics, for example, their status as a possible contender creates a dilemma of economic proportion.


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
The so-called rape-crisis feminists Roiphe denounces carry the very torch she claims to bear.
The sexual freedom she covets has two sides: the ability to engage, or not engage, in sex according to one's own free will.
Most of us have won the right to say yes.
"Rape-crisis feminists" fight for women's power to refuse sex when they don't.
By defining rape from the women's point of view, feminists fight for an autonomy we never owned, not an innocence we never wanted.
In Roiphe's world, fearless women say no to sex with conviction.
Reasonable men take refusal in stride, and the sexual encounter goes no further.
In my world, one out of seven married women has been a victim of marital rape, and 20 percent of all hospital emergency visits by women are attributed to wife beating.
Here, whether Roiphe likes it or not, women have just cause for fear.
Maybe the women whose experiences Roiphe dismisses, the ones who didn't scream so the neighbors could hear, just knew this fear a little better than she did.


Dodger Pride
To the Sports Editor:
The multitude of tributes to the late Roy Campanella published this week, including Dave Anderson's moving piece "In Roy Campanella, the Heart of a Hero," (The Times, June 28) paid homage to a man whose strength of character transformed him into an international symbol for the resilience of the human spirit.


MY MOSTLY COMPANION
I am, like Kelton, the mother of a daughter who has always been prettier, and is now taller, than I am.
Rachel, now 16, born when I was 27, and I enjoy each other's company.
We joke, shop and swap books, but we have never felt we belong to the same generation.


U.S. to Bar Calls to Cuba Through Canada
The Clinton Administration plans to close communications services that allow people in the United States to make telephone calls to Cuba through Canada, Administration officials say.
In preparation for the move, State Department officials said, they have asked the Treasury Department to determine whether the service offered by "resellers" violates the American trade embargo.
If the Treasury Department makes that determination, the companies, as well as the callers, may face fines and imprisonment.


NOTES
Underwear, one of the most profitable divisions of Calvin Klein's empire, may be the subject of a new book by his wife, Kelly (above).
"She is researching another book, but the topic has not been confirmed," said Lynn Tesoro, a spokeswoman for the Kleins.
"Underwear is under consideration."


Memoirs of a Confederate in Paris
THE GREEN PARADISE Autobiography: Volume I (1900-1916).
By Julian Green.
Translated by Anne and Julian Green. 243pp.
New York: Marion Boyars Publishers.


Jean-Marc Chapus and Victoria Cook
Victoria E. Cook, the daughter of Barbara Cook of Los Angeles and John D. Cook of Kona, Hawaii, was married yesterday to Jean-Marc Chapus, the son of Mary G. Kawamura Chapus of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Edmond E. Chapus.
The Rev.
Stephen E. Blaire, an auxillary bishop of Los Angeles, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mt.
Carmel Church in Montecito, Calif.
Mrs.
Chapus is a teacher at the Cathedral Chapel School, an elementary school in Los Angeles.
She graduated with honors from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is a real estate developer in Kona.
Her mother is a secretary in the emergency and admissions division of Northridge (Calif.) Hospital.


Beyond Budget Demagoguery
Anti-tax rhetoric poses a threat to common sense when Congressional conferees meet this week to begin the arduous task of reconciling the House and Senate budget bills.
Each bill would trim about $500 billion from projected deficits over the next five years primarily by cutting defense spending and raising taxes on families with taxable income over $100,000.
But the House would tax and spend about $30 billion more than the Senate.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MARINE LIFE By Linda Svendsen.
Penguin, $9.
These interconnected short stories are narrated by a young girl in a splintered working-class Canadian family.
Their subjects include her roving stepfather, her pianist mother and various half-siblings.
Last year our reviewer, Gary Krist, praised the "sharp, observant writing that keeps 'Marine Life' consistently fresh."


Two Scoops Of Mango-Vanilla; Ice Creams Test Ethnic Tastes
Barry Donefer was ducking in and out of bodegas and grocery stores north of 110th street the other day.
He was in search of Goya ice cream, an invention that he hopes will sweep Harlem by storm and, in turn, make him gobs of money.
Mr.
Donefer grimaced more than once as he poked his head into store freezers.
The shelves were packed with his nemesis, Haagen-Dazs, but not Goya ice cream.


Larkin Flanagan, Catherine Stanton
Judge and Mrs.
Reginald Stanton of Morristown, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Feehan Lynch Stanton, to Larkin Stepan Flanagan, a son of Joseph P. Flanagan of Chicago and Charlotte S. Flanagan of Winnetka, Ill.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stanton and Mr.
Flanagan, both 25, graduated from Boston College, she cum laude.
She received a law degree in May from Duke University.
She is to join the Chicago law firm of Keck, Mahin &amp; Cate in September.
Her father is a judge in the Superior Court of New Jersey in Morristown, as was her grandfather, the late Thomas J. Stanton.


Wall Street; Analysts' Picks, and Big Misses
THE good news is that securities analysts have managed recently to pick some winning stocks.
The bad news, as always, is that they just can't seem to remember to tell investors when to sell.


Greenwich Village Supermarket Is Damaged in Four-Alarm Fire
An afternoon fire that generated billows of smoke damaged a Greenwich Village supermarket on the ground floor of a 17-story apartment house yesterday, but residents left the building quickly and the blaze was brought under control in about two hours, fire officials said.
Apparently no one was seriously injured in the fire at the Sloan's Supermarket at 60 Seventh Avenue at 14th Street, which started shortly after 4 P.M., although at least five firefighters were treated for heat exhaustion at nearby St.
Vincent's Hospital.


Play On, Play On
From the World Trade Center to Central Park, free music, everything from 60's rock to classical, for dancing or listening.


Horse Sense?
To the Sports Editor:
Joseph Durso ("Triple Crown Must Be Majestic, Not Cruel," The Times, June 27) asks, "Is the Triple Crown cruel to horses?"
The answer is yes, but that's only the tip of the iceberg.
A sport that asks 2-year-old horses, whose knees aren't developed, to run as fast as they can is practicing some insane sort of investment-triage.
In order to get these investments to the track, for a quick return on capital, they are fed growth supplements; they are subjected to steroids to bulk up and overfed to look better for the yearling sales.
Recent studies published in The Blood Horse suggest that excess weight on a yearling has a lifelong detrimental effect on performance.


'Previn and Friends' at Caramoor
WHEN the conductor-composer-pianist Andre Previn moved to Westchester, he established ties with the Caramoor Festival in Katonah, and the association continues to bear fruit.
This afternoon at 5:30, "Previn and Friends" play Mozart and Beethoven in the Venetian Theater.
Joining Mr.
Previn will be the pianist Alicia de Larrocha, the violinist Young-Uck Kim and the cellist Anne Martindale-Williams.
Others are Tatjana Mead and Chun Jin Chang, both viola students at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia, and Laura Frautschi, a violinist in the graduate program at Juilliard.
Mr.
Previn returns Saturday evening at 8:30 to conduct a Rossini overture, Haydn's Symphony No. 104 and an edition of Mendelssohn's Incidental Music to "A Midsummer Night's Dream." Lines from the play will be read by the actress Claire Bloom, with the composer's original song-settings performed by the sopranos Juliana Gondek and Lorraine Hunt.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THREE BAGS FULL.
By Ragnhild Scamell.
Illustrated by Sally Hobson.
Orchard. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 6) Millie is too kind, and obliges all who ask -- bird, badger and others -- with clumps of her wool for their nests, so when the cold comes they are warm and she isn't.
The illustrations are as charming as the story.


Robbing History to Feed the Present in West Bank
Three young men sunk picks and shovels into a rocky hillside near this village, looking for treasure and grimacing when all they turned up were pottery shards and bone fragments.
They had been digging a few feet away when they stumbled upon a burial cave, one of many in this area dating from the ancient Israelites.
With visions of finding valuable artifacts and with one of them always keeping an eye out for Israeli Army patrols, they busily went about committing one of the oldest crimes in this or any other region: grave robbing.


Cinema Center Marks Expansion
"AN earned miracle" is what Vic Skolnick and Charlotte Sky, co-directors and founders of the newly named Cinema Arts Center in Huntington, call the completion of a $1 million expansion.
After 20 years, they have established the sole independent cinema on Long Island and, they say, one of only 12 in the country.
Running the cinema is not a hobby, Mr.
Skolnick said, adding that his workweeks ran 60 to 80 hours.
"We have become a model of what a cultural organization that shows film can be," Ms.
Sky said.


Under a Spell
To the Editor:
David Richards's celebration of the musical revival "She Loves Me"  [ " 'She Loves Me' Is a Confection That Won't Cloy," June 20 ]  inspired a host of memories.
I started attending musicals as tryouts in Boston when I was in high school in the 1940's, the first being "Allegro." In the 50's and 60's, from "Redhead" to "Do-Re-Mi" to "Seesaw" to "No Strings" and so many others, I saw most of the musicals of the era, and I still have the playbills to prove it.


Rethinking Deliberately Segregated Schools
WHEN New York State's highest court ruled last week that a school district created to accommodate Hasidic Jews was unconstitutional, it stoked a debate about whether specialized public schools represent a disturbing return to segregation or the only way to reach children whom public education has failed.
Schools designed for one group -- even if technically open to any student -- are being proposed or have opened across the country in the last few years: academies aimed at young black men in Detroit and New York City; a Latino Leadership high school and one for gay students in New York City; and the school in last week's case, one for disabled Hasidic children in Kiryas Joel, N.Y.


The Struggle for the Book Buyer's Dollar
STRAINS of classical music, along with attentive sales clerks, accompanied the dozen shoppers browsing through the wide aisles of a bookstore here on an early summer morning.
With its deep-forest-green carpeting, dark-wood shelves, soft lighting, reading tables and chairs, the setting conjured up images of a restful library.
Some customers were reading a newspaper or leafing through the pages of a book.
Others were speaking to a clerk, hoping to find a particular title.
And in the children's section, where a child-size reading table and chairs were placed near a display of board books and picture books, a mother was reading aloud to her preschooler.


Yankees Lose Way A 7th Time On the Road
The Yankees knew the situation long before their game ever started tonight.
They knew a victory over the Angels would elevate them into a first-place tie in the American League East.
All they had to do was topple Russ Springer.
It sounded easy enough.
Springer was pursuing his first major league victory, and the Yankees had keen awareness of him since they drafted him in 1990 and nurtured him through the minors before trading him to the Angels in the Jim Abbott deal last December.
They knew Springer and they knew their assignment.


Eighth Graders' Champion Minds
WORKING together with no time to spare, a team of Somers Middle School students recently tied for first place in their age group in the world championships of Odyssey of the Mind, a privately sponsored competition in creative problem solving, held earlier this month in College Park, Md.
The six eighth graders, who had been state winners, said that knowing how each of the others thinks gave them the edge over 51 other teams from around the world in the 14th yearly contest.
They shared their award with a team from Illinois.


Last-Place Action Heroes Win, Barely
The outs came almost in slow motion, but they came.
There was one huge one in the eighth, and then another.
There were then, despite the rude interruptions of a home run and a single, the final three in the ninth.
The game was over.
The season, of course, wasn't saved for the Mets at Shea Stadium yesterday.
But what remains of the club's sanity was.
The Mets, who had seen a 6-0 lead over the Dodgers deteriorate to a 6-5 near-disaster, hung on for what became a 7-6 triumph.


At Westport Playhouse, Three-Character Farce
WALTER, a house painter who is really an actor, arrives to finish a decorating job on Marcia and Reggie's flat.
Marcia has been having an affair, 10 days a year for three or four years, with Jane's husband, Brian.
Jane appears to tell Marcia that she has found out.
She smashes a vase with a mallet and then announces she will reappear that night to tell Reggie about his wife's affair with her husband.
Brian and Reggie do not appear in "The Decorator," an overextended, astoundingly witless, unendurable three-character English play at the Westport Country Playhouse.


Getty's Burger Dress
Horsepower and seven years ago our fathers brought four on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that Coleman are created equal.
Just think how different things would be if it had come out that way when Lincoln said it.
The crowd at Gettysburg, settling in for a three-hour stemwinder instead of a three-minute back-of-the-envelope scribbling, would have been completely confused.
Who's this Coleman, anyway, and why is he plural?


INSIDE
'Safe Area' Perils in Sarajevo
As 1,000 French troops arrived in Bosnia's capital to reinforce it as one of six "safe areas," one of them was shot and wounded.
Page 10.
Will The Post Survive?
There are new signs of a possible deal between Rupert Murdoch and the unions at The New York Post to keep the newspaper alive.
Page 27.


Ashley Ammidon, Daniel Quinlan
Ashley Elizabeth Ammidon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoyt Ammidon Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Scott Quinlan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Quinlan of Allendale, S.C.
The Rev.
Daphne Hawkes, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Blauenburg (N.J.) Reformed Church.
Mrs.
Quinlan, 28, is a research assistant at Besselaar, a pharmaceutical research company in Princeton.
She graduated from Hahnemann Medical College.
Her father is the president of Cazenove Inc., an investment banking company in New York.


CLINTON, IN SEOUL, TELLS NORTH KOREA TO DROP ARMS PLAN
Declaring that "no specter hangs over this peninsula or this region more darkly" than North Korea's nuclear-weapons project, President Clinton stepped up pressure Saturday on the Communist Government to abandon the program.
His aides suggested that the United States and South Korea would move swiftly to seek economic sanctions from the United Nations if North Korea failed to back down in coming weeks.


Upheaval


Be Smart as a Lemming, Orchestras Are Told
What is wrong with American orchestras?
Last year, at the annual meeting of the American Symphony Orchestra League, a report on orchestral finances warned of coming disasters: bankrupt organizations, crippling union and scheduling commitments, dwindling audiences.
At its meeting last month, the league unveiled another report, "Americanizing the American Orchestra," summarizing the findings of a national task force of 156 musicians, critics and managers.
The report's title reveals its premise: The American orchestra is too European.
By extension, it is elitist and irrelevant to its surrounding community.
In fact, the orchestra has resisted sharing the "secrets and norms of participation," creating the image of an "exclusive, arrogant, possibly racist institution."


'End of Summer' at SUNY Purchase
IN a memoir published a year before his death, S. N. Behrman (1893-1973) wrote, "Comedy is the saving grace which makes life bearable."
Graceful is the apt word for Behrman's plays, a score of them.
Mostly, they are concerned with the rich and the frivolous but not the mindless.
The playwright's works epitomized drawing room comedy, a genre that has been hopelessly out of fashion for more than three decades.
The genre has had little impact on the American theater -- serious playwrights don't bother much with the privileged class -- and it is rarely thought to be revivable.


Q and A
Help With Allergies
Q.
This summer we will be traveling in the Netherlands with my young daughter, who suffers from a severe food allergy called anaphylaxis.
Are packaged foods there labeled with their ingredients, as in the United States? -- I. Z. Posen, Haworth, N.J.


The Patent System Ain't Broke; Don't Fix It
To the Editor:
Would-be patent policy wonk Timothy O'Hearn ("Patents: An All-Purpose Policy Tool," Viewpoints, June 27) sees potential in a global compulsory patent licensing system: The patentee would no longer have the exclusive right of a patent; anyone could get a government-mandated license.
Yet free price competition would exist virtually immediately for patented products such as pharmaceuticals that require hundreds of millions of dollars of regulatory expenses, all without a necessary patent-based period of exclusivity vital to justify such a massive investment.
Compulsory licensing would poison the Wall Street market for funds to develop American biotechnology innovation in the new therapies for cancer, AIDS and other diseases of the nineties.


Protesters Demonstrate Against N.A.A.C.P.'s Support of Homosexuals


Why a Designer Dog For Chelsea Clinton?
To the Editor:
I was shocked and disillusioned by your report that the Clintons have been shopping for a gold-plated golden retriever for Chelsea (Egos &amp; Ids, June 27).


Correction
A short article on June 20 about the book "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women" incorrectly described the job of a character seen reading the book in the film "Indecent Proposal." She plays a receptionist in a real estate office that also employs the character played by Demi Moore.


Officials Say Woman Who Died Suffered Injuries in an Abortion
A 33-year-old woman who died shortly after an abortion at a clinic in Queens on Friday suffered internal injuries during the procedure and did not die of cardiac arrest while under anesthesia, as initially reported, the New York City Medical Examiner's office said yesterday.
An autopsy on the woman, Guadalupe Negron of the Bronx, was performed yesterday.
"There was a laceration of the cervix with perforation of the uterus," said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for Medical Examiner.
Perforation of Uterus
Capt.
Brian Milzoff of the city's Emergency Medical Service said an ambulance responded to a call from the clinic, the Metro Women's Center at 102-21 Roosevelt Avenue in Corona, about 1:40 P.M.
Ms.
Negron was taken to the New York Hospital Medical Center of Queens, where a spokesman, Bill Bell, said, "She was essentially dead on arrival."


Out and Around


The Mysteries of Easter Island
"NOT a soul was to be seen on shore, only a deserted, petrified world with motionless stone heads gazing at us from their distant ridge, while other equally motionless stone men lay prostrate in a row on the lava blocks along the coast. The shadows were long, but nothing moved; nothing but the fiery red sun as it descended slowly into the black sea."
The most remote of all places on earth, Easter Island has changed little since Thor Heyerdahl described it in "Aku-Aku," an account of his 1955-56 voyage.
Yes, there are a few comfortable hotels, a small but well-maintained commercial airport, telephone communication to the mainland, Suzuki jeeps stirring up dust on dirt roads and a dozen shops hawking handicrafts to the tourist trade.
But the essence of Easter Island -- the violent past that almost seems alive in the present -- remains unchanged.
The giant stones, or moai, many 30 to 40 feet tall and weighing up to 70 tons, that have tantalized scientists for decades remain silent witnesses to the extraordinary culture that formed them out of volcanic rock.
The caves painted with the face of the smiling warrior god, Makemake, seem haunted by their former inhabitants.
The volcanic craters that gave birth to the island three million years ago stand jagged and unforgiving.


Cigarettes Can Take A Substantial Tax
To the Editor:
In "The Trouble With Punitive Smokers' Tax" (letter, July 2), Robert Tollison claims that a cigarette tax of 35 cents to 40 cents a pack will maximize tax revenues.
He is responding to Michael Grossman, who argues in "For Best Revenue, Tax Cigarettes $1.26" (letter, June 18) that the Treasury would lose money if the Federal excise tax exceeded the figure that he prefers.
If Mr.
Tollison's tax of 35 cents to 40 cents were revenue maximizing, then how come the Governor and Legislature in Massachusetts are now locked in combat as to how they spend the tens of millions of extra tax dollars that have been generated by that state's recent tax increase from 26 cents to 51 cents a pack?


Social Security
To the Editor:
Robert M. Ball wants to "Raise Social Security Taxes" (Op-Ed, July 2).
I don't mind paying taxes on Social Security paid to me, but only if I can deduct all my contributions.


The Calm Before the Next Big Storm?
LYNDON JOHNSON was seeking a full term as President, promising a "Great Society" at home and no escalation in Vietnam.
The Beatles were the newest music sensation.
America felt rich and successful, with economic growth topping 5 percent a year.
And the stock market was rising ever so quietly, with virtually no volatility.
Life in 1993 appears to be very different from 1964.
Economic growth above 3 percent now seems like a distant memory, and even a mild economic stimulus package is deemed unreasonable because of huge budget deficits.
At last week's summit meeting in Tokyo, President Clinton went to great lengths to note that jobless prosperity is affecting all major industrial economies, not just this one.


Spectacular Hair Day
In the old days, newspapers were fairly straightforward about their weather predictions: "Tomorrow: cloudy, likelihood of thundershowers in late afternoon" was typical, or "Tomorrow: mostly sunny, hot and humid." In the heat of competition from handsome, giggling weather casters on television, however -- with their "Boyoboy, is tomorrow gonna be a scorcher!" and "Get out those galoshes, Charlie and Joan, it'll be pouring down cats and dogs" -- the too-dignified print medium has had to enliven its prose.
Here is a recent forecast in the upper right hand corner of the front page of The New York Times: "Tomorrow, sunny, spectacular."


Wall Street; Analysts' Picks, and Big Misses
THE good news is that securities analysts have managed recently to pick some winning stocks.
The bad news, as always, is that they just can't seem to remember to tell investors when to sell.


Yanks: A Clothes Horse and a Torn T-Shirt
From Buck Showalter's trusty jacket to Wade Boggs's most important superstition, here are some slices of life from the only baseball team in New York still playing meaningful games.
YOUR JACKET, MR.
SHOWALTER Indoors or out, 90 degrees or 60, Buck Showalter almost always wears a dark Yankee jacket.
It is not worn for luck or because he is trying to look older than 37.
Showalter wears the jacket (except when he showers) because it is cooler and more comfortable than his uniform jersey and because it presents him in a more dignified manner.
Showalter designed the jackets with Starter to insure that they would look sharp and be comfortable for his six coaches, including the 6-foot-8-inch, 300-pound Frank Howard.
"I've taken it off on some days when it's been really hot," Showalter said.
"I don't know why everyone asks about it." Because it is there, Buck.
Because it is always there.


Streetscapes: The Liberty Theater; Unlikely 42d St. Revival
THE 42d Street Redevelopment Corporation is confident that it can solve its big problems -- reviving the street temporarily until the office market recovers, keeping the street clean and safe and restoring its majestic collection of theaters.
But what of the deteriorating painted scene of early Manhattan in the Liberty Theater, at 234 West 42d Street.


A Wagnerian of the Past Remains Unmatched in 'Parsifal'
The conductor Hans Knappertsbusch had an unmatched way with Wagner's "Parsifal." Now two important recorded documents of that mastery have reappeared in the record stores: the old Decca/London album of the 1951 Bayreuth Festival production, which reopened that shrine after World War II, and an account of a 1943 (or 1942; the notes are contradictory) Berlin performance of Act III with the same Gurnemanz, Ludwig Weber.
I heard Knappertsbusch conduct "Parsifal" at Bayreuth, but I never saw him there.
At Bayreuth, the sunken orchestra pit masks both conductor and orchestra, and after "Parsifal" there are no curtain calls.
So my favorite Knappertsbusch sighting remains one from 1962 in the Prinzregenten Theater in Munich, a wooden structure modeled after Bayreuth but without the sunken pit.


Tampa's Island Project on the Upswing
Harbour Island, this city's long struggling mixed-use development off the downtown waterfront, appears to have put its worst days behind it.
Buoyed by strong residential sales and downtown growth, the 177-acre island has begun to shed its image as a project unable to meet expectations.


Uncertainty Of Finances Halts Skybus
Skybus, a fledgling no-frills charter service offering low fares between Florida and the Northeast, stopped flying June 29 amid conflicting reports over unpaid bills.
Nevertheless, Skybus said it was grounded only temporarily and would resume service soon.
Because Skybus was a public charter and lacked approvals from the Government to operate its own flights, it hired another charter carrier to serve its routes.
Its most recent carrier, Express One of Dallas, said it stopped flying for Skybus because it was owed more than $500,000 from the Fort Lauderdale-based company, which began operating last September, using Jet Expeditions.
Skybus said it had not paid Express One because it was unable to collect more than $1 million in ticket revenues from CD Travel, an agency in Fort Lauderdale that handles its reservations and ticketing.
CD officials said Skybus has received every dollar it was owed.


Criticism Without Machinery
LITERARY REFLECTIONS A Shoring of Images, 1960-1993.
By R. W. B. Lewis. 306 pp.
Boston: Northeastern University Press. $24.95.


After Political Gains, Feminists Seek a Spark
After a year in which anger over Washington's treatment of Anita F. Hill helped women make big strides in politics, the question being asked today at a women's conference here was: How can that momentum be recaptured?
Women gained office in unprecedented numbers last year after Professor Hill was sternly questioned by the all-male Senate Judiciary Committee at the confirmation hearings of Judge Clarence Thomas two years ago.
But now that the Democrats are in the White House and the furor over the Thomas hearings has largely waned, many here at the annual conference of the National Women's Political Caucus worry that their hard-won gains could be lost.


SURFACING
ACCESSORY -- The biker wallet: Given the wildly divergent styles -- biker chic and English fop -- that mesh in this wallet-and-chain set, it makes sense that it is selling well both in downtown stores like East Village Leather ($12-$16) and uptown at Bergdorf Goodman Men (Chrome Hearts model, $1,485).
MUSIC -- The Female Band Manager: Janet Billing has Nirvana.
Susan Silver has Alice in Chains.
Debbie Gordon and Rina Neiman have Babes in Toyland.
The management of punkish rock groups is no longer the terrain of not-necessarily-punkish men.
DANGER -- Central Park Traffic: The confluence of runners, cyclists and Rollerbladers has created havoc.
The park's Medical Unit says accidents are at an all-time high.


Ondieki of Kenya Breaks 10,000 Barrier
Yobes Ondieki of Kenya, breaking a newly set world record in the 10,000 meters, tonight became the first man to run the event in under 27 minutes when he clocked 26 minutes 58.38 seconds at the Bislett Games Grand Prix meet.
In the 400 meters, Michael Johnson, the favorite for the world championships, fought off a lunging Butch Reynolds in 44.89 seconds in a much-anticipated race.
Reynolds was 13 one-hundredths of a second behind.


Large Masonry Projects May Need Special Tools
DESPITE their sturdy appearance brick structures of all kinds, including walls, chimneys and barbecues, need periodic joint repair and, sometimes, other maintenance to keep them intact.
Repairing joints, called repointing, is necessary when the mortar between bricks develops cracks or begins to crumble.
The job is sometimes tedious, but not too difficult.
It consists of chiseling away part of the existing mortar and adding new material.
Repointing can be done over small areas at a time, making it convenient for amateurs.
But consider hiring a professional mason if the work involves dangerous heights or if the joints require delicate shaping.
Also consider hiring or at least consulting a mason before repointing or repairing any brickwork more than 100 years old.
That is because modern mortar, when mixed according to standard directions, is often harder than the old bricks and can cause them to crack or flake.


Technology; Coaxing More Miles From the Electric-Car Battery
FOR years, engineers have known that an electric-car battery powered by zinc could store six times as much energy per pound as a conventional lead-acid battery, a capacity that would make automotive engineers drool.
But the chemical reaction in a zinc battery produces power at only a steady dribble, not the stop-and-go surges that cars and trucks need.
And recharging zinc batteries is a slow process that tends to damage them.


Caroline Gilbert and Pieter Smit
Caroline Grace Gilbert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Gilbert of White Plains, was married yesterday to Pieter Hendrik Smit, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Willem R. H. Smit of New York.
The Rev.
Jeffrey M. Golliher performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Mrs.
Smit and her husband, both 29, graduated from the State University of New York, she from the New Paltz campus and he from Stony Brook.
The bride is an organizational specialist for the National Council of Jewish Women, a nonprofit community-services organization in New York.
She received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.


Boards Protect Shareholders, Right?
LEONARD TOW was in many ways an ideal choice for the board of the Citizens Utilities Company, a consistently profitable business based here.
An impressive career in the cable-television business made him one of the world's wealthiest businessmen.
He knows important people.
He thinks big.
To his fans, no one better understands the jumble of changes transforming the communications business.
But once he joined the board in 1989, Mr.
Tow quickly began to act less like a mere director and more like a man who wouldn't mind running the company.
Soon he was.
The way he reached the top and what he has done since then are a good study for the current debate about whether boards of directors are always up to their sole task: to protect shareholders.


At Work; Speaking for the Working Woman
THERE is a telling story about Karen Nussbaum, says Ellen Bravo, who recently succeeded Ms.
Nussbaum as head of 9 to 5, the National Association of Working Women.
More than 20 years ago, when Ms.
Nussbaum was a secretary at Harvard, a fellow walked into the office where she was working, looked for her absent boss and said, "Isn't anybody here?"
Ms.
Nussbaum hasn't been invisible since, and she's spent the better part of two decades working to make sure other women aren't either, first by organizing a group of female office workers in Boston and then taking the organization national in 1977.
Three weeks ago, she formally became the 13th director of the Women's Bureau, a smallish entity within the Labor Department concerned with women's employment issues.
She may not, as some of her activists-in-arms suggest, be the Mother Teresa of progressive politics, but she will, by all accounts, bring a steadying, working-person's perspective to an office that has suffered through a series of less-than-attentive, let-them-eat-cake administrators for roughly a dozen years.


When Bigger Is Better
EVEN for reporters, a Presidential campaign can be a life-altering event.
Some journalists I know have divorced after covering a campaign, others have married and still others have quit the profession altogether.
As for me, I turned to giant vegetables.
Last summer, during the dog days of the 1992 campaign, I traveled down to Arkansas to do a story on Bill Clinton and visited his by-now famous hometown of Hope.
It was watermelon season, which is a big deal in Hope, a town that calls itself "the Watermelon Capital of the World." Although melons didn't play much of a role in the President's early years, the drama of the season was hard to resist.
So I made my way to the farm of Ivan Bright, who, aside from Mr.
Clinton, has probably done more than anyone else from Hope to keep Hope alive.
Mr.
Bright's farm has produced two world-record winning watermelons -- a 200 pounder in 1979 and a 260 pounder in 1985.


Dreyfus: All Dressed Up, With Few Places to Invest
INVESTORS apparently love the Dreyfus Growth and Income Fund five times as much today as they did at the end of December: assets have soared to $703.7 million from $137.1 million on Dec. 31.
Richard Hoey, the economist who runs Growth and Income, launched in December 1991, said it isn't impossible to find places to invest all that dough.
But it isn't as easy as it used to be, either.
"I'm having a problem finding good values," he said last week.
"And I'm buying a much smaller percentage of the initial public offerings coming out."


Barbarians at the Box Offices
Jack Lang, the longtime czar of French culture who once assailed the American entertainment industry as "the immense empire of profit," has departed.
With his periodic jibes at American cultural imperialism, Mr.
Lang, the country's former Culture Minister, embodied an influential wing of the French intelligentsia that likes to get snooty about Hollywood.
But four months after French voters consigned Mr.
Lang and his fellow "champagne socialists" -- so called for their taste for both Maxim's and Che Guevara -- to oblivion, there is no sign of a truce in the Franco-American cultural wars.


Artists' Life In Paterson Mills
The article on the artists' residence in Paterson ("Dream of Creating Artists' Colony Meets Reality," June 6) paints a somewhat limited portrait of life here in the mills by focusing only on those residents involved with the visual arts.
Deeper digging would have discovered a significant number of musicians living here who consistently interact with and support one another.
As a musician, I often need only to call a neighbor for various help in any musical situation.
As for the Mayor's "disappointment about the role the artists have played in Paterson," either he has forgotten the numerous times we have donated our services for projects in the city, or, worse yet, he doesn't consider us "artists."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport  $310,000
34 South Ocean Avenue  7-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 108-year-old Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 3-car garage, 1.7 acres; taxes $9,000.
East Hills  $275,000
45 Sherrard Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, den, c/a; taxes $5,200.
Islip  $500,000
82 The Helm  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 22-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car attached garage; 153- by 270-foot waterfront lot; taxes $13,400.
Islip Terrace  $147,000
197 Bryant Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,200.
Manhasset  $405,000
126 Country Village Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, ceramic floors, patio, 2-car attached garage.
Roslyn Heights  $275,000
87 Hickory Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, office; taxes $6,500.
OTHER AREAS Cortlandt, N.Y.  $190,000
220 Buttonwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; family room, wet bar, workshop, deck, one-car garage; taxes, $4,475.
Vernon, Conn.  $167,750
23 Jeff Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10- year-old ranch; dining room, track lighting, sunken living room, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,165.
Mahwah, N.J.  $299,900
8 Greene Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, pool; taxes $3,760.


Technology; Coaxing More Miles From the Electric-Car Battery
FOR years, engineers have known that an electric-car battery powered by zinc could store six times as much energy per pound as a conventional lead-acid battery, a capacity that would make automotive engineers drool.
But the chemical reaction in a zinc battery produces power at only a steady dribble, not the stop-and-go surges that cars and trucks need.
And recharging zinc batteries is a slow process that tends to damage them.


Free, in the Land of the Free
On the July 4 weekend, people turned out in Manhattan for free outdoor events that offered the tranquillity of a concert in a sculpture garden and the cacophony of a fireworks display.


A Simpler Version of 'Phantom,' With Melodrama, at Gateway
MOST theater in the 19th century was melodrama in which good was threatened by evil, and virtue triumphed.
The modern era, after Freud and two World Wars, is known for realism, with complex characters and plots that do not always have happy endings.
But melodrama, in which bad characters always receive their just punishments and good characters are rewarded, still has strong appeal, which is one of the reasons that Gaston Leroux's 19th-century French novel "The Phantom of the Opera," with its heroes, heroines and thrills, has attracted adapters.


Borglum Brothers' Accomplishments
My thanks to The New York Times and its reviewer William Zimmer for the coverage it gave to the Borglum brothers exhibit (June 20) in Stamford.
The reviewer's words, "surprisingly moving," give a sense of the magnitude of the brothers' works on display together for the first time.
It has been 90 years since my grandfather and great-uncle began their arduous, very painful, conflict -- rivals -- yes, indeed!
I hope the exhibit will encourage more interest and research into this important segment of the cultural history of our country.
Each artist, living during an exciting period of our country's development, had a great deal to say, but the overshadowing of Solon by Gutzon nearly succeeded in silencing the former.
The truth must be made known, so that the gray area of conflict that has continued for almost a century, will no longer exist.


His Late Espoused Saint
SEAWARD By Brad Leithauser. 384 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Motorist's Death Raises Tensions in Upper Manhattan


Linda Patterson and Richard Weston
Linda Kay Patterson, a daughter of Mary Patterson of Brooklyn and the late Grant Patterson, was married yesterday to Richard Jeter Weston, the son of Leona and William Weston of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Edward H. Whitaker performed the ceremony at the Emanuel Baptist Church in Brooklyn.
The bride is a school administrator at Junior High School 216 in Fresh Meadows, Queens.
She graduated from the University of Vermont, received a master's degree in educational administration from the University of Virginia and is now a doctoral candidate in that field at New York University.
Her father was a chef.
Her mother is a sales representative for Carolina Herrera at Macy's in New York.


A Stealthy, Evasive Confession
When the White House was getting ready to fire all seven employees of its travel office, why was notice sent to Hillary Rodham Clinton and not her husband the President?
And why, even after the public had learned how Clinton friends engineered the travel office flushout, did the staff feed President Clinton the discredited line that the firings were simply economy measures?
These are among many questions that remain unanswered after the White House release of what it styles as a "management review" of the travel office fiasco that unraveled in May.
Thomas McLarty, the chief of staff, hoping to contain the scandal, calls his report "complete and thorough."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 11, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
51
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Dinosaur clones.
2
76
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
21
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
28
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
5
65
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
3
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
7
5
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
8
3
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.50.) Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
9
1
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
10
2
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
11
4
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) A princess and a knight in 19th-century England.
12
1
MCNALLY'S LUCK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) The quest for a kidnapped cat leads to cases of ransom and homicide.
13
2
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store.
14
11
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
15
12
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
THE MAKING OF "JURASSIC PARK,"by Don Shay and Jody Duncan. (Ballantine, $18.)
2
11
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
3
8
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
505
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
112
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) Communicating.
6
21
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) Memoir.
7 *
91
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The south of France.
8
9
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9 *
2
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) Satirical essays.
10 *
4
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) History.
11 *
10
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
12
17
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Memoir.
13
2
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) The great address.
14
35
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
15 *
20
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
16 *
22
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
17 *
3
I, TINA, by Tina Turner with Kurt Loder. (Avon, $5.50.) The rock star's life story.
18 *
2
LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL, by Bill Geist. (Dell, $5.99.) One team's season.
19 *
1
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $9.95.) Essays on the 1980's.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
100
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2 *
125
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
141
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
14
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More of the author's tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Is School Choice a Real Choice?; New York Citywide Plan Faces Bureaucracy and Shortage
Just inside the entrance to Public School 63 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, a large sign, in English and Spanish, informs parents: "You have the right to send your child to the school of your choice."
The sign illustrates how the national movement known as school choice -- heralded by its supporters as the way to improve schools by stimulating competition -- is already flourishing in pockets across New York City, toppling conventional wisdom like so many dominoes.


Teri Everett, Mark Davidson
TERI EVERETT, 35, the associate director of news information for ABC News, is known among friends and colleagues as "the trivia queen." A voracious consumer of tabloids, television shows, People magazine and movies, she can answer virtually any question about Madonna, Joey Buttafuoco, "The Sound of Music" or Elizabeth Taylor's husbands.
"I have a profound admiration for someone who has so many facts in her head," said Mark Davidson, 34.
"She's also the best star-sighter in New York. She's like a marksman as a star-sighter."


Flood Controls Pushed to Limit By Rising Water
Floods are by far the nation's most common natural disaster, but the tide rising in the Midwest is by no means a common flood.
In a slow, inexorable onslaught, it has breached levees, washed out highways and railroads, flowed over farms and towns and strained the vast water-control system for the Mississippi River watershed that Federal engineers have spent more than three generations planning and building.


This Week's Numbers
Tuesday . . .
June producer prices, percent change . . . 0 . . . -0.1 Wednesday . . .
June consumer prices, percent change . . . 0.2 . . . 0.1 June retail sales, percent change . . . 0.1 . . . 0.4 Early-July auto sales, millions, annual rate . . . 7.7 . . . 7.0 Thursday . . .
May business inventories, percent change . . . 0.1 . . . 0.2 Weekly jobless claims, thousands . . . 327 . . . 335 Friday . . .
May merchandise trade, change, billions . . . -10.5 . . . 9.5 June industrial production, percent change . . . 0.2 . . . 0.3 June capacity utilization, percent . . . 81.6 . . . 81.8 Monday . . .
Meeting of European Community finance ministers Congress returns from recess


MY MOSTLY COMPANION
Nancy Kelton's Hers column "My Mostly Companion" (June 13) brought tears to my eyes and a smile to my face.
I'm also a single mom, but with four sons.
They tell me when I look good and when I don't; they keep my life in perspective.
When finances are tight, a career isn't going as planned and yet another beau exits, my boys are there -- my mostly companions.
Like Kelton, I am blessed.
MAUREEN SAUVIGNE East Brunswick, N.J.


Haven in Rio Quite Hostile For Angolans
Keeping one step ahead of Angola's political police, Manuel Neto dreamed only six months ago of escaping across the South Atlantic to Brazil.
"The Brazilians I worked with in Angola were nice," the Angolan refugee reminisced of managers of Angolan diamond mines.
"We spoke the same language, Portuguese. I thought we were from one family."


Fooling With Nature
WORRIED about the rain forest disappearing?
Cheer up.
You can always go see the one at the Mirage, a gambling resort that rises like a tower of gold next to Caesars Palace, on the Strip in Las Vegas.
Afraid you'll never see a volcano?
There's one in front of the Mirage.
After dark, it goes off every 15 minutes, belching fire and steam out of the top of a 50-foot waterfall.
Palm trees blow wildly in the mist.
You think you're in a movie.


Science Fiction
I don't mind novels that are hard to read as long as the rewards are commensurate with the effort.
Sentences that must be decoded as if readers were cryptographers, paragraphs that only divulge their full meaning the second time around, dialogue that deliberately misleads so as to point to some deeper truth -- these are some of the narrative tools that Gwyneth Jones, the author of WHITE QUEEN (Tor/Tom Doherty, $27.95), chooses to work with.
Ms.
Jones's fiction verges on incomprehensibility but repays close attention.
Humanoid aliens have landed on a 21st-century Earth much changed by a socialist revolution in the United States, by a new computer technology and by a new pathogen, a "petrovirus" capable of infecting both humans and their machines.
As Ms.
Jones tells it, the first encounter between humans and aliens generates mutual bewilderment and little else.


Horse Sense?
To the Sports Editor:
Joseph Durso ("Triple Crown Must Be Majestic, Not Cruel," The Times, June 27) asks, "Is the Triple Crown cruel to horses?"
The answer is yes, but that's only the tip of the iceberg.
A sport that asks 2-year-old horses, whose knees aren't developed, to run as fast as they can is practicing some insane sort of investment-triage.
In order to get these investments to the track, for a quick return on capital, they are fed growth supplements; they are subjected to steroids to bulk up and overfed to look better for the yearling sales.
Recent studies published in The Blood Horse suggest that excess weight on a yearling has a lifelong detrimental effect on performance.


British Hiking
To the Editor: Regarding "Hiking Britain: From End to End" (June 13), walking is certainly one of the most popular leisure activities in Britain, with more and more Americans discovering this unusual and relatively inexpensive way of exploring the British countryside.


Prune, Pinch, Mulch and Transplant
Prune rambler roses after flowering by cutting this year's growth back six inches.
Ramblers bloom on the previous year's growth, so if you remove too much, you'll reduce flowering next year.
Pruning now slows development and helps the plant mature for winter.
Remove two-year-old wood and any dead canes, as well as any shoots that appear below the bud union.
Continue to remove faded blossoms from hybrid tea rose bushes, as well as from snapdragons, zinnias, delphiniums and other annuals for continued bloom.


How to Undo a Century of Racism in Politics; Our Ethnic Cleansing
To the Editor:
"A Dinosaur Ruling" (editorial, June 30), attacking the Supreme Court decision in the North Carolina districting case, misreads both the ruling and the Voting Rights Act.
You imply that those who agree with the ruling represent the right wing and that "the civil rights community" would be monolithically opposed to its reasoning.
But this is not the case.
For example, as you quoted Representative John Lewis of Atlanta, an early and effective leader in the civil rights movement, last Aug. 3:


SAINT HILLARY
Michael Kelly quotes Mrs.
Clinton's brilliant speech in Austin about "hopeless girls with babies and angry boys with guns" ("Saint Hillary," May 23).
Shockingly, he concludes by saying it is "easy to mock this sort of thing." Really?
For whom?
Caligula?
Bull Connor?
Mrs.
Clinton's speech stands as a testimony to an enduring passion for social change and a belief in the moral implication of social issues, which is central to the American tradition.
This speech would have been front-page news if it had been delivered by Mario Cuomo.
Indeed, it sounds much like the speeches of Robert Kennedy in the late days of his Presidential campaign.


The Deadly Sins; Avarice, 1849: A Distraction
My dear Balzac, you must remain quite still.
Make no motion at all, or nothing will appear on the plate but a faint grisaille,  the Unknown Masterpiece indeed!


Karen A. Nye, Donald Dale 3d
Karen Ann Nye, the daughter of Mrs.
Thomas S. Nye of Lakeland, Fla., and the late Mr.
Nye, was married yesterday to Donald Edward Dale 3d, a son of Darlene Dale of Coconut Grove, Fla., and Mr.
Dale 2d of Miami.
The Rev.
Richard Burn performed the ceremony at the Anglican Church of St.
Mary the Virgin, Widdington, in Widdington, Essex, England.
Ms.
Nye, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in economics at the London School of Economics.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from the University of Florida.


Wingate Re-signs With Hornets
The Charlotte Hornets signed unrestricted free-agent forward DAVID WINGATE to a multi-year contract yesterday.
Details of the deal were not released, but it is believed Wingate received a four-year contract worth just more than $500,000 a season.


'Girl, Interrupted'
To the Editor:
While architects, landscapers, sculptors and others dwell on how space shapes our experience of time, mental health professionals are often oblivious.
In Susan Cheever's review of Susanna Kaysen's memoir of her psychiatric treatment in a locked hospital, "Girl, Interrupted," we find the clearest illustration of this.
The segmented space of the treatment setting, from padded rooms to locked wards to monitored grounds, intersected by closely programmed hours including 5-, 10- and 15-minute checks, leads to the experience, as Ms.
Kaysen tells us, of "murdered time," pieces chopped up and lobbed "into the dustbin," "another five minutes of life down the drain."


Melinda Hackett, Walter Hutchins
Melinda Hackett, the daughter of Mrs.
Russell W. Munson and Montague H. Hackett Jr., both of New York, was married yesterday to Walter James Hutchins, a son of Mary H. Hutchins of Norwich, Vt., and William S. Hutchins of Bedford, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Ms.
Hackett, who is keeping her name, is a painter in New York.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith College.
Her father is the chairman of the American Gold Resources Corporation and the president of the Wood River Capital Corporation, both venture-capital companies in New York.
Her mother is a photographer in New York.


Rich Possibilities for Beethoven Fans
"BEETHOVEN BRAVO" is the overall title of the Tuesday Chamber Music Plus recitals in the Seaverns Room of the Bushnell in Hartford.
The day after tomorrow, at 8 P.M., the group's founding directors, Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann, are playing the composer's cello and piano variations on a theme from Mozart's "Magic Flute" and, with the violinist Renee Jolles, the "Ghost" Trio.
Susan Jolles adds her harp to the musical mix in the 1944 Trio by Jacques Ibert, the mother-daughter team also offering Saint-Saens's Fantasie for harp and violin.
For reservations, call 232-0085.
Beethoven buffs also have a week to celebrate at Music Mountain.
This afternoon at 3, the Auryn String Quartet, based in Cologne, Germany, starts its program with the first of the Opus 18 quartets, proceeding thereafter to Schumann's A-minor Quartet and, with the guest artist Peter Orth, Faure's Piano Quintet.


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
Katie Roiphe's article "Date Rape's Other Victim" (June 13) is a perfect example of backlash thinking.
She shifts the responsibility of men who rape to feminists who are fighting rape.
This neat reversal leaves feminists responsible for "finding" this rape crisis and cynically using it for broader political purposes.
No one is "finding" a rape crisis.
As even the United States Senate Judiciary Committee concluded in its recent report "Violence Against Women: A Week in the Life of America," the rape crisis is there.
It is being acknowledged because feminists have, to a certain extent, redefined the cultural landscape so that "boys will be boys" behavior is no longer seen as the norm.


Old Bus Passes Become Passports to Culture
A PILOT program to increase cultural outings in the county is tapping into a new audience: bus riders on the Bee-Line System operated by the County Department of Transportation.
The program, which began June 1, enables people holding monthly bus passes to exchange their previous month's expired pass for a free visit to one of seven sites: the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers, the Neuberger Museum of Art in Purchase, the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah, Lyndhurst in Tarrytown and three Historic Hudson Valley houses, Philipsburg Manor in North Tarrytown, Sunnyside in Irvington and Van Cortlandt Manor in Croton.
The Westchester Arts Council and the Department of Transportation collaborated on the project, which is expected to boost sales of monthly bus passes as well as introduce the county's cultural resources to new visitors.


Cruise Around Greenland
The Russian icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov will embark this summer on what trip organizers say is the first circumnavigation of Greenland.
On Aug. 17, the ship will leave Sondre Stromfjord on the west coast and head counterclockwise around the island.
During the 25-night cruise the 102-passenger ship, which has an indoor pool and large staterooms and is capable of plowing through thick ice at 12 knots, will call at Paamiut, Narsarsuaq, Qaqortoq, Prins Christian Sund, Ammassalik, Scoresbysund, King Oscar Fjord, Kaiser Franz Josef Fjord, Dove Bight, Cape Morris Jesup, Cape Alexander, Melville Bight, Upernavik, Disko Bay and Illulissat.
A second, more powerful icebreaker will help the Kapitan Khlebnikov clear the way, but Quark Expeditions, representative of the Kapitan Khlebnikov, says that if the ice is impassable, the ship will retrace part of the course and possibly end the cruise in Iceland.


Conversations/Herbert S. Okun; What Comes After Containment? It May Be Son of Containment
HE was 16 in Brooklyn, the red-haired son of an emigre produce merchant, in the summer of 1947 when he read George F. Kennan's anonymous "Mr. X" article in Foreign Affairs.
That essay, "The Sources of Soviet Conduct," recommended and swiftly came to define Western policy toward the Soviet threat for the next four decades as "containment."
Herbert S. Okun recalled: "I read it and said, 'That's what I want to do.' " From James Madison High School he went to Stanford, learned Russian, and applied to join the Foreign Service.
The substance of his diplomatic career, ultimately as a United States ambassador, concerned the containment policy of the United States: postings to Moscow and East Berlin and assignments to help negotiate limitations on strategic arms and test bans.


Susan Bronzaft, Michael Santoro
Susan B. Bronzaft, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, and Michael O. Santoro Jr., an urban designer with the New York City Department of Transportation, were married yesterday.
Justice Michael L. Pesce of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated at Fox Hollow, a country club in Woodbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Santoro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram Bronzaft of New York, graduated from the University of Colorado and the Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is a partner in Garwin, Bronzaft, Gerstein &amp; Fisher, a New York law firm.
Her mother, Dr.
Arline L. Bronzaft, a retired professor of psychology at the City University of New York, is a consultant on urban stress-related problems.


The Spectacular Boom In Andrea Electronics
The economist John Maynard Keynes once wrote that the stock market is like a 1930's newspaper contest, in which readers were asked to select the 6 prettiest women from pictures of 100 candidates.
The winning entry was the one that most closely matched the overall "favorites."
To win, Keynes noted, you didn't choose the women you deemed the best-looking, or even those you thought the public believed to be the prettiest.
Instead, he said, you chose the women the public thought the public believed to be the prettiest.


Justices Plan to Delve Anew Into Race and Voting Rights
The Supreme Court's contested ruling last month in a North Carolina redistricting case, far from being the Justices' last word on voting rights, may prove to be only one step in a prolonged and searching review by the Court of the role of race in electoral politics.
Three voting rights cases, two from Florida and one from Georgia, are already on the agenda for the Court's next term, which begins in October.
The new cases give the Justices the opportunity, which some appear eager to take, to deal with sensitive and unresolved issues concerning the application of the Voting Rights Act.


Corrections
A picture caption on June 27 with an article about lawyers who assist nonprofit groups referred incorrectly to the two women facing the camera.
Michelle Howard is a volunteer; Adaline Demarrais is executive director of the Evergreen Network.


JULY 4-10: Counting Fingers and Toes; New Scope Examines Embryos in First Trimester
It was inevitable, of course.
Once medical instrument makers discovered ways to make a viewing scope so small that it could fit inside a blood vessel, doctors would take a close look at human embryos early in pregnancy.
Nonetheless, the world opened by embryoscopy is startling.
Tiny embryos in the first trimester of pregnancy, less than an inch long, come into view so clearly that doctors can count fingers and toes.


Viewpoints; Health Reform Runs Antitrust Risk
UNWANTED side effects are the bane of medicine, and they may bedevil the Clinton health reform effort, too.
As policy makers cure health care's inaccessibility and high cost, they may unwittingly create new ailments in the area of antitrust.
These risks are real.
While the specifics of the "managed competition" reforms are unknown, the Administration has embraced general principles that may dangerously increase the economic concentration of the health-care industry.
There will be fewer, and bigger, buyers of health care, sellers of health care, and insurers:


Power Lines Raise Fears in Home Buyers
WHEN Marie Trizano takes people to see houses near power lines, she says, sometimes they won't even get out of the car.
"I guess there are enough houses for sale, that if there's anything negative, they won't even bother to look," said Ms.
Trizano, manager of the Prudential Ragette Realtor in Bronxville, N.Y.


Clint Eastwood Cozies Up To the 1990's
Many years ago, in an episode of the television western "Rawhide," Rowdy Yates got sick.
He got so sick that he had to take off his shirt.
The writers were probably searching for ways to get Rowdy's shirt off, because he was played by the very young, very handsome Clint Eastwood.
There he was, lying on his bedroll among the cattle, looking all sweaty and shirtless, insisting he was well enough to get up.
At that moment Rowdy was tough but vulnerable, and irresistibly attractive.
About 30 years later, Mr.
Eastwood may not be so fast to yank off his shirt, but he has carried a trace of Rowdy -- tougher and more vulnerable than ever -- to his new film, "In the Line of Fire." Directed by Wolfgang Petersen, the film promised to be a blip in Mr.
Eastwood's career.
It would be nothing next to last year's hit, "Unforgiven," which gained him an Academy Award as best director and the serious critical attention he had merely flirted with throughout his career.


Matisse Museum Reopens
The Matisse Museum in Nice reopened late last month after six years and a $9.4 million renovation and expansion.
A new, two-floor wing designed by the French architect Jean-Francois Bodin has been added to the 17th-century villa, which has housed the museum since its opening in 1963.
The addition, built below ground level, includes a bookstore, a 70-seat auditorium and a restaurant with terrace.
In the Genoese-style Villa des Arenes, restorations included the entrance hall, the gray and pink ceilings of the rooms on the first floor and the two terraces on the upper floor overlooking the Bay of Nice and the Hotel Regina, where Matisse lived.
Objects from his studio and apartment are displayed on every landing.


Deborah Dawson, Joseph Radecki Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Dawson of Greenwich, Conn., and La Quinta, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Anne Dawson, to Joseph Jerome Radecki Jr., the son of Joseph and Katherine Radecki of Beach Haven, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Dawson, 31, is the manager of human resources at Ancra International, an aerospace company in Los Angeles.
She graduated from San Diego State University.
Her father retired as the president of CBS Inc. in New York.


A Judd, Yes. A Country Singer, No.
NAME: Ashley Judd.
IDENTITY: Actress, 25. Daughter of Naomi Judd. Sister of Wynonna Judd.


Mickey Lacks a Soupcon of Charm
Battered by a European recession and still bewildered by European habits, Euro Disney put its entire future development under review last week after announcing disastrous summer losses.
Being in the red during the cold winter months was predictable, but an April-June loss of $87 million sent the company's stock into a nosedive on the Paris Bourse.
Behind the 20 percent plunge in Euro Disney shares lies a growing uneasiness over whether the Walt Disney magicians may have misjudged more than the economic trends in Europe.
Certainly, a recession has hit hotel attendance and spending, and higher-than expected interest rates have made Euro Disney's $3.7 billion of debt very expensive.


Your Home: Scrie Applications; Keeping Red Tape At Bay
DEALING with a government agency is never easy.
Among older people the problem of communicating by phone is complicated by loss of hearing.
And as if filling out a complicated form and following a confusing set of instructions isn't hard enough at any age, when eyesight is failing the task can be daunting.
These appear to be among the reasons some moderate- and low-income elderly tenants in New York City find it hard to win approval for the rental benefit known as Scrie (Senior Citizens' Rent Increase Exemption Program).


Spanish Police
To the Editor: I would like to report an incredible kindness on the part of two Barcelona police officers.
After a long, hot drive from France earlier this month, my wife and I arrived in Barcelona in the heart of the evening rush hour.
Fumbling through the jammed streets, as we circled a major traffic circle, I realized we were running out of gas.
I managed to inch over almost to the curb near a parked taxi.
The driver refused to drive me to a gas station, but did volunteer a plastic container.
My wife pointed out a parked police car nearby.
When I explained my predicament in a combination of gestures and pidgin Spanish, the officers motioned me to get into the back seat.


Elizabeth Mazzola And Ross Zucker
Dr.
Elizabeth Mazzola, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel P. Mazzola of Massapequa, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Ross Zucker, the son of Dr.
Herbert Zucker of Purchase, N.Y., and Dr.
Bess Zucker of Harrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Coveleigh Club in Rye, N.Y.
Dr.
Mazzola, who is keeping her name, is a visiting assistant professor of English at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
She graduated with distinction from the University of Virginia and received master's and Ph.D. degrees in English from New York University.


When the Soil Needs a Helping Hand
FOR many years gardeners have learned that the soil is the thing.
And the better the soil is, the better the plants grow.
A strong root system results when there is good soil.
This type of root system will be the engine that drives any plant's growth.
Gardeners may yawn a bit when they hear about the merits of adding compost to the soil now or especially at planting time.
They have come to learn that it is truly wasteful to haul away garden debris like weeds, kitchen waste and autumn foliage.
The decayed organic material, the compost, is a rich source of nutrients that adds to the soil's life.
And the plants, of course, always benefit.


Some Questions About Robert Lenz
I read with interest your article on Robert Lenz, a.k.a.
Zen Master Rama, in the Westchester section on June 20.
It had special meaning for me since I had just given a program to over 100 seniors at the Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua about cults in Westchester and had been contacted there by one high school senior who had been invited to and participated in Lenz lectures at Purchase and had also been invited to follow-up meetings at homes in the area.


Tech Notes; The Personal Earth Station
PERSONAL is the buzzword -- personal computers, personal stereos, personal digital assistants.
Now add the personal digital satellite earth station.
NEC, the Japanese consumer electronics giant, has introduced a 29-pound, briefcase-size terminal that lets the user make or receive telephone calls, send or get faxes, and link up with computer networks from virtually any spot on the globe -- land or sea.
NEC's Mlink-5000 works with a new class of service offered by the International Maritime Satellite Organization (Inmarsat) and is believed the first small unit to offer both voice and data communications via digital transmissions over Inmarsat's new Standard M service.
Standard M allows data transmissions at speeds of up to 4800 bits a second, common for personal computer modems; the voice-channel service is of a lower quality than Inmarsat's top-of-the-line Standard A.


When Red Wine Is Preferred for Fish
FISH and seafood are highlight summer menus.
And to accompany them a bottle of cool white wine is often the answer, but what is the lover of red wine to do?
Devising fish dishes that complement delicious pinot noirs, cabernet sauvignons, merlots, Beaujolais, Riojas, Chiantis, dolcettos and Cotes du Rhone in the cellar is a challenge, but it can be met.
Fish with good flavor, bold seasonings and, at times, a splash of red wine in the sauce suggest uncorking the red instead of the white with dinner.
Serving tuna grilled rare is one easy answer.
The rich, meaty flesh of tuna is an excellent foil for red wine.
Even grilled swordfish or salmon have enough intense flavor to answer a bottle of red wine without being drowned out.
Almost any fish roasted or grilled with tomatoes or a tomato sauce would be another option, especially with some of the lighter reds like Beaujolais or dolcetto.


For Some, Rituals of Abuse Replace Youthful Courtship
James Fauntleroy, 15, says the teen-agers in his circle either don't date or don't admit to it.
"Nobody wants a relationship except the girls," he said, sitting on a park bench in downtown Stamford, Conn., listening to music on a hot summer night.
"The guys don't want to look soft to their friends."


Linda Kanarvogel, R. E. Tepper
Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Kanarvogel of Massapequa, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Linda Ellen Kanarvogel to Dr.
Robert Eric Tepper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Tepper of Oceanside, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kanarvogel, 29, is an attending physician at Long Island Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I., and is an instructor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


A Pilgrimage Renews a Life
SOME years ago, when my mother was 86, widowed, resident by then for five years in a Cleveland nursing home, and I was doing research on a book, I took her on a three-week 1,000-mile note-taking drive from Paris south through France and Spain.
And though we had a couple of uncertain moments, the trip was one of the most pleasurable of my life.
As for Mother, this is what I wrote in the little diary I gave her -- and as it turned out, filled on her behalf:
"Mother is full of spirited responses. Days in the car are a long poem of appreciation for the landscape, the colors, the trees, the good road, etc. The memory is less good. Nothing stays. Still, we won't let this be an impediment. Because, don't you see? The moments all along the way are lived, and so, count."


Not a Fairy Tale: Sunday Meant Mail
ONCE upon a time, in the Kingdom of Belgium, mail was delivered seven days a week.
No special-delivery charge, no Priority Mail stickers.
At the turn of the century, mail carriers just worked seven days a week.
Several groups of people were unhappy about this, not least the mail carriers and their nascent labor unions.
But there was also a growing feeling among observant Christians that Sunday should be a day of rest as a matter of religious principle.


Air on Planes Questioned
Both the Department of Transportation and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta are investigating air quality on planes and its possible role in the transmission of respiratory disease.
One C.D.C. investigation involves a Continental Airlines flight attendant who was diagnosed with active pulmonary tuberculosis.
The C.D.C. sought to contact and examine members of her flight crews, and found that two crew members tested positive for the disease.
Three other investigations involve tubercular passengers on Northwest, Delta and Alaska airlines.
Dr.
Mark Miller, a public health physician assisting in the C.D.C. investigation, noted that "an airline cabin is a closed, confined space, and we're trying to determine what the risk factors are." He added, "We make the assumption that the more frequent the air exchange, the better it is for not acquiring tuberculosis."


America's Cup Technology Goes Inland for Chicago-Mackinac Race
The technology that marked the 1992 America's Cup races in San Diego has made its way to the Midwest with a flourish in big-boat racing.
In the most traditional sailboat regatta of America's heartland, the Chicago-Mackinac Race, three new maxi-boats are featuring innovations from the last cup races.
The 333-mile competition, which begins Saturday, extends from Chicago, at the southwest edge of Lake Michigan, to Mackinac Island, Mich., in the lake's northeast corner.


Topics of The Times; Reform-as-Usual
Soon after the Republicans took control of the New Jersey Legislature last year, they put a lid on the number of bills that could be debated on any one day -- 30 in the Senate, 20 in the Assembly.
It was their way of proclaiming reform.
Unlike the previous Democratic majorities, they wouldn't try to pass bundles of bills in the closing days of the session with no time for maneuvering.
They forgot that the end-of-session rush is a time-honored maneuver itself, not limited to Democrats.
And as the end of the session approaches in Trenton this year, it turns out that the tactic is still honored by New Jersey Republicans.
Despite the lid, the Senate recently handled 83 bills one day, and 220 in four days.
The Assembly -- more efficient? -- handled 100 in a single day.


Miami Virtue: Arquitectonica's Low-Rent Housing
Bernardo fort-Brescia tried to steer me away from Edison Terrace, a new apartment complex in Liberty City designed by his firm, Arquitectonica.
He would be out of town that weekend, and hadn't I heard about the German woman?
Pulled from her car and run over by thugs?
Yet the danger of visiting Edison Terrace added to the building's allure.
Isn't Miami supposed to be the dark metropolis of sin and insurrection, the city where death lurks behind pastel facades?
And isn't Arquitectonica the firm that helped to give the once dowdy city a racy new image?
Alas, these thrilling stereotypes have had their day.
Miami never had a monopoly on urban violence, and it has been five years since the last episode of "Miami Vice," the series that brought Arquitectonica instant notoriety with those glamorous shots of the Atlantis condominium complex and its fabulous "sky patio." Fringed with palms, bubbling with Jacuzzi effervescence, the patio became an architectural logo for a city basking in a lurid aura of opulent dissolution.


'Girl, Interrupted'
To the Editor:
As a "graduate" of both Smith College and Austen Riggs in Stockbridge, Mass. ("the other Ivy League," as Susan Cheever refers to it), I found Susanna Kaysen's book filled with romantic portrayals of mental illness as well as distorted images of "the really glamorous places" such as the Austen Riggs Center.
This only serves to contribute to the collective myths society holds in regard to mental illness and psychiatric hospitals.
Ms.
Kaysen presents life in a private mental hospital as some sort of country club for the wealthy neurotic, a place where no one in her right mind would refuse a chance at membership.


Corrections
The Food column last Sunday, about peaches, carried an incorrect byline.
The writer was Moira Hodgson.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Paul Carey, first baseman, to Rochester of the International League.
Activated Sherman Obando, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Optioned Bill Sampen, pitcher, to Omaha of the American Association.
Recalled Enrique Burgos, pitcher, from Omaha.
National League  MONTREAL EXPOS -- Acquired Denis Boucher, pitcher, from the San Diego Padres for Austin Manahan, infielder, and future considerations.
Assigned Boucher to Ottawa of the International League.
Signed Nathan Brown and Jayson Durocher pitchers.
Basketball National Basketball Association  ORLANDO MAGIC -- Named Bob Hill and Tree Rollins assistant coaches.
Football National Football League  MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Dwayne Gordon, linebacker.
Soccer United States Soccer  U.S.
NATIONAL TEAM -- Named Milutin Soskic goalkeeping coach.


Susan Morrison, James A. Kilfoyle
Dr.
Susan Signe Morrison was married yesterday to Dr.
James Anthony Kilfoyle.
The Rev.
Jonathan L. King officiated at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
James Coffee, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Kilfoyle, a graduate of Swarthmore College, is an assistant professor of English and comparative literature at Southwest Texas State University in San Marcos.
She and her husband received master's and Ph.D. degrees from Brown University, she in comparative literature and he in English.


'Small' Means Total Collateral
To the Editor:
In "Banks Take Care of (Small) Business" (Viewpoints, June 27), it is stated that "Banks are taking care of small business, and a costly Federal program is unnecessary." However, not one single bank that I have contacted over the past two years has been open in any way to funding startups without total collateralization.
Even Small Business Administration loans require collateral.
In other words, in usual bank parlance, I can get the money if I don't need it.


When the Soil Needs a Helping Hand
FOR many years gardeners have learned that the soil is the thing.
And the better the soil is, the better the plants grow.
A strong root system results when there is good soil.
This type of root system will be the engine that drives any plant's growth.
Gardeners may yawn a bit when they hear about the merits of adding compost to the soil now or especially at planting time.
They have come to learn that it is truly wasteful to haul away garden debris like weeds, kitchen waste and autumn foliage.
The decayed organic material, the compost, is a rich source of nutrients that adds to the soil's life.
And the plants, of course, always benefit.


Kit Schaefer And John Axton
Judith Kittredge Schaefer, a daughter of Mrs.
Henry W. Schaefer of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Mr.
Schaefer, was married yesterday to John Lawrence Axton, the son of Helen C. Axton and John R. Axton, both of Santa Fe., N.M.
Michael Howard, a Roman Catholic deacon, performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Breckenridge, Colo.
Mrs.
Axton, who is known as Kit, graduated from Santa Clara University.
Her father was a policy analyst with the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in London.
Mr.
Axton graduated from Whittier College.
His mother is the owner of Ventana Fine Art, an art gallery in Santa Fe.
His father is a painter there.


Large Masonry Projects May Need Special Tools
DESPITE their sturdy appearance brick structures of all kinds, including walls, chimneys and barbecues, need periodic joint repair and, sometimes, other maintenance to keep them intact.
Repairing joints, called repointing, is necessary when the mortar between bricks develops cracks or begins to crumble.
The job is sometimes tedious, but not too difficult.
It consists of chiseling away part of the existing mortar and adding new material.
Repointing can be done over small areas at a time, making it convenient for amateurs.
But consider hiring a professional mason if the work involves dangerous heights or if the joints require delicate shaping.
Also consider hiring or at least consulting a mason before repointing or repairing any brickwork more than 100 years old.
That is because modern mortar, when mixed according to standard directions, is often harder than the old bricks and can cause them to crack or flake.


JULY 4-10: Royal Blood, Royal Bones; The Romanovs' Remains Are Finally Confirmed
It may be too early to pull out the finery and polish the carriages in preparation for an imperial Russian funeral for Czar Nicholas II and his family, executed some 75 years ago.
But that incredible prospect is closer to reality with an announcement last week by a team of British scientists.
The scientists used DNA to unlock the secrets of bones found in a mass grave two years ago in a forest near Yekaterinburg.
Confirming public suspicion and the work of Russian experts, they said the bones were those of the last reigning Romanovs, who were shot dead in the basement of the Yekaterinburg house where they were imprisoned.


Tax Challenges Prove a Profitable Business
LAWRENCE WILLINGER, a Realtor in New Rochelle, is one of many who has made a successful business out of the inequities of outdated tax rolls in Westchester County.
Three years ago, Mr.
Willinger and two real-estate partners formed B.L.D.
Associates, a real-estate tax- reduction consulting firm.
The first year they filed 61 claims for homeowners whose properties appeared to be overassessed.
Last year, they filed 100 claims, and this year 600 claims in 20 different communities.


For Business Lobbyists in Albany, Little to Cheer About
The anger in the terse, two-sentence news release was palpable.
"To the Governor and the Senate, thank you for your efforts to improve New York's dismal economy," it read.
"To the Assembly, thanks for nothing."


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
Roiphe's lit-based assessment had me wondering if she had read too many 18th-century romantic novels or not enough.
Male violence against women exists.
It is not a public relations campaign designed by rabid "rape-crisis feminists" to frighten young women into Gibson-girl mode.
I respectfully suggest Roiphe spend a year or two volunteering at her local battered-women's shelter or rape-crisis center before she unleashes her considerable intellect on the reality of contemporary women's lives again.
KAY LEIGH HAGAN Santa Fe, N.M.


Shades of Lincoln-Douglas: Spano vs. Brodsky
INVOKING the spirit of the Lincoln-Douglas debates, which took place in parks in Illinois during the summer of 1858, the Westchester chapter of the League of Women Voters last week sponsored an Independence Day dialogue between two Democratic primary candidates for County Executive.
Before the holiday concert and traditional July Fourth fireworks at Louis Engel Waterfront Park here, County Clerk Andrew J. Spano and State Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, who represents the 86th District, sparred on issues involving the environment, housing and property reassessment -- at times, generating their own fireworks display.


Topics of The Times; A Salisbury Scoop
A great journalist can take the most unpromising subject and turn it into page-one news.
An incident in the long career of Harrison Salisbury, who died last week at 84, splendidly makes the point.
Having earned his reputation by covering Stalin's Russia for The New York Times, Mr.
Salisbury was summoned home in 1954 to cover local news.
In an initiation rite meant to take him down a peg, an editor asked him to write about New York's chronic failure to keep streets and parks clean.


When Red Wine Is Preferred for Fish
FISH and seafood are highlight summer menus.
And to accompany them a bottle of cool white wine is often the answer, but what is the lover of red wine to do?
Devising fish dishes that complement delicious pinot noirs, cabernet sauvignons, merlots, Beaujolais, Riojas, Chiantis, dolcettos and Cotes du Rhone in the cellar is a challenge, but it can be met.
Fish with good flavor, bold seasonings and, at times, a splash of red wine in the sauce suggest uncorking the red instead of the white with dinner.
Serving tuna grilled rare is one easy answer.
The rich, meaty flesh of tuna is an excellent foil for red wine.
Even grilled swordfish or salmon have enough intense flavor to answer a bottle of red wine without being drowned out.
Almost any fish roasted or grilled with tomatoes or a tomato sauce would be another option, especially with some of the lighter reds like Beaujolais or dolcetto.


Big Girls Don't Cry
More than half the women in America wear at least a size 12 dress.
Guess how many want to look like a street urchin?
Enough with the waif.
Too many grown-ups with full breasts, ample hips, large shoulders and baggage-free self-images are tired of the implication that the only way they could be in fashion is wrapped in the shroud of Turin.
Less is not necessarily more, though in truth, more should usually wear less.
Beaded epaulets, dropped waists and garish prints are not the way to a lovelier silhouette in any size.
Large women are flattered by the unemcumbered lines, monochromatic layers, easy fit and minimal jewelry currently in style.
In fact, no matter what the arbiters say there are clothes out there for you.
In these lean times, fashion could profit from a little largess.


Jack Lazorko Doesn't Pitch Here Anymore
Maybe you've never heard of Jack Lazorko, the 37-year-old right-handed pitcher who is as compact as a tugboat and is called "Il Bulldog" in Italy, "El Bulldog" in Latin America and "Zork" in the States.
Maybe you've never seen him play, his dark brows over intense hazel eyes, armed with an assortment of pitches from forkballs to knuckle curves to sliders to fastballs that dip and fastballs that rise -- none of which will blow anyone away, as he describes it, but all of which are invariably around the plate and always carry a purpose.


Jones Beach Is Blanketed as 160,000 Crowd Into Park
As the heat wave continued to embrace the region, an estimated 160,000 people decided today that it was better to bake on the sand of Jones Beach than on the streets of the city.
Those who braved the traffic to get here were greeted by an ocean breeze that had been lacking earlier in the week.
"It's much nicer today than during the week, because we have an ocean breeze from the north," said John Norbeck, director of operations for the park.
"On Friday, the breeze didn't swing around until the afternoon. By that time, the sand was hot."


The Fall Softens Its Edge
The Fall is one of England's enduring cult bands.
Formed in 1976 by the singer and lyricist Mark E. Smith, it evolved into one of the most critically acclaimed and influential groups of the post-punk era.
In the mid-80's, the Fall was the prototype for the abrasive British genre of "shambling bands." More recently, its coruscating sound and cryptic lyrics have been a major influence on the "indie" scene in the United States.
Pavement, the most prominent band in the burgeoning American lo-fi underground, is indebted to the Fall, as are other up-and-coming groups like Truman's Water, Thinking Fellers Union Local 282 and God Is My Co-Pilot.
The Fall has signed with the hip independent label Matador, and the band's new album is its first for some while to be widely distributed in the United States.
"The Infotainment Scan" (Matador/Atlantic 92263; all three formats), the Fall's 16th studio album, is one of the group's most accessible, so it may be that the band will reach a whole new audience, primed by Pavement, et al.


Warehouse Club, County's First, to Open
AS the economy softens, interest heightens in warehouse purchasing clubs, which sell household goods and food products at wholesale prices to members.
This Friday, Pace, the first membership warehouse in Westchester, is scheduled to open for business in Elmsford.
"We already have 3,000 business members and 1,000 household members signed up," said Greg Mowery, the director of the Pace warehouse, which is at 333 Saw Mill River Road, Route 9A.


A Slight To Lady Peel
To the Editor:
In your article about Canadians in American show business, "The Most Entertaining Americans? Canadians"  [ June 27 ] , how could you possibly omit the name of Beatrice Lillie, perhaps the greatest comedienne of all time, who was born in Toronto?
CHARLES W. STEIN Buffalo


D. L. Hartfelder, Jeffrey Stevenson
Deborah Lynn Hartfelder, the daughter of Mrs.
Jack F. Hartfelder of Dallas, and the late Mr.
Hartfelder, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Taylor Stevenson, a son of Mrs.
William Crouse of Chatham, Mass., and Lincoln Stevenson of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ's Church in Rye.
Mrs.
Stevenson is a production secretary at the ABC News program "20/20" in New York, and the assistant to the program's publicist.
She graduated from Texas A &amp; M University.
Her father was the president of Oak Farms Dairies in Dallas, a division of the Southland Corporation, of which her grandfather, the late Herbert E. Hartfelder, was the vice-chairman.


Lisa Bailey, Bradley Hittle
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Bailey of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Ann Bailey to Bradley Arthur Hittle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Hittle of Old Greenwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bailey, 30, is a market research consultant in Westport, Conn., and the founder and coach of the Fairfield University equestrian program in Fairfield, Conn.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.


Corrections
The Food column last Sunday, about peaches, carried an incorrect byline.
The writer was Moira Hodgson.


'94 Cup Tickets, Almighty Dollar
To the Sports Editor:
Last week, I called to purchase tickets for the World Cup, to be staged in the United States in 1994.
To my surprise, tickets were only being sold in blocks of at least four games, at a minimum price of $140 ($245 by the time I called).
When I asked whether tickets could be purchased for individual games, I was told no.
I called the World Cup USA headquarters in California and was told that the management had decided to offer only blocks of tickets because that would guarantee "a full stadium," which would be "important for television," and the best way to "popularize the sport." When I asked about the young fan who could not afford more than $200 in tickets but might want to catch a single game, I was told his only chance would be to buy a ticket from a scalper.
EMIL WILLIAM CHYNN New York


Will the Zebra Mussels Invade L.I.?
A SMALL European freshwater mollusk, the zebra mussel, has invaded the lakes, rivers and streams of North America.
Originally seen as a problem confined to the Great Lakes, the zebra mussels, so named for their dark brown stripes on a light tannish shell, have been found in the Hudson River, 25 miles from the Long Island Sound.
The mussels have not been sighted in Long Island waters and pose less of a threat to the region, because the Island is surrounded by saltwater.
But marine experts are concerned about species of zebra mussels found in 1990 that tolerate saltwater and may be able to thrive in Long Island waters.


Streetscapes: The Liberty Theater; Unlikely 42d St. Revival
THE 42d Street Redevelopment Corporation is confident that it can solve its big problems -- reviving the street temporarily until the office market recovers, keeping the street clean and safe and restoring its majestic collection of theaters.
But what of the deteriorating painted scene of early Manhattan in the Liberty Theater, at 234 West 42d Street.


Arsenic And Old Paint
The patriarch of the first family of American artists is responsible for the death by poisoning of his son, say two scholars.
In a tortuous family saga, they say, Charles Willson Peale, who is best known for his life portraits of George Washington and other notables of the American Revolution, became insanely jealous of his son, Raphaelle, who was also an accomplished artist.
The father induced the son to brew arsenic and mercury compounds for the family's taxidermy museum without warning him about the fumes.
Until now, historians have believed that Raphaelle, who died a gruesome death in 1825 at age 51, had succumbed to alcoholism.
Although the charge against the elder Peale will not appear in print until the August issue of Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, scholars have been merrily faxing copies of the article around.


Carolyn MacIver, James Millstein
Carolyn Whitney MacIver, a daughter of Mrs.
George A. MacIver Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
MacIver, was married last evening to James Eliot Millstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira M. Millstein of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
The Rev.
Margaret H. Minnick, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg officiated at the Country Club of New Canaan.
Mrs.
Millstein and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
She is a jewelry designer and maker in New York.
Her father was an insurance manager in Stamford, Conn., with the International Business Machines Corporation.
Her mother is the financial manager of the First Presbyterian Church in New Canaan.


A Question Of Balance
To the Editor:
Not surprising that John Hale, the sometime legal adviser to the New York Archdiocese, should trot out vicious antigay slanders to denounce social service agencies that work with our youth ("Out and Organized," June 13).


Second Thoughts


Your Own Account; Learning the Lessons of a Layoff


Profile/Marc J. Shapiro; This Banker May Be Too Big for Texas
MARC J. SHAPIRO's incandescent rise in banking began here in his hometown 21 years ago, when the top graduate from Stanford Business School started designing systems for budgeting and profit analysis at Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc. after turning down a similar job at Citibank.
Now in his fourth year as president and chief executive of Texas Commerce, the lanky, 45-year-old Texan is riding a surge in profits and market share at the state's second-largest banking company.
And soon he may be presented with another Houston-vs.-New York career choice -- one with much higher stakes.


They'll Always Have Leningrad
SAFE CONDUCT By Elizabeth Benedict. 230 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


A Bit Too Much Ado About the School Prom
To the Editor:
Perhaps as someone whose high school years were framed by Woodstock and the winding down of the Vietnam War and whose class opted not to have a prom, I cannot understand the significance of the event.
Yet as a resident of a Long Island community similar to the one in your article ("Prom: The Production," July 4), with children soon approaching what appears to be the age of insanity around here, I am forced to comment.


Comic Reversals in 'Arms and the Man'
EVEN at his most lighthearted, George Bernard Shaw didn't let an audience off lightly.
Look at "Arms and the Man," by his own designation a "pleasant play," also an early and a minor one.
It leaps into farce and crosses over into operetta, having inspired the libretto for "The Chocolate Soldier," but that doesn't disguise Shaw's insistence on rationality and his contempt for hypocrisy.
Against a veneer of frivolous dalliance, he was debunking posturing patriotism and the glorification of war and, of course, commenting on class differences, while mocking the shameless romanticism and idealism that suited his story.
Consider the preface, which Shaw says provides a "hint as to what I am driving at."


The Patent System Ain't Broke; Don't Fix It
To the Editor:
Timothy O'Hearn has it right that incentives provided by patent law create jobs.
He is wrong on almost everything else.
The American patent system is not invisible -- "political heavyweights" in Washington have indeed discovered patents.
For example, United States Trade Representative Mickey Kantor and his predecessor, Carla Hills, support restrictions on compulsory patent licensing in the North American Free Trade Agreement.


The View From: Mystic; A Schooner's Refurbishing Becomes an Artist's Mission
MALCOLM THOMPSON was on his 1935 schooner, the Pursuit of Happiness, which is moored beside the drawbridge in downtown Mystic.
"You see the frames on the side?" he said.
"I replanked the whole side."
A passer-by called out, "Are you restoring this?" Someone snapped his picture.
"No, I'm getting ready for Hollywood," Mr.
Thompson said.


Dana Reifler, L. H. Schaefer
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Wayne of Niskayuna, N.Y., have announced the engagement of her daughter Dana Jill Reifler to Air Force Capt.
Lawrence H. Schaefer, the son of Eileen Schaefer and Henry Schaefer, both of Saugerties, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Reifler graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
She and her fiance received law degrees from Syracuse University.
She is to join Parkowsky, Noble &amp; Guerke, a law firm in Dover, Del., as an associate in August.


How a Friendly Ghost Became a TV Muse
Shaken and bruised, Alex sits at the computer keyboard, hours after having been beaten up by a gang.
He is angry, he is scared, and he wants to write about what happened to him.
For help in getting started, he asks an invisible friend, Ghostwriter, who communicates only by writing.
On Alex's screen appears Ghostwriter's advice: "Tell me one thing you saw." Prodded by Ghostwriter, Alex begins a sentence about the hands of the boys who hurt him.
"How do you feel now?" asks Ghostwriter.
"Better," says Alex as he sees his anger released in words.


Haiti's Future Can Be Undone Before It's Done
FOR many who have followed Haiti's multiple ups and downs since the fall of the Duvalier family dictatorship in 1986, attentions quickly turned -- once the news of a United Nations-brokered settlement of the country's latest political crisis had penetrated -- to speculation over what could go wrong next.
In this proud but star-crossed nation given to coups, countercoups, rampant demagoguery and permanent intrigue, the question seems even natural, given the elaborate choreography called for by the United Nations plan to restore the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to office on Oct. 30.


3 Ships Adrift in a Diplomatic Limbo
More than 650 undocumented Chinese men and women remained aboard three rusty tramp steamers about 60 miles west of Mexico's Pacific coast today as the Clinton Administration tried to figure out what to do with the aliens without either abandoning its new get-tough immigration policy or antagonizing the Mexican Government.
On Friday night Mexico turned down a request by the United States for assistance in dealing with the 659 illegal immigrants aboard the three ships.


Stand By Your Song
"Stand by Your Man" is becoming an all-purpose anthem.
Written in 1968 by Tammy Wynette and Billy Sherrill, the song hit the top of the country charts and became Ms.
Wynette's trademark.
Tina Turner, Bobby Vinton, Patti Page and the Blues Brothers (Dan Aykroyd and John Belushi) all recorded it.
Since 1990, according to EMI Music Publishing, the song has been recorded by some 35 singers.
There is even a version by Alvin and the Chipmunks.


Back-Stabbing Brings 'Blood' on Senate Floor
Normally, the guiding principle of the United States Senate is "You scratch my back, I'll scratch yours." But occasionally, a senator will stab another in the back, and then there's hell to pay.
That is what happened a couple of hours before dawn on June 25 as the Senate approached a final vote on its monumental deficit-reduction bill.


A. D. Crawford, M. R. Wheeler
Annabel Davenport Crawford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Crawford of Washington, was married there yesterday to Michael Robert Wheeler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Michael Wheeler of Conway, N.H.
The Rev.
Margaret M. Graham performed the ceremony at St.
Margaret's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Crawford Wheeler, 28, graduated from Guilford College and received a master's degree in early-childhood education in May from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father, now retired, was a senior producer of the "CBS Evening News" in New York.
Her paternal grandfather, Kenneth G. Crawford, was a columnist for Newsweek magazine and a president of the Newspaper Guild.


U.S. Women Compete Under New Names
THE United States will send a dozen female players to Chile in September to contest the Venice Trophy, and their rivals from other continents will find that two of them are nominally disguised.
They will have little difficulty in spotting that Kathie Wei-Sender was Kathie Wei when they last met her.
She married Henry Sender in January and abandoned New York City for Nashville.
She and four teammates -- Lynn Deas, Beth Palmer, Carol Sanders and Betty Ann Kennedy -- will try to add to their collections of world titles.
Helen Utegaard will seek her first title.


Eugenie Calure, Robert Bestwick
Eugenie Ann Calure, the daughter of Vilma Calure of Newburgh, N.Y., and the late Eugene D. Calure, was married yesterday to Robert David Bestwick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Bestwick of Reading, Pa.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Bestwick, 34, is a senior social worker at the Rusk Institute, the rehabilitation center in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Syracuse University, from which her husband received an M.B.A.
The bride received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending June 26  MANHATTAN  Carnagie Hill  $400,000
40 East 94th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,312-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining area, 2 exposures, Central Park view; common charge $585, taxes $6,348 (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Chelsea  $376,500
10 West 15th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 2 terraces; maintenance $1,504, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Chelsea  $925,000
344 West 22d Street  6-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, attached, 4-story Greek Revival town house; dining room, library, 7 fireplaces, original moldings and detail; 20- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $5,450 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Gramercy Park Area  $273,500
145 East 15th Street  (Gramercy Arms)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining el; maintenance $871, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  Upper West Side  $530,000
176 West 87th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, family room, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,944, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Klara Madlin Real Estate-Halstead Property Co.)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area  $165,000
3327 Paulding Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick Ranch; dining area in upper unit; eat-in kitchen in other; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,385 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Williamsbridge  $150,000
948 Magenta Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- ny 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/Metro Star Realty)  BROOKLYN  Carroll Gardens  $255,000
29 Third Street  2-family, 3-story, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; full basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $768 (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Ditmas Park West  $180,000
501 Marlborough Road  5-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Victorian; center hall, dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, original oak trim and detail;, 54- by 91-ft. lot; taxes $1,584 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  College Point  $170,000
5-05 Schoor Drive  (Silver Point)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, 1-car garage, pool and health club; common charge $221, tax abated (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills  $218,800
67-85 Groton Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND  St.
George  $55,000
50 Fort Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,008-sq.-ft. co-op in a postwar building; dining el, communal terrace aand garden plot, N.Y.
Harbor view; maintenance $624, includes gas and electricity, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)  Tottenville  $367,000
82 Jacob Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, 6-year-old, detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, Jacuzzi in master bath. fireplace, 2-car garage, 66- by 160-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Ward Hill  $125,000
16-18 Willis Avenue  4-family, detached, frame house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit, 4 garages, 40- by 65-ft. lot; taxes $1,771 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Q and A
A Docked Rent Deposit Question: After living from month to month with no lease in the upper apartment of a two-family dwelling in Queens, I informed my absentee landlord by mail on the ninth of the month that I would be leaving at the month's end.
He received the letter on the 12th.
Because I had not notified him 30 days prior to moving, however, he deducted 12 days rent from my security deposit.
I reluctantly cashed his check, but I am continually bothered by what I feel was an illegal act.


Political Memo; Republicans Forget Clinton; the Big Worry Is Perot
After slashing Ross Perot as "a walking sound bite," "a great hit-and-run artist" and a free agent who can make a splash then "run back to Dallas on his private jet," Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, denied that he harbored any ill feelings.
"I talk to Ross Perot," he said.
"I don't want to leave the impression that there's any hostility between myself and Ross Perot."


Charting New Worlds, Camera in Hand
All it took was a little concentration, a one-on-one relationship with an artist -- and the thrill of having access to a huge Polaroid camera.
Ten teen-agers interested in art but considered "at risk" -- homeless or living in drug-treatment centers or city housing projects -- were paired a year ago with 10 well-known artists for a bit of serious play.
The result is "Art Works," a display of their creations at the International Center for Photography through Sept. 26.
The children, some of whose names were kept confidential, were exposed to a situation in which "what they do and how they conduct themselves matters," according to Tim Rollins, the artist who wrote an essay for the show's catalogue.
The catalogue also includes comments by the teen-agers and the artists.
The collaboration was the brainchild of the Education Project, a nonprofit group that introduces art to children unlikely to encounter it otherwise.
After closing at I.C.P., the show will begin a two-year national tour.
Meanwhile, all 10 teen-agers have been offered paid internships at museums and arts organizations in the city.


U.N. Calls Them 'Safe Areas'; Bosnians, a Sick Joke
As more than 1,000 French troops began arriving at a former Olympic complex here on Friday to begin a United Nations military buildup, snipers opened fire, wounding one in the neck.
So began the process of making Sarajevo what the United Nations calls a "safe area."
The soldier, who is expected to live, was evacuated to France within hours on a military flight.
He was one of at least 1,500 people who have been killed or wounded in the Bosnian capital in the two months since the United Nations Security Council designated Sarajevo and five other predominantly Muslim enclaves to be safe havens.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF 62 Gives Pruitt Lead Dillard Pruitt scorched the sultry Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va., with birdies on nine of his first 13 holes, vaulting him into a one-shot lead over John Adams yesterday.
Pruitt made up a five-shot deficit by matching the course record of nine-under-par 62 held by five others at Kingsmill Golf Club.C.
Pruitt's round put him at 13-under 200 after three tours of the 6,797-yard layout.
Adams shot a three-under 68.(AP) Lunn and McGeorge Lead: Karen Lunn settled down and rolled in a 10-foot eagle putt on the closing hole to pull even with Missie McGeorge entering the final round of the Youngstown-Warren L.P.G.A.
Classic in Holland, Ohio.
Lunn had a round that included six birdies and an eagle but also four bogeys.
Her four-under-par 68 left her at 10-under 134 and matched McGeorge, who followed a career-low 65 in the opening round with a 69.
Two shots behind the co-leaders were Hall of Famer Nancy Lopez, seeking her first victory of the year.(AP) First European Victory: Jesper Parnevik of Sweden scored his first victory on the European PGA Tour, winning the Scottish Open in Gleneagles by five strokes over Payne Stewart.
Parnevik shot a one-over-par 71 in the final round to finish with a 271.
He earned a top prize of $150,000 -- more than he has made in any year since turning pro in 1986.
Stewart shot a 69 to finish at 276. (AP) TENNIS Raymond Tops Sabatini Lisa Raymond, a 19-year-old American, upset top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 6-4, 3-6, 6-1, yesterday in the women's semifinals of the Gunze exhibition tournament in Osaka, Japan.
Raymond, a two-time N.C.A.A. champion from Wayne, Pa., is ranked No. 149 in the world, and Sabatini is fifth.
Raymond will play Amanda Coetzer of South Africa, who defeated Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2, in the women's final today.
Top-seeded Petr Korda of the Czech Republic and Aleksandr Volkov of Russia won the men's semfinals at the Osaka Municipal Gymnasium.
Korda beat Australian Mark Woodforde, 7-5, 6-2, and Volkov trounced second-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, 6-1, 6-2. (AP) Novacek Ousts Muster: Third-seeded Karel Novacek of the Czech Republic defeated No. 2 Thomas Muster of Austria, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5), in the semifinals of the Swiss Open in Gstaad.
Rain interrupted the semifinal between the top-seeded defending champion, Sergi Bruguera, and Marc Goellner with the clay-court match tied at 3-3.
It will be completed today, followed by the final. (AP) Unseeded Players in Final: Ronald Agenor of Haiti and Horst Skoff of Austria, two unseeded veterans without tournament titles since 1990, will meet in the final of the Swedish Open at Bastad today.
Agenor beat Magnus Larsson, 6-4, 6-3, in the semifinals while Skoff beat fifth-seeded Christian Bergstrom, 6-4, 6-4.(AP) BOXING Fighter Keeps Title Steve Robinson retained the World Boxing Organization featherweight title last night with a ninth-round knockout of Sean Murphy of Britain.
Robinson, fighting in his hometown of Cardiff, Wales, used a series of combinations in the early rounds to wear down Murphy and set up the only knockdown in the fight at the National Ice Rink.
Robinson, 24, improved to 15-9-1.
Murphy, 28, is 22-4..(AP) SOCCER U.S.
Wins, 1-0 Eric Wynalda's goal in the 67th minute last night gave the United States a 1-0 victory over Jamaica in a Group A game of the Gold Cup tournament at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas.
Wynalda chipped a shot from short range over the head of Jamaican goalkeeper Warren Barrett, who had come out in an attempt to control the bouncing ball.
In the first game, three second-half goals by Eduardo Bennett helped Honduras to a 5-1 rout of Panama.
The United States won for only the third time in 21 international games this year, along with 10 ties and eight losses, but is 2-1 with its complete squad.
The other victory was 2-0 over England in the U.S.
Cup in June. (AP)


Bouncing Back From an Elephantine Disaster
It was less than a decade ago that Martha Clarke was the darling of Off Broadway.
Her "Garden of Earthly Delights" in 1984 and "Vienna: Lust haus" in 1986 had critics raving about this unexpected theatrical genius from the recondite world of dance.
She had become known for imaginative, probing work full of dark imagery, drawn from a startling variety of sources.
There was more qualified praise for two pieces that followed, "The Hunger Artist" and "Miracolo d'Amore." Then came "Endangered Species," the first big failure of her buoyant, nearly 30-year career.
The play, which used actors and animals to explore humanity's domination of nature, was presented at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1990.
The reviews were generally negative.
Harvey Lichtenstein, director of the Brooklyn Academy, closed the play early.


Dispute Over Danube Dam Threatens Hungarian Wetlands
A few steps off the road leading into this village, a sign loomed, proclaiming the formerly lush area for nesting birds a "strictly protected zone." Dried-out reeds rustled in the breeze, and a few frogs hopped forlornly among wilted lily pads outlined by the mosaic of cracks in the parched creek bed.
The marsh, a sanctuary once echoing with bird song, has fallen victim to the dispute between Hungary and Slovakia over the dam they had planned to build jointly on the Danube River.


German Guerrillas Assert Leader Was 'Executed'
An urban guerrilla group has accused a member of an elite Government commando squad of killing one of its leaders in cold blood last week in eastern Germany, and the authorities say they fear reprisals.
Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters has resigned and a chief federal prosecutor has been dismissed because of confused and contradictory statements about how Wolfgang Grams, a suspected leader of the Red Army Faction, was killed during a shootout with the anti-terrorist squad, Border Protection Group 9, in a crowded railway station on June 27.
A commando also died.


SAINT HILLARY
I give Michael Kelly credit for at least trying to get to know the special person that is Hillary Rodham Clinton, but he has not yet picked up on her rather earthy and good-natured enjoyment of life.
The Hillary I knew as a fellow classmate did not think of herself as a saint.
And why should we have to?
What more do we expect from our leaders than intelligence, savvy, kindness, grit, pragmatism, desire?
PATRICIA COFFIN FRY New York, N.Y.


Dinkins's Olive Branch: Facing Crown Hts. From Israel
Mayor David N. Dinkins traveled nearly 6,000 miles last week to utter words that had eluded him at home during two years of bitter debate over the racial violence in Crown Heights.
On the first morning of a four-day trip to Israel, the Mayor found himself once again facing criticism on how he handled the unrest in the divided Brooklyn neighborhood in August 1991.
But this time, Mr.
Dinkins's spontaneous remarks carried a directness and an emotional intensity that left some supporters in his entourage hoping that he might have finally turned a corner in addressing the criticism.


RECORD BRIEFS
Martin, Ravel, Ibert, Poulenc: Song Cyles, Songs Jose van Dam, bass-baritone; Lyons Opera Orchestra conducted by Kent Nagano.
Virgin Classics 759236 2; CD.


JULY 4-10: 19 Days of Deliberation; A Jury Rebuffs U.S., Acquits 2 of Marshal's Death
In his closing argument last month at the trial of two men accused of killing a Federal marshal, Gerry Spence, the Jackson, Wyo., lawyer, told a jury in Boise, Idaho, that they had a chance to make history by sending a message to the Government.
Last Thursday, after 19 days of deliberation, that jury came back with precisely the message Mr.
Spence sought.


Ellen Gardner, John C. Bass
Ruth Ellen Gardner, a daughter of Carrington H. Gardner of Plainview, Tex., and Robert H. Gardner of Rockport, Tex., was married yesterday to John Croley Bass, a son of Mrs.
Robert R. Click of Dallas and the late Harris H. Bass.
The Rev.
William Rogers performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in San Antonio.
Mrs.
Bass, 28, is known as Ellen.
She is a history teacher at New Braunfels (Tex.) Middle School.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Texas at Austin, from which the bridegroom received an M.B.A.
Her father is the manager of Aransas Autoplex in Aransas Pass, Tex., and her mother owns Gardner Chevrolet in Plainview, both automobile dealerships.


Opera, the Fairest One of All
These days the Marx Brothers would have a much tougher time dismantling a night at the opera.
Once the province of the monied and the socially connected, opera has in the last decade become much more democratic in both substance and style.
Subjects that might once have sent operaphiles into fits of derision, like President Nixon's trip to China or the hijacking of a cruise ship, have quickly entered the culture.
And because of opera's sweep and scope, it has attracted a wide range of artistry from various disciplines.
Other artists can now flex new muscle, whether they are poets like Alice Goodman ("Nixon in China"), playwrights like William Hoffman (John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles"), costume designers (Bob Mackie, Gianni Versace, Willa Kim), scenic designers (Tony Walton) or stage directors (Harold Prince, Frank Galati).
Paradoxically, in becoming more democratic, opera has also become more glamorous.
Everyone -- artists and audiences alike -- wants in on the action.
The glamour that was once the movies and the legitimate theater has found a new home.
When the opera season begins in the fall, the life of glamour will itself be a plot subject, from "Marilyn" at the New York City Opera to "The Dream of Valentino" at the Washington Opera.
A season later, the San Francisco Opera will make the stage and film hit "Dangerous Liaisons" sing.


When the Soil Needs a Helping Hand
FOR many years gardeners have learned that the soil is the thing.
And the better the soil is, the better the plants grow.
A strong root system results when there is good soil.
This type of root system will be the engine that drives any plant's growth.
Gardeners may yawn a bit when they hear about the merits of adding compost to the soil now or especially at planting time.
They have come to learn that it is truly wasteful to haul away garden debris like weeds, kitchen waste and autumn foliage.
The decayed organic material, the compost, is a rich source of nutrients that adds to the soil's life.
And the plants, of course, always benefit.


Cambodia Finds Its Own Troops Add to Brutality
If Ly Seng had been a little faster in pounding a few nails into the wall, or a little quieter, he might still be alive.
Instead, Mr.
Ly Seng, a 27-year-old hospital orderly from the western Cambodian city of Battambang, was shot in the chest in March as he tried to hammer up a mosquito net to protect his infant nephew from the swarming bugs.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SOCIAL COMMENTARY FOR THE SAKE OF ARGUMENT Essays and Minority Reports.
By Christopher Hitchens.
Verso, $27.95


And How About . . . ?
To the Editor:
Another Canadian to add to your list: the folk singer Oscar Brand, who was born in Winnipeg.
MIRIAM WEISS Astoria, N. Y.


Lesson for Ballerinas: It Takes Two to Dance a Pas de Deux
SOUNDING like the Dr.
Ruth of ballet, David Richardson, a teacher and dancer at the American Ballet Theater, explained the art of partnering to a pas de deux class at the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Mid-Westchester here.
"It's about communication," he told the young women, most of whom were in their early teens.
Referring to the male dancers, he said, "When he offers his hand" -- Mr.
Richardson held out one of his hands and carelessly slapped it with the other -- "don't just go splat!"


Labeling Prime-Time Violence Is Still a Band-Aid Solution
V is for victory?
Some members of Congress would also like V to stand for violence, and to serve as the warning signal the broadcast networks have promised to alert parents to especially bloody prime-time programs starting this fall.
Catch No. 1: The networks themselves would judge violence levels.
Catch No. 2: They will also devise the warning.
The current nebuluous contender, to be broadcast just before a show, is: "Due to some violent content, parental discretion advised." So, in the latest posturings between Government regulators and the networks, V is still very much for victory as far as the television industry is concerned.
This small concession to Congress has demolished for now the prospect -- never very likely in any case -- of stringent Federal sanctions, among them an imposed ratings system and the installation of a computer chip in every television set that would allow viewers to block out programs electronically coded for violence.


Free at Last, N.F.L. Ushers in a New Era
In the new era of National Football League free agency, bringing hope for rebirth and resurgence, perhaps there is no more appropriate team than the Los Angeles Raiders to be first out of the gate for training camp.


A Softer, Gentler Romanticism From Schumann and Brahms
Schumann and Brahms have long been subjects of rumor.
One didn't know how to orchestrate, they say, and lost his way in larger forms; the other quavered before Beethoven's example, concealing orchestral thoughts in chamber garb.
Some listeners still dislike the Brahmsian sound ("India-rubber-like," according to an early critic).
Without apologies or retouchings, Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic will present major works of Schumann and Brahms at Carnegie Hall beginning on Wednesday evening.
But it is still revealing to note the difficulties these composers faced.
Schumann was a man of mercurial, unstable temperament who wrote in bursts of inspiration; the multiple stages of the orchestral process caused him great frustration.
Brahms, by contrast, was a relentless perfectionist, laboring to achieve the clarity and integrity of his more intimate scores.


Biographers United
To the Editor:
As the steering committee of the Women Writing Women's Lives Seminar of the New York Institute for the Humanities, we speak for the membership in opposing the gag order issued by Doris Lessing in The New York Times Book Review (letter, June 20).
Ms.
Lessing is a public figure.
Her work has been and will continue to be the subject of many forms of scholarly inquiry, biography among them.
Ms.
Lessing is of course free to restrict her papers as she wishes, but we encourage her associates to speak for themselves.
DEIRDRE BAIR, NORAH CHASE, HONOR MOORE, NELL IRVIN PAINTER, SUE A. SHAPIRO New York


Cottager's Life: For Young Set, Action Aplenty
THE slow-rolling vistas of the Adirondacks were a soothing sight, the mountain air sweet with sap.
But what really raised my spirits as we approached our vacation home were less natural phenomena: the 40-foot, striped and star-trimmed statue of a perplexed Uncle Sam welcoming visitors to the Magic Forest, home of the area's only diving horse; the orange and yellow coils of the Steamin' Demon roller coaster snaking into the sky above The Great Escape Fun Park; the House of Frankenstein Wax Museum and Leonelli's Playland Arcade in the happy-to-be-honky-tonk village of Lake George.
On a dreary afternoon, these would be the havens of our children's discontent; on a clear evening, like kiddie casinos, they would top off a day at the lake with bright lights and big fun, sending our little high rollers soundly to sleep in the back seat, pinball winnings and silly souvenirs wedged in their fists.
The peeling white paint and rust-spotted roof of the house we had rented for two weeks on Lake Vanare, about five miles southwest of Lake George, only increased my optimism.
It was one of six Lakeview Fireplace Cottages, but unlike the other five -- one- and two-bedroom cabins with log siding -- this was the original lake house, a ramshackle white frame structure that made up in character what it lacked in paint.
Because it "needed some work," George Conable, the owner of Lakeview, rented the 1,600-square-foot cottage for $399 a week during our first stay and $415 when we returned last summer -- rates that were just a few dollars more than what he charged for cottages half its size.
My husband, Daan, and I were delighted with the deal.
When you have a 10-year-old who likes to practice his forward rolls and flips in the living room and a 4-year-old who prefers to be called the Weedwacker, you don't want anything too fancy.


Of Colleges And Race Relations
In "A Novelist's Journey in Race Relations" (New Jersey Q &amp; A, June 13), Prof.
John A. Williams of Rutgers emerges as an immensely accomplished man.
Thus, I am particularly disturbed to find him a proponent of several irresponsible and imprudent viewpoints.
He says that the police "shouldn't shoot people over property for one thing -- which these guys will do in a minute." The New Jersey police are hardly eager to shoot people for any reason.
And, if the word got out that the police were going to allow fleeing thieves to escape with their loot, neither property nor civilization would be secure.


A Woman of Many Talons
ARTISTIC DIFFERENCES By Charlie Hauck. 238 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $21.


Diana MacLear, Peter Renehan
September wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Frank MacLear of Watch Hill, R.I., for their daughter Diana Reynolds MacLear and Peter Lawrence Renehan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Renehan of Southport, Conn.
Miss MacLear, a graduate of Skidmore College, is a jewelry designer in New York.
Her father is the president of MacLear &amp; Harris Inc., a yacht design company in New York.
The future bride's maternal grandfather, the late Arthur Gardner, was the United States Ambassador to Cuba during the Eisenhower Administration.


'End of Summer' at SUNY Purchase
IN a memoir published a year before his death, S. N. Behrman (1893-1973) wrote, "Comedy is the saving grace which makes life bearable."
Graceful is the apt word for Behrman's plays, a score of them.
Mostly, they are concerned with the rich and the frivolous, but not the mindless.
The playwright's works epitomized drawing-room comedy, a genre that has been hopelessly out of fashion for more than three decades.
The genre has had little impact on the American theater -- serious playwrights don't bother much with the privileged class -- and it is rarely thought to be revivable.


When the Soil Needs a Helping Hand
FOR many years gardeners have learned that the soil is the thing.
And the better the soil is, the better the plants grow.
A strong root system results when there is good soil.
This type of root system will be the engine that drives any plant's growth.
Gardeners may yawn a bit when they hear about the merits of adding compost to the soil now or especially at planting time.
They have come to learn that it is truly wasteful to haul away garden debris like weeds, kitchen waste and autumn foliage.
The decayed organic material, the compost, is a rich source of nutrients that adds to the soil's life.
And the plants, of course, always benefit.


The Civil War Gains New Legions of Fans
AS wars go, the Civil War was long in the nation's past and presumably mostly forgotten.
Even the centennial of the war, in the 1960's, failed to attract much attention, perhaps because the country was absorbed in a newer war, in Vietnam.
Then, in 1991, came a riveting nine-part program on public television about the war that had torn the nation apart in the last century.
Suddenly the Civil War had returned to the public consciousness.


POSTINGS: Renovation at City College; Preserving Gothic Arches
As part of an ongoing preservation effort at the City University of New York in the Harlem section of Manhattan, the original Gothic-style arches that surround City College will be renovated this fall.
"There are still some discussions with the Landmarks Preservation Commission about it, but this is our intention," said Robert E. Buxbaum, the university's acting vice chancellor for facilities, planning, construction and management.


When America Fell in Love With the Art of Antiquity
In early 19th-century America, images of the ancient past were very much at home.
Statues of Venus proliferated in Boston parlors.
Toile curtains depicting George Washington driving a chariot with a Greek goddess in the back seat were fashionable in Richmond.
And mummy mania, spurred by gallery shows of Egyptian exports, swept the land.
In the words of Wendy A. Cooper, curator of decorative arts at the Baltimore Museum of Art, Americans were "mesmerized" by antiquity.
From Massachusetts to the Mississippi, the images of classical civilizations were pervasive in 19th-century arts and decoration; aware of their popularity, Ms.
Cooper organized "Classical Taste in America, 1800-1840," an exhibition of 270 items that will run through Sept. 26.
She also wrote the catalogue, published by the museum and the Abbeville Press ($34.95 paper and $55 cloth).
The show, financed primarily by the Henry Luce Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities, will travel to the Mint Museum of Art in Charlotte, N. C., and the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston.


E. H. Bauman, Luke Gullick
Elizabeth Hughes Bauman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Bauman of London and Kennebunk Beach, Me., was married yesterday to Luke Gullick, the son of Peta Gullick of Salisbury, Wiltshire, England, and Thomas M. Gullick of Infantes, Spain.
The Rev.
Mary Louis Stevens officiated at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
Mrs.
Gullick, 27, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is the chief executive of SmithKline Beecham, the health-care company based in London.


Erasing the Holocaust
DENYING THE HOLOCAUST The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory.
By Deborah E. Lipstadt. 278 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.
ASSASSINS OF MEMORY Essays on the Denial of the Holocaust.
By Pierre Vidal-Naquet.
Translated by Jeffrey Mehlman. 205 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press. $27.50.


Corrections
An article yesterday about power use in the New York metropolitan area misstated the number of watts in a megawatt and the amount of electrical power consumed by customers of the Consolidated Edison Company.
There are a million watts in a megawatt, and Con Ed customers are using the equivalent of 100 million light bulbs.


Getting Medical Transportation in an Emergency
"EMERGENCY medical transportation is not a subject you want to learn about during an emergency," advises Peter Savage, a crisis-management adviser to corporations and security companies in Baltimore, and a former Foreign Service officer.
Overseas, the anxiety of a sudden illness or injury may be intensified by difficulty with a foreign language, problems with the telephone and a lack of friends and family to help out.
The trauma of an on-the-spot education may be avoided by two routes.
One is having a credit card with an "enhancement" that provides a telephone link to a travel assistance company, and, depending on the card, some reimbursement of medical expenses.
These assistance organizations are retained by the card issuers to deal with calls about cardholders' emergencies, from resolving the cost of damage to a rental car to finding a lawyer in a foreign city to arranging for a patient to be flown home.


JULY 4-10: Keeping the Pressure On; A Standoff in Iraq Raises Nervousnessc About New Raids
The air raid sirens that sounded in Baghdad last week proved to be a false alarm, but the Iraqi edginess was only one sign that last month's punitive American missile strike may not be the last.
There was still hope of compromise by week's end in the most serious current standoff between Iraq and the United Nations, which began more than a month ago.
But Iraq's steadfast refusal to permit cameras at two missile-test sites moved the dispute closer to confrontation.
A U.N. inspection team pulled out in protest.


Gregg Renfrew, William D. Orr
Susan Gregg Renfrew, the daughter of Susan G. Renfrew of New York and R. Bartlett Renfrew of Dallas, was married yesterday to William Dennison Orr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Orr of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.
Mrs.
Orr, 25, is known as Gregg.
She is a marketing representative for CCA Financial Services Inc., a computer leasing company in Richmond.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.


In Congress, Now Is the Time to Come to the Aid of the Party
A COUPLE of weeks ago Senator John B. Breaux of Louisiana approached Vice President Gore as the budget bill was finally coming to a vote, and asked "Are you all right on this one?"
Mr.
Gore, who had come to the Senate to cast the tie-breaking vote, riposted: "Only if you need me."


Fire Blazes Through Seventh Avenue Supermarket


Cuban Player Takes Intentional Walk
For the first time in the 70-year history of the World University Games, baseball is being played as one of the 12 sports, and no one will be surprised if the United States and Cuba play for the gold medal.
But that expected battle took an unexpected turn today when a member of the Cuban team, 23-year-old Edilberto Oropesa, left the squad, giving rise to reports that he would seek to defect.


Everyone Stops at Wagontire (Pop. 2)
Given the flooding rains in the Midwest and the scorching heat almost everywhere else, the weather in the Oregon high desert last week was about the country's most amiable, particularly accommodating for a New Yorker homeward bound on a bicycle.
The sun was brilliant every day, but afternoon temperatures barely made the 80's.
At sunup, they hovered not much above freezing.
At every stop -- not that there were a lot of them; oases of civilization are few and far between out there -- I was informed of my good luck.
It became a kind of refrain: "This time of year it's usually up around 100."


D'Amato Utters Sounds That a Candidate Makes
It's starting to sound more and more as if Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato may really run for governor of New York next year.
Consider:


Clinton Discovers That Even Japan Can Go For a Populist
PRESIDENT CLINTON and his Administration kept saying all week that this was a different kind of Group of Seven meeting.
The lofty old talk of macroeconomic coordination and stable exchange rates was replaced by the mantras of the 90's: jobs and "structural reform," which means preparing governments, industries and workers geared to cold war prosperity for the new austerity.
"Some have called this a jobs summit," Mr.
Clinton said.
"And they are right, because the creation of new jobs in the United States and in all the other countries present here was at the center of all of our discussions."


In the Region: Westchester; Knicks Sign Pact With SUNY Purchase
FOR years, Westchester County has been anxious to attract professional sports teams, both to make use of its existing athletic facilities and to develop new arenas and sports complexes that could generate new revenue.
The county recently scored a coup when the New York Knicks basketball team, which had been training at the State University of New York at Purchase since 1987, signed a 10-year contract to remain at the school.


Taking a Short Cut To the End Game
THREE players tied for first place in the Skei-Masters International Tournament in Gausdal, Norway, in early May: Bjarke Kristensen of Denmark; Jonathan Tisdall, an American who lives in Norway, and Ferdinand Hellers of Sweden.
For Kristensen, it meant a second norm toward the grandmaster title; for Tisdall, it meant his third norm, but he must still bring his International Chess Federation rating up from 2425 to 2500 before he can be accorded the honor.
Hellers is already a grandmaster.
Each of the three turned in a 6-3 score -- the requirement for the norm -- in the 10-player invitational competition.


Manager's Profile
Shelby M.C. Davis
Fund: New York Venture, $690 million in assets; 4.75% sales charge; manager since 1969 inception.
Also, Selected American Shares, $450 million in assets; no sales charge; manager since May 1. (Sponsor: Selected/Venture Advisers, Santa Fe, N.M.).


Laurie Whitmore, Kevin Lippincott
Elizabeth Lawrence Whitmore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Whitmore Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Kevin Frederick Lippincott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Lippincott of Media, Pa.
The Rev.
Avery C. Manchester, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Lippincott, 29, is known as Laurie.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Both she and her husband work for Frito-Lay Inc. in Dallas, she as an associate product manager, he as an assistant product manager.
Her father is a management consultant in Greenwich.


IN the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison  $206,625
6 Sherwood Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; Jacuzzi, c/a, ceramic tile kitchen and foyer; taxes $3,362.
Fords  $110,000
114 Beech Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, fenced yard, new windows and furnace; taxes $2,390.
Mahwah  $299,900
8 Greene Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, pool; taxes $3,760.
New Milford  $185,000
515 Ryeside Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; underground sprinklers, 1-car garage, full basement; taxes $3,901.
Park Ridge  $159,000
14 Glendale Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,310.
Ramsey  $545,000
4 Swan Hollow  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, 1-acre lot, 3-car garage, c/a; taxes $12,200.
OTHER AREAS Cortlandt, N.Y.  $190,000
220 Buttonwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; family room, wet bar, workshop, deck, one-car garage; taxes, $4,475.
Vernon, Conn.  $167,750
23 Jeff Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10- year-old ranch; dining room, track lighting, sunken living room, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,165.
East Hills, L.I.  $275,000
45 Sherrard Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, c/a; taxes $5,200.


Large Masonry Projects May Need Special Tools
DESPITE their sturdy appearance brick structures of all kinds, including walls, chimneys and barbecues, need periodic joint repair and, sometimes, other maintenance to keep them intact.
Repairing joints, called repointing, is necessary when the mortar between bricks develops cracks or begins to crumble.
The job is sometimes tedious, but not too difficult.
It consists of chiseling away part of the existing mortar and adding new material.
Repointing can be done over small areas at a time, making it convenient for amateurs.
But consider hiring a professional mason if the work involves dangerous heights or if the joints require delicate shaping.
Also consider hiring or at least consulting a mason before repointing or repairing any brickwork more than 100 years old.
That is because modern mortar, when mixed according to standard directions, is often harder than the old bricks and can cause them to crack or flake.


10-1 Birdonthewire Beats 4-5 Fly So Free
Scotty Schulhofer, a man of few words, said it in a very few words before they ran the Tom Fool Stakes at Belmont Park yesterday.
"There is no sure thing in horse racing," he said.
"There is only one way to win a race, but a thousand ways to lose one."


A Lark With Kids in London
SOMETIME last January I noticed an ad for amazingly low air fares to London -- $186 round trip from Boston -- and stuck it on my bulletin board.
It was a fantasy, really.
The next time the ad caught my eye was the very day the fares expired -- an hour before my travel agency closed, in fact.
It occurred to me that we could fly to London for the weekend for less than it would cost to go to Washington. (I knew I could never afford such a trip in the summer.) And though I had not once seriously considered the possibility of such an expedition, I found myself suddenly picking up the phone and booking four tickets -- for myself and my kids, only one of whom, my daughter, Audrey, had ever crossed the ocean.
We would be flying on a Thursday night, land in London Friday morning (before 8), spend three nights and set off for home at noon on Monday.
Three nights in a London hotel with a good package deal would cost about $400, breakfast included.
The dollar was up, and I knew from past experience that what I liked to do best in this city -- just walking around and riding the tube -- was free, or at least cheap.
My goal was to make the whole trip for approximately $1,500.


Toxic Chemicals Make Clean a Dirty Word
To the Editor:
Your article on the environmental aspects of clothing purchases ("The Cotton Brief," June 20) correctly pointed out industry's recent efforts to reduce the adverse health and environmental consequences of various fiber, textile and apparel production technologies.
Members of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union operate the new low-emission Tencel process for making rayon as well as the Wellman Company's major plant making polyester fiber from recycled plastics.


The 17 Faces Of Kerri. Or Are They?
Kerri Scharlin, a conceptual artist in TriBeCa, wanted to know how others perceived her.
So, over the last two years, she asked 17 friends who are also artists to visit police sketch artists and describe her appearance to them.
"There's a universal desire to see how you are seen by other people," she said.
"I saw a police sketch in The New York Post and I thought, how could something that looks so generic identify a specific individual?"


Sex, Triads and Chromaticism
BENJAMIN BRITTEN A Biography.
By Humphrey Carpenter.
Illustrated. 677 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $30.


The Blimp
WHAT: The blimp, as in Goodyear, Bud One and all those other bobbing billboards.
Bigfoot, a new $4 million airship, recorded the roughest July Fourth in blimp history last Sunday when a puncture forced a crash landing atop a seven-story Manhattan apartment building.
The incident had all the trappings of a disaster, except that there were no fatalities and the protagonist was a blimp with a wild-eyed Pizza Hut mascot on its side.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Long Time at the Bank
TIME to test your mental prowess against Herman Meyer's, coin roller extraordinaire.
How many quarters in $10?
How many nickels in $2?
Eh, eh. Time's up.


Your Own Account; Learning the Lessons of a Layoff


Mom-and-Pop Is Just Fine by Some
To the Editor:
"As Suburbs Slow, Supermarkets Return to Cities" (June 27) left the unfortunate impression that the abandonment of city neighborhoods by the national supermarket chains desolated these areas and forced residents to patronize low-quality, high-priced mom-and-pop grocers.
In fact, when the national chains fled New York City in the late 1970's in favor of more lucrative suburban opportunities, the locations they abandoned were purchased by hundreds of hard-working immigrant entrepreneurs -- Dominican, Korean, Arabic, Jewish and Italian -- who have invested more than $100 million in the city's neighborhoods over the past 15 years.
These store owners have helped to keep neighborhood commercial strips from deteriorating and they employ thousands of mostly minority workers.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Gramercy Park
ONCE home to Edwin Booth, Theodore Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy, Gramercy Park, a relaxed neighborhood at the foot of Lexington Avenue and just a mile south of Grand Central Terminal, seems a bit out of place in bustling New York City.
The neighborhood still has a 19th- century atmosphere, enhanced by the large private park that it surrounds.
Two houses on 19th Street -- also known as Block Beautiful for its many plantings -- jut out past others because they were built in 1828, before zoning mandated deeper setbacks.


Katherine Hill, J. A. O'Connor Jr.
Katherine Renee Hill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Robert Hill of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Jeremiah Anthony O'Connor Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
O'Connor of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
John O'Connor, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph on the Brandywine in Greenville, Del.
Mrs.
O'Connor, 32, is a product manager for General Foods USA in White Plains.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father recently retired as a business programs manager at the Du Pont Company in Wilmington.


IRAQ SEEKS TO KEEP MISSILE SITES OPEN
Saddam Hussein faces a new confrontation with the Security Council this weekend over the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction unless he allows United Nations inspectors to seal two missile-testing stations close to the capital, rendering them useless.
Today the Government made a counteroffer, saying it would give the inspectors constant access to the sites if they did not place seals on the buildings and equipment there, officials here said.


Books in the Ears
To the Editor:
Rand Richard Cooper's article about audio books ("Can We Really Read With Our Ears? The 'Wuthering' Truth About Novels on Tape," June 6) was an amusing piece and scored some points, but there is another side to the subject.
As one who has labored long in the field, at times as a reviewer, at others as a producer and broadcaster of spoken-word recordings, I feel prompted to reply.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FREE CONCERTS
The National Chorale will give three free performances in its 12th annual Connecticut Festival of American Music Theater this week.
The first and third concerts are scheduled at 6 P.M. today and next Sunday at Cove Island Park in Stamford, the second will be at the City Hall Concert Hall on East Avenue in Norwalk on Thursday at 7:30 P.M.


Corrections
The Food column last Sunday, about peaches, carried an incorrect byline.
The writer was Moira Hodgson.


Prostrate Haiti Looking to Foreign Aid for a Lift
The economic data pieced together here by foreign experts in recent weeks read like those of a country emerging from a devastating war: unemployment of more than 40 percent, uncontrolled inflation and a poverty line cutting off 70 percent or more of the population.
But even these figures do not give a full picture of the damage wrought not by armed conflict, but by nearly two years of political strife and mismanagement as well as international sanctions intended to help force the restoration of democracy after a coup by the Haitian military in September 1991.


The Struggle For the Soul of Islam
The following news stories are all taken from the first half of 1993.
In Pakistan, a poet, Akhtar Hameed Khan, 78, is quoted as having said that while he admires Mohammed his real inspiration has been Buddha.
He denies saying this but nevertheless is accused of blasphemy by mullahs.
In 1992, he was arrested for allegedly insulting the Prophet's descendants by writing a poem about animals that, the fundamentalists asserted, contained hidden allegorical meanings.
He managed to beat that charge but now once again his life is in danger.


POSTINGS: New Use for Bus Garage; Health-Care Center Coming to Jamaica
Construction has begun in the Jamaica section of Queens on the first community health facility being built under Mayor David N. Dinkins's new Communicare program.
The 17,000-square-foot structure, formerly an abandoned bus-maintenance station, is at the intersection of Merrick Road and Archer Avenue.
In addition to gutting, re-facing and renovating the building, the project calls for constructing a 10,500-square-foot addition.


Rupert Mackay, Hillary D. Bidwell
Gail S. Bidwell of Greenwich, Conn., and J. Truman Bidwell Jr. of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Hillary Day Bidwell to Rupert Mackay, a son of Stuart M. Mackay of Durban, South Africa, and Anne Mackay of Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, England.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Bidwell teaches Bible studies at St.
Helen's Church in London.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of White &amp; Case in New York.
Her paternal grandfather, the late J. Truman Bidwell, was a chairman of the New York Stock Exchange.


World Markets; Blue Skies Again for British Aerospace
BY rights, these should not be happy times for British Aerospace P.L.C., Britain's dominant military contractor and a major exporter of fighter planes, missiles and ordnance.
Spending on new weapons is being reduced by nations all over the world, and just last week the British Government announced plans to slash defense spending by $2.25 billion, or more than 6 percent.
Yet British Aerospace is riding a wave of newfound investor confidence that has sent its stock up sharply since last fall.
Investors and analysts have been won over by a new management team, led by the chairman, John C. Cahill.
The team has shown its ability to guide British Aerospace safely not just through the downturn in military spending but out of a series of other problems.
Those problems include weakness in its small-aircraft business, years of losses at its Rover automobile subsidiary and a cyclical downturn in its commercial real estate unit.


Game Playing
To the Editor:
As the inventor of the game Famous Canadians, I especially appreciated your article on that very subject.
Presumably you left out writers like Robertson Davies, Mordecai Richler and Saul Bellow because they're not, strictly speaking, entertainers.
But neither, strictly speaking, is "thinker" John Kenneth Galbraith.
So, if you included Galbraith, how could you have excluded the most celebrated 20th-century Canadian of them all, Marshall McLuhan?


Commercial Property: The Flatiron Building; Charm and Favorable Rents Nail Publishers Down
SO what if those glittery new office buildings have large open floors, and this quirky relic is laid out in triangles?
And so what if the new buildings offer advanced electronics, while this one still depends on a hydraulic system to power its 90-year-old elevators?
It is, after all, the Flatiron Building, which has shined since 1902 as a grand architectural beacon at Broadway and 23d Street.
One of New York City's earliest examples of a steel-skeleton skyscraper, it has also endured as an eccentric center of commerce far removed from the economic magnets of midtown and Wall Street.


Back in Town


Data Bank/July 11, 1993


Logistics of Hanging Neuberger Exhibition
PLANNING the current exhibition commemorating Roy R. Neuberger's 90th birthday on July 21 was an exercise in nostalgia, said Lucinda H. Gedeon, director of the Neuberger Museum of Art on the campus of the State University of New York here.
But borrowing works for the show also illustrated the intricacies of current museum practice, she said.
Virtually sitting at the collector's knee, Ms.
Gedeon said, she listened as the museum's namesake and benefactor reminisced about the hundreds of works he has donated to colleges and art institutions nationwide.
Although she lunches with him weekly in Manhattan, where Mr.
Neuberger still works at his brokerage firm, Neuberger &amp; Berman, Ms.
Gedeon said this was the most time she had ever spent with the man whose legacy she oversees.


Latin America's Oil Rush: Tapping Into Foreign Investors
LONG a crusty redoubt of nationalism, the Latin American oil industry is quietly opening to a flood of foreign investment.
In late June, attention focused briefly on the successful privatization of Argentina's state oil company, YPF S.A.
But beyond that sale is a broad movement in the region to attract foreign oil capital and technology.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MILITARY HISTORY NO MARGIN FOR ERROR The Making of the Israeli Air Force.
By Ehud Yonay.
Pantheon, $27.50.


Indulging in Some of Life's Luxuries
IN Sagaponack just about everyone knows the story of the roasted duck.
The sex of the individuals involved may differ.
The amounts of money may change.
But the duck that almost caused fisticuffs at the Sagaponack General Store remains a local legend.
Mary Spellman, who runs the store along with her husband, Don, has a reputation for making an excellent roast duck. (And meat loaf, too, but that's another story.) One day Mrs.
Spellman was selling her last roast duck when a man, or woman, -- here is where the legend has variations -- walked in and said: "Oh that smells good. I have to have one."


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
Rape-crisis centers serve women from an enormous diversity of economic, educational and cultural backgrounds.
For many women, the "rape crisis" that Roiphe so glibly dismisses can mean a chain of events leading to the loss of a job or a home.
Rape-crisis centers can provide medical treatment, legal aid, housing referrals and psychological assessment.
Many of the services originated by college women now help large numbers of nonstudents.
Because the news media pay so little attention to the needs of low-income women, campus activism is often the best hope for generating public awareness of rape and other violence.


No Mets' Takers
To the Sports Editor:
How bad are the Mets?


Natalie Wolcott, Hugo Williams
Natalie Wolcott, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel H. Wolcott 3d of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Hugo Andrew Younger Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Y. Williams of London.
The Rev.
Herbert H. Beardsley, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Advent in Westbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Williams, 30, is an accounting manager at Sotheby's in London.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a managing director in the investment banking division of Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company, the securities brokerage in New York.


In McNally Country, Life Is All and Nothing
Terrence McNally is very much his own playwright -- and an excellent one, too.
But if the Manhattan Theater Club had struck his name from the billing for "A Perfect Ganesh" and let you guess the identity of the author, you could be forgiven for coming up with someone else.
I think I would have hazarded Tennessee Williams as my guess.
Not the incandescent Williams of the 1940's, in full control of his genius and his craft; the injured Williams who came later and whose personal devils manifested themselves in wilder, more exotic landscapes.


Kathrine McCoy, Scott A. Bartlett
Kathrine Finley McCoy, a daughter of Albert and Margaret McCoy of Bridgehampton, L.I., was married there yesterday to Scott August Bartlett, a son of M. Keith and Patricia Bartlett of Penn Yan, N.Y.
The Rev.
Linda Quinlan officiated at the Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
John Lynch, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Bartlett is an architectural designer in Bridgehampton.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in architecture from Columbia University.
Her parents own and operate W. F. McCoy Petroleum Products Inc., a fuel distributor, and the McCoy Bus Company Inc., a bus service, both in Bridgehampton.


Pursuing School Choice In a Political Minefield
When school reopens in September, a class of gifted sixth-grade students from the Upper West Side will make their school choice by moving crosstown en masse to Robert F. Wagner Jr.
High School on East 76th Street, in a neighboring school district.
The politics and diplomacy that led Stephanie Natale, Jory Faiola and a dozen or more of their classmates to sign up in another school district -- like a team of college football stars -- is one tale of many that show how school choice has begun to transform the largest school system in the country.


Sound Bytes; Wooing the Suits and Ties On Behalf of PowerPC
HIS business card lists his official title as "Lord of the High End," but Frank Casanova of Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh division is really "Lover of All Things Fast."
"Fast cars, fast computers, fast food," he said, listing a few of his favorite things.
Mr.
Casanova came to Apple, where he has been a product manager for the Macintosh IIfx and Quadra computers, from Apollo Computer Inc., where he worked on high-performance work stations.


When Red Wine Is Preferred for Fish
FISH and seafood are highlight summer menus.
And to accompany them a bottle of cool white wine is often the answer, but what is the lover of red wine to do?
Devising fish dishes that complement delicious pinot noirs, cabernet sauvignons, merlots, Beaujolais, Riojas, Chiantis, dolcettos and Cotes du Rhone in the cellar is a challenge, but it can be met.
Fish with good flavor, bold seasonings and, at times, a splash of red wine in the sauce suggest uncorking the red instead of the white with dinner.
Serving tuna grilled rare is one easy answer.
The rich, meaty flesh of tuna is an excellent foil for red wine.
Even grilled swordfish or salmon have enough intense flavor to answer a bottle of red wine without being drowned out.
Almost any fish roasted or grilled with tomatoes or a tomato sauce would be another option, especially with some of the lighter reds like Beaujolais or dolcetto.


Jody A. Gonzalez, Robert Werner 3d
Jody Anne Gonzalez and Robert John David Werner 3d, both graduates of the Columbia University School of Law, were married yesterday in the chapel of the Valley Forge Military Academy in Wayne, Pa.
The Rev.
Karl Hommen, a Lutheran minister, and the Rev.
John Callan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
Mrs.
Werner, 26, a graduate of Cornell University, is the daughter of Frank and Priscilla Gonzalez of the Bronx.
The bride is an associate at the Philadelphia law firm of Duane, Morris &amp; Heckscher.
Her father is the principal of P.S. 246 and her mother a secretary at P.S. 1, both in the Bronx.


SAINT HILLARY
Thankfully, my opinion of the First Person was not altered by Michael Kelly's polite exploration of her moral and political philosophy.
In fact, I was even more convinced that she is no more a New Liberal than her spouse is a New Democrat.
Mrs.
Clinton is very, very old wine in a new bottle.
And when she finally finds the words to express her political dogmas, I can tell you the kind of laws and executive orders they will translate into: coercive and equalitarian instruments of radical social change that will expand the role of the state at the expense of individual civil liberty.


For Children of AIDS, New Hope in Newark
In a three-story brick building on a quiet corner of United Hospitals Medical Center here, six doctors and nurses from Myanmar are learning how to treat young patients infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Just a year ago, their government did not even officially recognize H.I.V. and AIDS as a national threat.
Now, the contingent from Myanmar, formerly Burma, is just the latest to visit the clinic headed by Dr.
James M. Oleske, a pioneer researcher and clinician.
Dr.
Oleske was among the first to prove that the AIDS virus could be transmitted to children by their infected mothers.


A Pilgrimage Renews a Life
SOME years ago, when my mother was 86, widowed, resident by then for five years in a Cleveland nursing home, and I was doing research on a book, I took her on a three-week 1,000-mile note-taking drive from Paris south through France and Spain.
And though we had a couple of uncertain moments, the trip was one of the most pleasurable of my life.
As for Mother, this is what I wrote in the little diary I gave her -- and as it turned out, filled on her behalf:
"Mother is full of spirited responses. Days in the car are a long poem of appreciation for the landscape, the colors, the trees, the good road, etc. The memory is less good. Nothing stays. Still, we won't let this be an impediment. Because, don't you see? The moments all along the way are lived, and so, count."


Watch Television And Get the Word
A LAW TAKING EFFECT this month recognizes a startling fact: Nearly 10 percent of the population is at least partially deaf.
The Television Decoder Circuitry Act requires that every television set sold in the United States (except for old stock and small portable models) contain a built-in caption decoder.
The object is to make television more accessible to the estimated 24 million Americans suffering from hearing loss.
In captioning, subtitles are transmitted along with the television signal for viewers unable to hear the audio portion of a broadcast.
Until now, these subtitles could not be seen on regular television sets; a separate decoder costing from $130 to $180 was needed.
But henceforth, decoders will be part of every set and can be activated at the touch of a button.
Because the entire decoder can now be contained on a single microchip, it adds no more than $5 to $15 to the cost of the set.


Clinton in Korea: A Call for a Pacific Community Based on 'Shared Strength'
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's address to the South Korean National Assembly yesterday in Seoul, as transcribed by the Federal News Service and provided by the Reuters news agency:
When President Truman sent American troops to Korea's defense 43 years ago, he said he aimed to prove that, and I quote, "Free men, under God, can build a community of neighbors working together for the good of all." Our efforts together since then have benefited all our peoples, not only the people of our own countries, but in the Asian-Pacific region, all who seek to live in peace and freedom.
Our relationship has made this region more secure, more prosperous, and more free.


JULY 4-10: Sincerity Doubted; F.B.I.'s Director Pushes For Gun Control
When F.B.I.
Director William S. Sessions proposed last week that the Justice Department endorse legislation requiring a five-day waiting period for handgun purchases, senior officials in the department showed little enthusiasm.
In fact, the idea has long been urged by law enforcement officials.
With Mr.
Sessions clinging precariously to his job, some officials saw his recommendation on the measure, the Brady bill, as a limp attempt to support a bill favored by President Clinton, who is deciding whether to dismiss Mr.
Sessions.


At Empire, The Glow Of Greed
FOR more than two years, 19 ornate silver punch bowls have been gathering dust in a Virginia warehouse, hostages in a drama that is transforming the public's perception of Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans.
From their inception more than 60 years ago, the network of national nonprofit companies had seemed beyond reproach.
While the for-profit insurance giants skimmed off the youngest and healthiest customers for themselves, the Blues focused on their mission to offer health insurance to anyone who wanted it, at the lowest possible cost.


The Restaurant Is French. Well, Sort Of.
A GIANT lemon slice hangs outside Citron, an attractive new restaurant on Main Street in Sag Harbor.
It is French, but do not expect hearty bistro fare or haute cuisine classics.
The stars of the lineup are bright, fresh and new.
Lemon pasta, a bowl of fettuccine in a lush, zippy sauce, is Citron at its best.
Lemon sparks the decor as well as the menu.
At the entrance, a basket of the sunny fruit perfumes the air.
Walls are painted a soft lemon-sherbet yellow.
A beautiful antique walnut bar, wood floors, a pressed-tin ceiling, Casablanca-style fans and a wall of exposed brick define Citron.


Lollapalooza Love Story
Amy Stewart spent a full June week fretfully rehearsing how to tell her parents that she'd changed her plans for the summer.
No, the 18-year-old repeated into the mirror, she wouldn't be taking college art classes and working at McDonald's.
Instead, she went on, she'd shortly be going on the road with Lollapalooza, rock-and-roll's summer circus.
Amy was worried.
How would she ever convince her folks that Lollapalooza wasn't a traveling bacchanal but simply the way-hip annual convention of her generation?


Flood Menaces Early French Settlement
From the front porch of a log house built by French settlers in the 1780's, Bernie and Vion Schram nervously watched the creeping waters of the Mississippi River, usually more than a mile away but now within a block.
Floods that have caused billions of dollars in damages to crops, homes and businesses in the Midwest are also threatening to destroy assets that no insurance policy could replace: cherished remnants of history.


Protectionism Is Our Most Important Product
THE MYTH OF FREE TRADE A Plan for America's Economic Revival.
By Ravi Batra. 274 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $23.


HOT TUNA
What a tuna does to survive is ultimately what makes it somebody's dinner.
In order to live, it needs oxygen-rich water.
This induces the tuna, a giant-sized mackerel, to swim at bursts of up to 40 miles an hour, zooming from the subtropics in the winter to the temperate north in summer on a schedule known only to this particular creature.
And though the tuna is as much a predator as any corporate animal, its compulsion to surge ahead makes it curiously impervious to the implements of its captors -- the harpoon, the longline, the net.
This, along with the fact that a tuna can weigh up to 1,500 pounds, was the reason the annual tuna-fishing contest in Provincetown, Mass., was once such a fierce fete.


Israel Again Seeks A Deal With an Outcast
WITH an understanding nod from the United States, Israel is exploring possible ways to buy off North Korea to keep it from selling advanced Scud missiles to Iran.
Perhaps inevitably, questions arise about whether Israel is acting purely on its own.
Its track record is such that it would not be hard to imagine it serving as point man for other countries -- say, the United States, or perhaps even Saudi Arabia -- with a similar interest in easing North Korea's isolation or its appetite for missile sales to Iran.


Danbury's Gorgeous Culinary Mosaic
SMALL as it is, Danbury has restaurants that reflect its varied ethnic makeup.
There aren't many towns its size (population 67,000) with three Thai and three Portuguese restaurants, two each of Lebanese, Hungarian, German and Mexican, along with Cuban, Greek, French and Spanish.
And that's not even counting the numerous Italian and Chinese places or the Vietnamese, Korean and other ethnic grocery stores and delicatessens in town.


Opposition Mounts To West Side Stadium
If the Yankees were to relocate to a new ball park upon the West Side railyard, a possibility now being pushed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, local community board members say construction, traffic and mass transportation problems would choke the area.
Even before a new stadium could be completed, its construction, plus that of Route 9A -- the scaled back Westway project that will spread from the Battery to 59th Street along the riverfront -- and other projects that could built in roughly the same time frame, would generate traffic havoc, they say.


Corrections
A brief report accompanying a picture essay on page 29 of the Arts and Leisure section today incompletely listed the problems that put a group of teen-agers at risk.
In addition to unsettled living situations, two of the teen-agers are at a high school for troubled girls, and one is from a family affected by AIDS.


Revolving-Door Diplomacy
PEACE PROCESS American Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict Since 1967.
By William B. Quandt. 612 pp.
Berkeley, Calif.: The Brookings Institution/University of California Press.
Cloth, $38.95.
Paper, $15.95.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y.  $385,000
44 Loop Road  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; country kitchen, den, spiral staircase, brick terrace; 1 acre; taxes, $10,041.
Cortlandt, N.Y.  $190,000
220 Buttonwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; family room, wet bar, workshop, deck, one-car garage; taxes, $4,475.
Harrison, N.Y.  $77,000
85 Columbus Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old co-op; eat-in kitchen, w/w carpeting, pool; maintanance, $463.
Bridgewater, Conn.  $199,900
9 Morrissey Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old Cape Cod; reproduction of 1910 farmhouse, stone fireplace and cathedral ceiling in living room, large closets, 3.6 acres; taxes $4,357.
Sharon, Conn.  $186,000
East Street
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath 60-year-old farmhouse; fireplace, basement workroom, old orchards, 2.5 acres; taxes $1,742.
Vernon, Conn.  $167,750
23 Jeff Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 10- year-old ranch; dining room, track lighting, sunken living room, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,165.
OTHER AREAS Mahwah, N.J.  $299,900
8 Greene Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, pool; taxes $3,760.
Park Ridge, N.J.  $159,000
14 Glendale Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,310.
East Hills, L.I.  $275,000
45 Sherrard Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, den, c/a; taxes $5,200.


Sports of The Times; A Working Golfer, Wife And Mother
HALL of Fame touring golf pro. Mother of three young daughters. Baseball wife.
One or two of those lives would be enough for most women, but Nancy Lopez juggles all three without losing a stroke, a diaper or a husband.
At age 36, she remains the queen of the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, the one the galleries cherish the most, the one whose phone rings the most.


Manager's Profile
Shelby M.C. Davis
Fund: New York Venture, $690 million in assets; 4.75% sales charge; manager since 1969 inception.
Also, Selected American Shares, $450 million in assets; no sales charge; manager since May 1. (Sponsor: Selected/Venture Advisers, Santa Fe, N.M.).


Large Masonry Projects May Need Special Tools
DESPITE their sturdy appearance brick structures of all kinds, including walls, chimneys and barbecues, need periodic joint repair and, sometimes, other maintenance to keep them intact.
Repairing joints, called repointing, is necessary when the mortar between bricks develops cracks or begins to crumble.
The job is sometimes tedious, but not too difficult.
It consists of chiseling away part of the existing mortar and adding new material.
Repointing can be done over small areas at a time, making it convenient for amateurs.
But consider hiring a professional mason if the work involves dangerous heights or if the joints require delicate shaping.
Also consider hiring or at least consulting a mason before repointing or repairing any brickwork more than 100 years old.
That is because modern mortar, when mixed according to standard directions, is often harder than the old bricks and can cause them to crack or flake.


How to Undo a Century of Racism in Politics
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court ruling on the constitutionality of Congressional districts based on distribution of minorities in states has redrawn the battle lines of minority empowerment.
One approach to achieve equitable voting in minority communities has been to allow state legislatures to create county, state and Federal districts to represent large racial minorities.
In the South and major cities, often an entire Congressional delegation of eight or nine would not include a single African-American, though African-Americans were 35 percent of the overall population.
There was obviously something wrong with this system.
The idea of creating the majority minority districts in these instances caused a furor and sparked resistance throughout the country.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 intended just that.


Thomas Hudgins and Tracey Morgan
Tracey Elizabeth Morgan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Morgan of Greenwich, Conn., was married Friday to Thomas Harlan Hudgins, a son of Thomas M. Hudgins of New York and Elizabeth S. Hudgins of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas L. Stiers performed the Congregational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Hudgins, 27, graduated from Princeton University.
She is a freelance research editor.
Her father is the senior vice president of marketing of Philip Morris U.S.A. in New York.


In New Albums, Forget the Glue
NOT all amateur photographers take care of their prints -- some still let the pictures pile up in desk drawers.
A number of manufacturers, sensing opportunity, have begun making photo albums in the last few years.
But these are not the old-fashioned paste-a-picture-on-a-page type.
The albums can be humorous, tell stories or entice people to write about themselves and their pictures.


Young to Start Over in Relief
The streak won't end with a start for Anthony Young.
The Mets, after spending more than a month trying to let Young establish himself as a starter, and perhaps even win a game, have reassigned the right-hander with the record 26 straight defeats to the bullpen.
"We're past trying to help Anthony out of his troubles," said Manager Dallas Green.
"Now, we have to talk about the team. And the team's bullpen has faltered."


Lawyers and Contempt
To the Editor:
Regarding "Finding a Lifeboat in a Flood of Asbestos Litigation" (July 4), about companies trying to cut the high cost of litigation: Several years ago, I was one of many daily commuters traveling between Philadelphia and New York.
Monthly passes saving about 70 percent of the cost of one-way, nondiscounted tickets were used by all the commuters -- save one.
He made the trip every business day for months, each time buying one-way tickets from the conductor and paying a penalty fare even higher than the full one-way fare.
When asked about this odd behavior, our travel companion blandly replied that he was an attorney.
The fare didn't matter, he said, since his firm passed it along to the corporate client.


Charter Oak College: Another View
I can appreciate the need to lighten up after the recent dire, front-page article "Top Graduates in Science Also Put Dreams on Hold," (June 6) which outlined the trials of recent top-notch college graduates.
But as a graduate of Charter Oak who was less than satisfied with the college, I was disturbed by the overwhelming positive tone of "Unconventional College Finds Adults Are Good Students" (June 13).


On Sunday; Turning Words Of Compassion Into Solutions
IT is up to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo now.
For weeks he and the State Legislature have been playing chicken in Albany with the homeless mentally ill.
Thursday at 7:15 A.M. the Governor's closest ally in the Legislature, the Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, decided he wasn't going to be the bad guy in this game of chicken.
So he supported the landmark legislation to house more of the mentally ill in the community, dropped it in the Governor's lap and left town for the summer.
Now it is up to the Governor who speaks so eloquently for the poor.
Will he sign the bill into law?
Advocates for the homeless are hoping.
So are the people who were moved by his speech at the Democratic Convention last July, moved by his beautiful, compassionate words, ("Why can we not find the wealth to respond to the quiet catastrophes that every day oppress the lives of thousands?").
They are waiting to see if Governor Cuomo meant those beautiful words.


On Prison's Little Acre, Time Is Well Spent
"THIS is farmland," Reginald Wiltshire said as he labored in the dark soil.
"It is good soil for planting." What is unusual about this farmland is that it is inside the fence of the Westchester County Correctional Facility here.
Mr.
Wiltshire, a Yonkers resident who worked on farms as a youngster in North Carolina, is not a farmer.
He is an inmate of the prison, serving time for a probation violation.


Ms. Sunshine And Mr. Hirsch
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Sunshine of Great Neck, L.I., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Deborah Lynn Sunshine, and David Lawrence Hirsch, a son of Patricia Hirsch of White Plains.
Ms.
Sunshine, 26, is a special-events coordinator at the Pubsun Corporation, a marketing and public relations company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester.
Her father is the president of JSO Associates in Great Neck, a company that sells and distributes frozen food.
Her mother, Joan Sunshine, is the nursing administrator at Winthrop Pediatric Associates, a clinic at Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, L.I.


When Red Wine Is Preferred for Fish
FISH and seafood are highlight summer menus.
And to accompany them a bottle of cool white wine is often the answer, but what is the lover of red wine to do?
Devising fish dishes that complement delicious pinot noirs, cabernet sauvignons, merlots, Beaujolais, Riojas, Chiantis, dolcettos and Cotes du Rhone in the cellar is a challenge, but it can be met.
Fish with good flavor, bold seasonings and, at times, a splash of red wine in the sauce suggest uncorking the red instead of the white with dinner.
Serving tuna grilled rare is one easy answer.
The rich, meaty flesh of tuna is an excellent foil for red wine.
Even grilled swordfish or salmon have enough intense flavor to answer a bottle of red wine without being drowned out.
Almost any fish roasted or grilled with tomatoes or a tomato sauce would be another option, especially with some of the lighter reds like Beaujolais or dolcetto.


So Young, So Serious
Larenz Tate is working with directors who are practically his peers.
The teen-age actor made his film debut in May playing a killer in "Menace II Society," which was directed by Allen and Albert Hughes, who are 21.
Last week in Wilmington, N.C., he began work on his second film, "The Inkwell," the story of a nerdy teen-ager who visits his wealthy cousins in Oak Bluffs, Martha's Vineyard's black enclave.
The film is being directed by Matty Rich, 20, who directed "Straight Out of Brooklyn."


JAPAN'S SOCIALISTS MOVING TO CENTER
There was no better symbol of the remarkable speed of the political changes sweeping Japan than a scene in a hotel here late last month, when Sadao Yamahana, the chairman of the Socialist Party, welcomed not only his onetime foes from the right, but also their diplomatic and defense policies.
The deal, all but unthinkable a month ago, reversed decades of fierce resistance by the left to Japan's security treaty with the United States and even the existence of a military here -- policies that in the eyes of many Japanese were what made the Socialist Party socialist.


Luxury Train To Saratoga
Travelers to Saratoga this summer can arrive in style on the Saratoga Limited, a private train from Grand Central Terminal in New York City.
The train -- pulled by a leased engine and consisting of a 1928 New York Central business car with an observation platform and a 1946 dining and passenger car refurbished in Victorian style with mahogany interior -- will operate for the duration of the thoroughbred meeting at the Saratoga Race Course, from July 28 to Aug. 30.
The 180-mile trip, mainly along the eastern shore of the Hudson River, will take three and a half hours each way.
The train is scheduled to leave New York at 8:15 A.M. daily except Tuesdays, when there is no racing, and return to New York at 11 P.M.


Editors' Note
A review of Harrison E. Salisbury's 29th book, "Heroes of My Time," appears on page 25 of The Times Book Review today.
Mr. Salisbury died on Monday, after the section had gone to press.


Now Batting . . .
To the Sports Editor:
Great news for Mets fans: Joe McIlvaine will be returning to solve all the team's problems.


Spanish Police
To the Editor: While vacationing in Madrid, we were robbed twice, losing all our money, credit cards, passports and ID cards.
While the crime was going on in a subway train, a Metro official saw the act, but did not try to stop the crime until I discovered that my belt pack was opened.
We searched a young man in a subway station and discovered my wallet in his sweatshirt.
Instantly, the young man started to run away.
We shouted and chased after him.
No one attempted to stop him, including policemen nearby.


Done Fixing? Repair to the Computer
MY '65 Caddy convertible has a 26-gallon gas tank and a thirst for premium, so it doesn't go on many outings.
These days, it pretty much lives in the backyard, although "lives" may not be exactly the word I am looking for here.
I was, in fact, trying to coax some life into it last week, halfway under the hood and struggling to change the spark plugs, the coil and the distributor points.
I was having a good time, and it occurred to me that, while electronic ignitions have been a boon to the consumer, they have put a definite crimp in what used to be known as shade-tree mechanics.


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
It does Roiphe's readers a disservice to quote Catharine MacKinnon's definition of rape without presenting MacKinnon's larger argument.
As I understand it, MacKinnon intends to define rape from the perspective of the assailed because "the crime of rape is defined and adjudicated from the male standpoint." She argues that the "problem is that the injury of rape lies in the meaning of the act to its victim, but the standard for its criminality lies in the meaning of the act to the assailant." That is, it may look, smell and feel like rape, but if the rapist doesn't think it is, it isn't.
Given that, it makes good sense to counsel young women first to know whether they want to say yes or no (by neither overdrinking nor overdrugging) and second to say no clearly.
ANN DARBY New York, N.Y.


Fred Weick, 93, Dies in Florida; Was Pioneer in Airplane Design
Fred E. Weick, who was inspired by the boyhood sight of an early airplane to become a pioneering aviation engineer and designer, died on Thursday at a hospital in Vero Beach, Fla., where he lived.
He was 93.
The cause was heart disease, his family said.


Whose Vacation Is It, Anyway?
ONE of the biggest problems about traveling with kids, at least from a kid's point of view, is that all parents and grown-ups were once kids and consequently think they know what kids like, which means that they do totally ridiculous things like singing about 100 bottles of beer on the wall in the misguided notion that this will make a journey pass quickly.
This was just one of several observations offered by five well-traveled fourth and fifth graders at the Hillside School in Montclair, N.J., consulted as a panel of experts by The New York Times.
The basic premise was that if you want to know about holiday travel with youngsters, you ask youngsters.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Gramercy Park
ONCE home to Edwin Booth, Theodore Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy, Gramercy Park, a relaxed neighborhood at the foot of Lexington Avenue and just a mile south of Grand Central Terminal, seems a bit out of place in bustling New York City.
The neighborhood still has a 19th- century atmosphere, enhanced by the large private park that it surrounds.
Two houses on 19th Street -- also known as Block Beautiful for its many plantings -- jut out past others because they were built in 1828, before zoning mandated deeper setbacks.


Julie Hall, Miles Dinneen
Juliette Hammond Hall, the daughter of Richard and Sharon Hall of Loudonville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Miles Terrence Dinneen, a son of Terrence and Dorothy Dinneen of Hawkes Bay, New Zealand.
The Presbyterian ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Gailey McIntyre at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Dinneen, 24, is known as Julie.
She graduated from Skidmore College and is to start graduate studies in elementary education in September at the College of St.
Rose in Albany.


Elizabeth Ablow, Richard Wall
An October wedding is planned for Elizabeth Ann Ablow, a daughter of Judith and Dr.
Ronald Ablow of New York, and Richard Dean Wall, a son of the late Dorothy D. and John B. Wall.
Ms.
Ablow is an aquatic ecologist in Bellevue, Wash., for Ebasco Environmental, an environmental consulting firm in New York.
Her father is a professor of radiology at Columbia University and the director of radiology at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, both in New York.
Her mother is a adjunct lecturer of English as a second language at Bronx Community College.


Michigan's Food
To the Editor: Laura Mansnerus, in "Biking Along Michigan's Hilly Shores" (June 6), was surprised to find a few good places to eat "in an area not known for cuisine."


Punch, Conductor
To the Editor: The letters under "Tickets in France" (Letters, May 30) reminded me of a similar incident with a French conductor 30 years ago, on our honeymoon.
We had spent two months enjoying various cities of Europe on our way to Yugoslavia.
We returned by train via Italy and France and took the boat to England.
When my husband purchased our tickets in Italy, the two clerks were arguing and no one put a cover on my ticket.
The reactions of various conductors has been an often repeated anecdote.


County to Combat TB With Clinic Expansion
WITH Westchester reporting the second-highest rate of tuberculosis in the state, county officials have announced that they will spend $550,000 for a pilot program this year to expand clinic and educational services to prevent the disease -- which has become resistant to many drugs -- and to increase supervision of those who have already contracted it.
Last year, 135 cases of tuberculosis were reported in Westchester, up 48 percent from 91 new cases documented the year before, making the county second only to New York City in the rate of infection.


Black Enterprises Grow and Get Noticed
MANY black leaders in Chicago were upset last month when the Johnson Products Company, one of the nation's leading symbols of black enterprise, announced that it would be acquired by the IVAX Corporation, an international conglomerate.
For decades, Chicago-based Johnson Products dominated the market in personal and hair care for blacks with Ultra Sheen, Classy Curl and other products, and its sale means the loss of a very powerful institution, the black leaders lamented.


42d Street
To the Editor:
A quickie plan for "interim" development of Times Square shouldn't be all that difficult  [ "Rethinking 42d St. for Next Decade," June 27 ] .
If Cora Cahan and Rebecca Robertson  [ presidents, respectively, of New 42d Street Inc. and the 42d Street Development Project of the New York State Urban Development Corporation ]  and their cohorts will walk across town to "Red Grooms at Grand Central," they will find their answer incongruously displayed in Grand Central Terminal's elegantly restored waiting room.


Miss Samek And Mr. Hopkins
Anne Mariejane Samek, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Samek of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Hopkins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Hopkins of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
The Rev.
James Gardner performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Rooke Chapel of Bucknell University in Lewisburg, Pa.
Mrs.
Hopkins, 28, a graduate of Bucknell, received a master's degree in education from the University of Pennsylvania, where she is to receive another master's, in educational counseling, next month.


Steve Dunlop and Carole Pierson
Carole Pierson, a writer, and Steve Dunlop, a reporter for WNBC-TV in New York, plan to marry in September.
Miss Pierson, 30, owns Song Lake Productions, a video production company in Palisades, N.Y., and is a story consultant to the Hayden Planetarium in New York.
She is the daughter of Arlette Chappe of San Diego, and Robert N. Shapiro of New York.


The Burden Of Celebrity
IN a field of parked Jaguars, Saabs and BMW's at Sag Pond Farm in Sagaponack, L.I., last weekend, beyond the din of the party tent where a fund-raiser for the Hamptons International Film Festival was in progress, Barbra Streisand was in a little huddle with her friends Donna Karan and Stephan Weiss.
Having come to see Steven Spielberg only to be told that he wasn't there, Ms.
Streisand apparently had lost her will to venture forth.
"I wanted to see Steven," she said. "Steven's my friend."


Air on Planes Questioned
Both the Department of Transportation and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta are investigating air quality on planes and its possible role in the transmission of respiratory disease.
One C.D.C. investigation involves a Continental Airlines flight attendant who was diagnosed with active pulmonary tuberculosis.
The C.D.C. sought to contact and examine members of her flight crews, and found that two crew members tested positive for the disease.
Three other investigations involve tubercular passengers on Northwest, Delta and Alaska airlines.
Dr.
Mark Miller, a public health physician assisting in the C.D.C. investigation, noted that "an airline cabin is a closed, confined space, and we're trying to determine what the risk factors are." He added, "We make the assumption that the more frequent the air exchange, the better it is for not acquiring tuberculosis."


For Some, Rituals of Abuse Replace Youthful Courtship
James Fauntleroy, 15, says the teen-agers in his circle either don't date or don't admit to it.
"Nobody wants a relationship except the girls," he said, sitting on a park bench in downtown Stamford, Conn., listening to music on a hot summer night.
"The guys don't want to look soft to their friends."


The Patent System Ain't Broke; Don't Fix It
To the Editor:
Timothy O'Hearn has it right that incentives provided by patent law create jobs.
He is wrong on almost everything else.
The American patent system is not invisible -- "political heavyweights" in Washington have indeed discovered patents.
For example, United States Trade Representative Mickey Kantor and his predecessor, Carla Hills, support restrictions on compulsory patent licensing in the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Detroit's Papers Under Fire At Trial of Officers in Beating
The court and the news media were at odds again this week in the trial of three white former police officers accused of beating an unemployed black steelworker to death on Nov. 5.
Judge George W. Crockett 3d, who has made no secret of his mistrust of the local newspapers, threatened to hold a photographer and editor in contempt of court after their newspaper published a photograph of a prosecution witness standing outside the courthouse.


Iraqi No-Fly Zone
To the Editor:
Your June 30 report that a United States jet patrolling Iraq fired a missile at an artillery site mischaracterizes the legal status of the no-fly zones over Iraqi airspace.
The no-fly zones were not "imposed by the United Nations." Security Council Resolution 688, which the United States relies on for justification, demands only that Iraq stop repressing its people; it does not authorize any state to use force to protect Iraqi civilians.


The Executive Computer; A Program That Transcends Incompatibility
WHILE most new software on display at the recent PC Expo computer show in New York consisted of improvements to established programs, one fresh face stood out.
Adobe Acrobat, which is just reaching retail stores, is an innovative and impressive technical achievement.
It promises to add a dimension to the way people communicate over computer networks.
Acrobat, created by Adobe Systems Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., allows Macintosh and Windows computers to exchange fully formatted documents over networks, including electronic mail systems and by modem, regardless of what applications and fonts are on the receiving machine.
In other words, it breaks down the barriers that have kept people from seeing on one computer screen a complex document that was created on a different computer.


Third Party


Abby Sykes, Philip Downey
Abbitt Ruth Sykes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Sykes Jr. of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Philip Alexander Downey, a son of Beatriz G. Downey of Barrington, R.I., and the late Kevin P. Downey Sr.
The Rev.
Edward M. Story, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Rangeley, Maine.
The Rev.
Paul Cote, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Downey, who is know as Abby, graduated from Wittenberg University, as did her husband.
She also received a master's degree in education from Cabrini College.
Her father, former headmaster of Rumson Country Day School, is an educational consultant in Red Bank, N.J.


'Shadow Of the Original'?
To the Editor:
As the founder of the Classic Stage Company and its artistic director from 1967 to 1985, I must respond to Steven Winn's article about the new leadership of the American Conservatory Theater  [ "A Director Shakes Up Unshockable San Francisco," June 13 ] , in which he describes the Classic Stage Company as a "somewhat obscure" theater.


A Romanian Poet Examines the Land of Immigrants
A young Jewish dissident and poet, Andrei Codrescu left Transylvania in 1965 when the Ceau cescu Government sold him to Israel for $10,000.
He made his way instead to the United States, where the Federal Bureau of Investigation soon began a file on the suspiciously intellectual 19-year-old (who was forced to wait a decade longer than normal to become a citizen).
In 1983, at a party in honor of his newfound citizenship, friends showered Mr.
Codrescu with American icons -- cherry pies, autographed baseballs, flag toothpicks -- adding the proper irreverence to a moment that even an anarchist poet found moving.
And then last year, with the cameras rolling for his first-person documentary, "Road Scholar," Mr.
Codrescu, savoring the irony, rose from between two hulking immigration officials to deliver the official welcoming speech at a swearing-in ceremony of new citizens.


A la Carte; Summer Means It's Time for Lobsters, and They're Plentiful at the Island's Eateries
EARLY July means more than hot dogs, fireworks and the realization that summer has really arrived.
It is also the time for lobsters.
True, serious lobster lovers can purchase them all year, but now the weather is warm and the lobsters are plentiful.
It is even possible, with some scouting around, to find restaurants with lobsters on the menu at prices that do not resemble the nation's military budget.


World Markets; Blue Skies Again for British Aerospace
BY rights, these should not be happy times for British Aerospace P.L.C., Britain's dominant military contractor and a major exporter of fighter planes, missiles and ordnance.
Spending on new weapons is being reduced by nations all over the world, and just last week the British Government announced plans to slash defense spending by $2.25 billion, or more than 6 percent.
Yet British Aerospace is riding a wave of newfound investor confidence that has sent its stock up sharply since last fall.
Investors and analysts have been won over by a new management team, led by the chairman, John C. Cahill.
The team has shown its ability to guide British Aerospace safely not just through the downturn in military spending but out of a series of other problems.
Those problems include weakness in its small-aircraft business, years of losses at its Rover automobile subsidiary and a cyclical downturn in its commercial real estate unit.


Accidentally in the Path of Package Bomber, 23 Lives Are Indelibly Changed
Shrapnel from a homemade bomb tore through Hugh Campbell Scrutton's heart in a windswept parking lot here in 1985, and the computer store owner cried for God's help as he died beside a Dumpster.
Earlier that year, a similar explosion at the University of California at Berkeley blew the fingers off Capt.
John E. Hauser's right hand, ending the flying career of the ambitious young Air Force pilot and engineering student and shattering his dream of becoming an astronaut.


Mario Bauza, Band Leader, Dies; Champion of Latin Music Was 82
Mario Bauza, an instrumentalist and band leader who helped change the sound of American music, died at his home in Manhattan yesterday.
He was 82.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Lourdes.


Ellen S. Dweck and Richard D. Baum
Ellen Stephanie Dweck, a director of advertising for Forbes magazine in New York, and Dr.
Richard David Baum, a urologist in Ridgewood, N.J., were married yesterday at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Rabbi David Possner officiated.
The bride, a summa cum laude graduate of Boston University, is a daughter of Phylis and Melvin Savage of Boca Raton, Fla.
Her father, a consultant in Boca Raton to Comsat, the satellite communications company, is a former director of the Skylab space project of NASA.


Foiled in 14th: Yanks Just Can't Win
Maybe the Yankees will reflect back on this horrid road trip in November and claim that it built their character.
Or maybe they will reflect back on this treacherous trek and classify it as the trip that doomed them, the trip when first place was at their fingertips and they failed to employ a tight-enough grasp.
After today's numbing loss, the latter scenario seemed to be the more likely one.
How many devastating losses can a contending team absorb?
How many one-run defeats are too many when a club is pursuing a pennant?
The Yankees added one more frustrating loss to their collection today when Torey Lovullo ended a 14-inning skirmish by rapping Paul Gibson's 0-2 curveball for a bases-loaded single over drawn-in center fielder Bernie Williams to catapult the Angels to a 3-2 victory at Anaheim Stadium.
The draining loss was an ugly exclamation point for a draining trip.


Free Trade Pact Is Still a Mystery To Many in U.S.
Only four months before Congress is expected to vote on the sweeping package of economic changes known as the North American Free Trade Agreement, a New York Times/CBS News poll finds that nearly half of Americans say they have not heard anything about the agreement.
Although President Clinton has often spoken of the consumer benefits of global trade, as he did in Tokyo last week, the White House seems to be letting other parties set the agenda for the national debate on the North American pact.
In recent months, Mexican officials and business executives have criss-crossed the United States promoting the agreement, which would create a single free trade zone encompassing Canada, Mexico and the United States.
Meanwhile, Ross Perot and some American labor groups and environmentalists have been opposing it with increasing vehemence.
A Stalled Campaign
Administration officials say they cannot begin a sales campaign until side agreements about environmental and labor issues are completed and until Congress ends work on the budget.
But the poll charts the problems ahead in selling Congress on the pact, which within the next 15 years would eliminate tariffs and other trade barriers among the three nations.


Ship Conditions Worsen as U.S. and Mexico Discuss Chinese Aliens
Sanitary conditions continued to deteriorate today for 659 undocumented Chinese aliens aboard three ships off the Mexican coast, as officials in Washington and Mexico City tried to find a solution to an increasingly embarrassing diplomatic problem.
The men and women who were discovered crammed on the three rusting commercial vessels when the ships were stopped late Tuesday have been given food and water by the United States Coast Guard.
But the Coast Guard has no way of providing portable toilets, wash stands or other sanitary facilities.
The international waters in which the ships are anchored, 64 miles southwest of Ensenada, Mexico, are reported to be calm.


Review/Dance; Free Association in Technicolor From Paul Taylor
The American Dance Festival is celebrating its 60th anniversary this summer by commissioning new works from major American modern-dance companies at its present home on the Duke University campus.
Paul Taylor's new "Spindrift," an ambiguous but haunting exercise in free association that suggests a Technicolor dream of epic proportions, was the latest premiere in this series over the weekend.


INSIDE
Somalia Effort Threatened
Conflicts in the United Nations operation in Mogadishu, with troops taking orders from their own capitals instead of from the central command, are adding to the city's instability and threatening relief work.
Page A8.
Bosnians Offer Their Plan
Bosnia's collective presidency adopted a plan for a federal state, patching up a split in the leadership but ignoring a Croatian-Serbian proposal to partition the country.
Page A8.
Marriages of Convenience
For hundreds of gay service members, marriage is a lie, but it provides a shield against questions.
Page A10.
Attack at Manhattan Pool
Three youths were charged with sexual abuse in an attack on a teen-ager at a Manhattan pool.
Page B3.
Victory Continues at 53
Jack Nicklaus captured the United States Senior Open, his first triumph in two years.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Mets' Battle Cry: Catch The Marlins!
The theme of the night was tempered expectations.
Before the game, Joe McIlvaine, the new head of baseball operations, warned that there will be no major overhaul of the Mets' roster during the All-Star Game break, which begins today.
And afterward -- after the Mets had lost, 2-1, to the Los Angeles Dodgers -- Manager Dallas Green set a second-half goal for his ball club that was simple, and realistic, but just a bit sad.


Blanket Wars of Central Park Concertgoers Spoil the Mood; Special Night Out
To the Editor:
There were many people with special smiles in the audience at the Pavarotti concert in Central Park (editorial, July 1).
They were the 1,000 frail elderly and disabled individuals from all over the Big Apple who arrived in ambulettes, buses and cars at a special area next to the stage, protected from the crowds and set up through the efforts of the New York City Parks Department.


Tough Calls: Enforcing a Flight Ban Over Bosnia
Early last month a helicopter painted with a red cross was flying to the besieged Bosnian town of Gorazde to pick up critically wounded Muslims.
During the flight, it was identified by a NATO radar plane as a possible violator of the United Nations ban on flights over Bosnia, said an official of an organization that monitors relief and peacekeeping operations there.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the danger of flooding in Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., and the town's efforts to build a protective levee, rendered the title of a Mark Twain book incorrectly.
It is "Life on the Mississippi," not "Travels Along the Mississippi."


Corrections
A front-page picture on Friday showing flooding in Portage des Sioux, Mo., bore an incorrect credit.
It was supplied by Reuters, not The Associated Press.


Naushahr Journal; Iran's Old Soldiers Die, as Suicides
Like hundreds of thousands of young Iranian men, Kazem Ahangar was once a disciple of war.
But the violence he turned on Iraqi soldiers he has turned against himself.
"I tried to do it with pills, Valium and depressants, mostly," the 28-year-old veteran said, seated on a white pebble beach along the Caspian Sea.


Air Fare War of '92 Moves to Court
During last summer's air-fare war, vacationers took whimsical trips on cheap tickets and business travelers elbowed their way onto formerly peaceable flights suddenly crammed with novice flyers.
Though that low-price airlift is now a memory, the fare war will flare anew today in different form, on a different battleground.


Finding a Hot Ticket to a Job in a Beauty Course
Beauty has been good business since time immemorial and still is.
It is a business that Ann Panisse, a 23-year-old secretary from Ridgewood, Queens, is trying to break into.
So is Robin Humphrey, a 26-year-old Bronx department store worker, who thinks cosmetology will allow her flexibility to be with her 3-year-old son.
Johnny Thomas, 30, just out of a drug-rehabilitation program in Far Rockaway, Queens, sees it as a new beginning.


Mother Nature's Moods Skew TV Habits
When the weather is blistering hot, people may decide it is wise to stay indoors.
But when they do, they apparently spend more time staring at the air-conditioner than the television set.
On the other hand, when it rains and rains, more people dry out in front of the tube.
Hot and Cold Viewing
These are the logical conclusions to be drawn from some information on viewing patterns in two of the country's weather-battered areas last week, compiled by the A. C. Nielsen Company.
On the East Coast, where it was torrid, the use of television showed no perceptible increase.
In the Midwest, which was awash in rain, viewing levels shot up substantially.


At Posro Komics, Heroes Defy the Odds, and Stereotypes
Staring out a smudged window in his cramped home office, Roland Laird cannot see past the squat, sprawling apartment complex across the street.
But with a pen in hand and the thumping pulse of hip-hop music in the air, Mr.
Laird closes his eyes and sees the crowded streets of Harlem, losing himself in the rhythms and riddles of the inner city.


Northwest Sweetens Machinists' Pact
Northwest Airlines and leaders of its machinists union yesterday accepted a package of concessions, clearing another big hurdle in Northwest's attempt to cut labor costs and avoid filing for bankruptcy.
As expected, the agreement stemmed from small enticements for workers, obtained by modifying details of the union's five individual labor contracts.
The two sides agreed on changes and concessions that involved little money and would have little effect on the beleaguered finances of the nation's fourth-largest carrier.


Karl E. Metzger, 81, Ex-Secretary Of Rutgers and Metuchen Mayor
Karl E. Metzger, a former secretary of Rutgers University, Mayor of Metuchen, N.J., and director of the Board of Freeholders in Middlesex County, N.J., died on Thursday at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 81 and lived in New Brunswick.
His wife said the cause was unclear, but he had had surgery involving his aorta two years ago.
Mr.
Metzger was the university's secretary -- seeing that university policies were carried out -- from 1950 until he retired in 1976.
He was concurrently secretary of the university's board, serving as a coordinator between the university staff and faculty and members of the board.


American Winner Trotting in Father's Hoofprints
Barry Bonds, Ken Griffey Jr. and Brett Hull followed their fathers' footsteps to stardom in the world of sports.
The latest offspring with a chance to ditto his daddy's success is American Winner -- a four-footed athlete -- who set a world record Saturday night en route to winning the final of the $313,699 Yonkers Trot, the first leg of trotting's triple crown.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Paul Carey, first baseman, to Rochester of the International League.
Activated Sherman Obando, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.


When the Private Sector Best Serves the Public
WHEN Mayor Edward G. Rendell of Philadelphia vowed to clean up City Hall, he enlisted a New Yorker, Larry Colin of Westchester, to do his dirty work.
Mr.
Rendell, a former New Yorker himself, has been in the vanguard of an episodic national movement that goes under the faddish rubric of "re-inventing government," but whose fundamental agenda was articulated long ago by Lincoln.
Its premise is largely this: that a government of the people, by the people and for the people should do only what the people cannot do for themselves or what government can do for them more efficiently.


Brooklyn Man Held in Shooting of Friend
A 24-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested yesterday in the early-morning shooting death of his friend in a grocery store, the police said.
He was also charged with trying to shoot the store owner.
Rumors had spread in the Midwood neighborhood that the owner had shot the victim, but police community-affairs officers quickly circulated in an attempt to dispel them.
The store owner, whom the police did not identify, is Korean, and the two customers were black.
A number of black residents of the neighborhood gathered at the store after the shooting, and the police were concerned to diffuse any potential confrontation.


Protestants Set to March in an Uneasy Belfast
Thousands of Protestants in this British province plan to march in the streets on Monday to celebrate the proudest day in their history, July 12, 1690, when Roman Catholics under King James II were routed in the Battle of the Boyne by James's son-in-law, the Protestant William of Orange.
That battle established in the Province of Ulster the Protestant domination that is the center of the civil strife that has killed 3,065 people since 1969.


Another Federal Fiasco
Randy Weaver was a white supremacist.
He lived as a heavily armed recluse in a cabin on a ridge in rural Idaho.
Neither of those things is against the law in the United States.
In a trial in Boise, Federal agents painted Mr.
Weaver, a former Green Beret, as a neo-Nazi fugitive who had been planning an armed confrontation with the Government.
But when the trial ended on Thursday, the Government's case was in tatters, contradicted by many of its own witnesses.
And serious questions remained about how Federal agencies deal with religious and political eccentrics who may hold distasteful views but aren't necessarily a threat to society.


Nicklaus Regains Golden Touch
At a time when the greatest career in golf seemed on the verge of ending with a whimper, Jack Nicklaus produced at least one more reverberating bang today by winning the 14th United States Senior Open in a classic duel with his old rival Tom Weiskopf.
With the graceful Weiskopf in full form two holes ahead of him, Nicklaus called on his legendary poise to conquer the uncertainty of two years without a victory, then seized the moment with a vintage birdie on the 70th hole, followed by two door-slamming pars.


We'll All Pay for Denying Abortion to the Poor
To the Editor:
I am writing in reference to the June 30 House of Representatives vote upholding the Hyde amendment, which curbs Federal financing of abortions for poor women by restricting the use of Medicaid funds for the procedure (front page, July 1).


The Talk of Hollywood; Good Job! Here's Your Mercedes!
Work hard. Put in those extra hours. Get a little something extra from the boss.
Well, it's Hollywood.
So instead of a box of candy or a bouquet of flowers or some tickets to a Madonna concert, Paramount Pictures decided to do something quite nice for several people connected to its new film "The Firm."


Bill Sales By Treasury This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
Traders said by the close of trading on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.10 percent.


New Accents for Old Ritual: Vacationing in the Catskills
The generations who came here to escape New York City's sultry streets called the Catskills "the Mountains," as if no other mountains existed or mattered.
More often than not, their comments were flavored with Yiddish.
The crisp air and cool shade of the area are still ambrosia to vacationers.
But now many of the voices are Korean and Russian, people flocking to places like Swan Lake because the landscapes remind them of summer places in the mountains near Seoul or in the Urals.
The Yiddish that is spoken comes from the Hasidim who have replaced more secular Jews as the mainstay of the area's bungalow colonies.


We'll All Pay for Denying Abortion to the Poor; A Medical Nightmare
To the Editor:
The arrogance and insensitivity in Representative Henry J. Hyde's response to Representative Cynthia McKinney in the House debate on Federal funding for abortion, as reported in "There's No Choice for Poor Women" (editorial, July 2) can be illustrated by the following story.


Sky Beauty Triples, Eyes Turf's Home Run
If horse racing is searching for a superstar to energize and dramatize the business, it probably found one yesterday at Belmont Park: the dark beauty Sky Beauty, who won the Coaching Club American Oaks by half a length over the threatening Future Pretense and became the eighth filly in history to sweep New York's Triple Tiara series.
The Triple Tiara isn't exactly the Triple Crown with its six-month countdown to the Kentucky Derby.
But it is an Olympian achievement for any 3-year-old filly to sweep the three Grade I classics in two months' time.
And Sky Beauty, who is owned by Georgia E. Hofmann of Miami Beach, scored her Olympian achievement with the mix of power and grace that makes heroes in any sport.


Clinton Ends Asia Trip at Korea's Demilitarized Zone
Seeking to underscore the economic and security concerns that now define the relationship between the United States and its Pacific allies, President Clinton ended a six-day trip to Asia today by visiting one of the most menacing vestiges of the cold war -- the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.
Mr.
Clinton's visit to Japan and South Korea, which revolved around last week's meeting of the leaders of the seven richest industrialized democracies, was part economics primer and part military maneuver for a President who won election by emphasizing his country's domestic needs.
Mr.
Clinton used the occasion to address some of the 36,000 American troops stationed in South Korea in a speech intended to build the President's stature by demonstrating through words and pictures that he can be an able Commander in Chief even though he never served in uniform.
Tough Talk and a Saxophone
He courted the soldiers with tough talk about American security and patriotism, and then performed an impromptu riff on a saxophone borrowed from a member of the Army band.
He drew his biggest cheer when he mentioned his decision last month to order a missile attack on Iraq in retaliation for what the White House said was a plot to assassinate President Bush.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines; The Lessons of Recession Help Magazines Lure New Readers and Advertisers
As anxiety about the second half of 1993 replaces the optimism that swept the magazine industry earlier this year, publishers are fundamentally altering the way they woo advertisers and readers.
The recession taught magazines that advertisers were fair-weather friends, quick to pull out when things got tough.
It was a bitter lesson for the publishers, who depended on advertising for most of their revenue, and led many of them to court readers as fervently as advertisers.


Couple Who Left 2 Daughters at Home Give Them Up for Adoption
The suburban Chicago couple who left their two young daughters at home alone last December while they vacationed in Mexico have given the girls up for adoption because they had "no interest in being reunited with the children," one of the couple's lawyers said today.
The girls, Nicole, now 10, and Diana, 5, have been wards of the state since their parents, David and Sharon Schoo, took a nine-day trip to Acapulco last year.


Capt. Eric Nave, 94, Breaker of Japanese Codes
Capt.
Eric Nave, an Australian who worked to break Japanese codes for Britain and Australia before and during World War II and was the co-author of a disputed 1991 book about Pearl Harbor, died last month, London newspapers reported last week.
He was 94.
In reporting his death, The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian did not give its cause or say where he lived.
Book Sees British Plot
The Daily Telegraph said Captain Nave was "one of the most important pioneering personalities in the secret world of code-breaking" and his "long years in intelligence made him almost compulsively secretive."


Corrections
A front-page picture on Friday showing flooding in Portage des Sioux, Mo., bore an incorrect credit.
It was supplied by Reuters, not The Associated Press.


Corrections
An article on Friday about political paraphernalia referred incorrectly to a company that manufactures buttons.
Its president, Tony Baltes, says the company, Creative Photo Crafts, does not make "negative" buttons.


Marsha Resnick, H. Michael Baris
Marsha Gwen Resnick, the daughter of David and Sybil Resnick of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to H. Michael Baris, a son of David and Florence Baris of Baltimore.
Rabbi Howard Stecker performed the ceremony at the Fresh Meadows Jewish Center in Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Mrs.
Baris is a substitute teacher in the Arlington and Fairfax county school systems in Virginia.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
Her father, now retired, was an assistant principal at Abraham Lincoln Junior High School in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a secretary at John Bowne High School in Flushing.


Love Is Not a Shield For Rain of Bullets
Frances Davis and Tracey Wood are tied together by motherhood, the streets of Brooklyn and the scars of violence.
Mrs.
Davis lives with the haunting memory that over the last six years her three sons were cut down by gunfire in a violent patch of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Ms.
Wood, a mother of eight, was herself a victim, a hapless target of gunfire that pierced the air outside the Brownsville Houses early Thursday.


Already Shaky Area Losing Key Pillar: Mrs. Paul's
Crescentville looks like a neighborhood from the 1950's, except for all the "For Sale" signs.
This blue-collar section of northeast Philadelphia is filled with rows of tidy, two-story brick homes with metal awnings and an occasional ceramic squirrel.
Children spin Hula-Hoops on the street and run through the misty rainbows of lawn sprinklers.
But the troubles of the 1990's have arrived within the ill-defined boundaries of Crescentville, where the residential neighborhood bumps against a ghostly industrial area with empty warehouses, closed manufacturing plants and a boarded-up supermarket.


Review/Music; A Solemn Waterloo Program
The Waterloo Festival commonly flouts the conventional wisdom of summer programming, and often draws a big audience anyway.
But on this steamy evening, in which the only breeze was a hot one generated by the wind instruments in John Corigliano's Symphony No. 1, the festival's sober program drew only a few hundred listeners.
In such intimate circumstances, Mr.
Corigliano's brash work, a response to the AIDS crisis that is clearly meant to assault the listener, was almost frightening in its intensity.
The symphony may make the biggest orchestral noise this side of Edgard Varese.
But unlike Varese's abstract sonic sculptures, it is obviously trying to communicate something concrete, alternating primal screams with mordant string passages and offstage piano tunes.
References to friends afflicted with AIDS dot the score.
In fact, Mr.
Corigliano insists that the listener look dementia and death squarely in the face, as he has been forced to do on numerous occasions.


At Last, Some Relief From Boiling Heat
Like an oven turned down from broil to bake, the Northeast cooled down just slightly yesterday from the oppressive, triple-digit heat wave that has left the region simmering.
It was the first sign of a more bearable week to come.
But with temperatures remaining in the mid-90's in the New York City region, the drop from 100-plus temperatures was too little, too late.


Darcy Blitz, Jeffrey Becker
Darcy Blitz, a daughter of Sandford Blitz of Hudson, Me., and the late Meri U. Blitz, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Maxwell Becker, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leslie Becker of Northport, L.I.
Rabbi Barton Shallot performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Becker, 29, is an associate professor and the associate program director of radiography at Gateway Community College in New Haven.
She graduated from the University of Bridgeport.


Books of The Times; Community vs. Family And Writer vs. Subject
Pigs in Heaven  By Barbara Kingsolver 343 pages.
HarperCollins Publishers. $22.
Wakefield Hall  By Francesca Stanfill  401 pages.
Villard Books. $23.
"Women on their own run in Alice's family. This dawns on her with the unkindness of a heart attack and she sits up in bed to get a closer look at her thoughts, which have collected above her in the dark." So begins the appealing homespun poetry of Barbara Kingsolver's new novel, "Pigs in Heaven," about a moral conflict between the claims of mother love and the needs of a community.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  IRAQ BLOCKS INSPECTORS  Arms inspectors left Iraq abruptly after the Government blocked them from sealing suspected missile sites, in defiance of a Security Council order, increasing tension over monitoring of the sites.
A1  CLINTON HIGHLIGHTS ASIA ISSUES  President Clinton visited the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea, seeking to underscore the concerns that define the relationship between the United States and its Pacific allies.
A2


2 Who Split on Clinton Budget Find Neither Won
When Representative Bill Orton broke with his party and voted against President Clinton's budget package, he became an instant hero in the canyons and deserts of his rural district in eastern Utah.
But his hopes of winning a choice committee assignment on Capitol Hill plummeted.
When Representative Karen Shepherd of Salt Lake City cast aside her doubts and voted with the President, she faced a barrage of angry constituent phone calls and letters.
While she may well have committed political suicide, she became the darling of the House leadership by providing a critical vote for the budget bill, which passed with only a six-vote margin.


Dams and Levees: Restraint on Nature or Talisman for Flood-Prone Areas?
The calamitous flooding in the Midwest has rekindled the old debate over whether the United States Corps of Engineers can fool Mother Nature.
Has the $25 billion spent by the Corps through the better part of this century to build 500 dams and 10,000 miles of levees nationwide been a huge pork-barrel boondoggle that fooled only the taxpayers?


Dermot O'Farrell, Barbara Kilduff
Barbara Jane Kilduff, a coloratura soprano in New York, was married yesterday to Dermot Patrick O'Farrell, the quality programs manager in Limerick, Ireland, for Analog Devices, a manufacturer of computer microchips.
The Rev.
Paul F. Wancura performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Caroline Church of Brookhaven in Setauket, L.I.
Ms.
Kilduff, 34, has performed with the Metropolitan Opera, the Hamburg Opera and the Munich Opera.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Fredonia and received a master's degree in music from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Kilduff of Dix Hills, L.I., where her father is a civil engineer for the New York State Department of Transportation.


Bosnian Officials Back Federal Plan
The collective presidency formally adopted a plan today that would establish Bosnia as a federal state, but their blueprint ignores the demand of Serbian and Croatian nationalists for ethnic partition of the country.
The plan was adopted in Zagreb, Croatia, after an agreement in principle at lengthy talks that ended in Sarajevo on Friday.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chesapeake &amp; Potomac Telephone Co. of Virginia, Richmond, a unit of Bell Atlantic Corp., is offering $100 million of 6.125 percent notes due in 2005 at 99.822 to yield 6.146 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated AAA by Moody's Investors Service, AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AAA by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
First Union Corp., Charlotte, N.C., a bank holding company, is offering $250 million of 6.625 percent subordinated notes due in 2005 at 99.778 to yield 6.652 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated A-3 by Moody's, BBB+ by S.&amp; P. and A- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Market Place; A Possible OPEC Price War Threatens Oil Company Prospects.
JUST as things were looking up for the oil industry, talk of a huge surplus has raised the specter of falling prices for crude -- and a grim turn in the fortunes of the big oil companies.
The leaders have sprung back to life this year after low demand for their products had depressed earnings and forced huge write-offs.
The 22 largest American oil companies showed profits of $4.1 billion in the first quarter, in contrast to a loss of about $900 million in the 1992 quarter.


Clinton Ends Trip at Korea's Demilitarized Zone


Blanket Wars of Central Park Concertgoers Spoil the Mood
To the Editor:
"Smiles of a Summer Night" (editorial, July 1) portrayed Luciano Pavarotti's concert in Central Park as a tranquil affair.
Perhaps that's how it appeared on television, but for those of us who attended the event, it was far from serene.


Review/Pop; An Algerian Has His Way
Safy Boutella, an Algerian composer and singer who performed at S.O.B.'s on Thursday night, mixes Algerian rai music with fusion jazz from the 1970's, a combination that, as dull as it sounds on paper, is actually worse in concert.
Rai, the music of the disaffected urban landscape of Algeria, is a hybrid that has produced music of protest and beauty.
Antique American fusion, which has become the secret hobby of third-world musical intellectuals, seems inevitably to poison everything it touches.
Mr.
Boutella, who studied at the Berklee School in Boston, home of the internationalization of fusion, can write intricate lines that owe a debt to Arab classical music.
The lines, played on keyboard and violin, zipped along, darting and turning, and always giving off the sound of passion.
And on "Orient," playing in an odd meter, the band actually grooved enough to quiet the Algerian heckler in the audience who had been shouting, "What happened to the rai?"


We'll All Pay for Denying Abortion to the Poor; Not Hyde's Argument
To the Editor:
"Abortion Foes Win Vote in the House on Funds for Poor" (front page, July 1) includes a paragraph that unfairly attributes racist sentiments to Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois.
According to your article, Representative Hyde seemed to some members of the House to endorse the argument that "there are too many of you people and we want to refine, refine the breed."


Critic's Notebook; On Remembered Joys Of the LP Recording
A few weeks ago, while watching a murder mystery on videotape, I caught a glimpse of one of technology's victims.
On the screen, a tweedy, middle-aged Englishman picked up an LP, slid the disk out of its sleeve, carefully placed it on his turntable and fumbled with the tone arm until the needle caught the lead-in groove.
Then he settled into a plush chair and, holding the LP jacket in both hands, lost himself in the liner notes as Mozart's Clarinet Quintet poured into his living room.
"Ah, those were the days," I said, hitting the freeze-frame and gazing wistfully at the screen.


Signaling New Hard Line, China Jails a Dissident
In a sign that a crackdown on dissent may be under way in Shanghai, the authorities have sentenced an outspoken dissident to three years in a labor camp for "inciting trouble" and speaking to foreign reporters.
The sentence, coming after the arrest of four other protesters in Shanghai in the last six weeks, suggests that China may be taking a harder line on dissent.
The trend had been to release political prisoners early and to tolerate low-level protests.


CHRONICLE
In the most recent of many tributes in his memory, the tennis champion Arthur Ashe was honored on Saturday with a 21-gun salute and the playing of taps during the dedication of a memorial marker at his grave in Richmond.
About 200 people attended the dedication on what would have been his 50th birthday, including the former Mayor of Atlanta ANDREW YOUNG , the poet MAYA ANGELOU and Gov.
L.
DOUGLAS WILDERof Virginia.


Review/Theater; Vaudeville's Verve Wrapped In a 90's Latino Attitude
Midway in the first act of "Unplugged," a cheerfully exorciating show by the Chicano comedy trio Culture Clash, one of its members, Herbert Siguenza, sings a pointed parody of Neil Diamond's anthem, "America." Instead of a land of hope and opportunity, the country he evokes in his revised version of the song is a forbidding place into which immigrants are smuggled in the trunks of cars, and where "home is a burnt-down mini-mall."
Performed with the same lunging ferocity that Mr.
Diamond brings to his concerts, the number exemplifies the comic sarcasm that sputters acidly through "Unplugged," which the group brought to Alice Tully Hall on Saturday evening as part of the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center.


BASEBALL: Players Must Wait for Owners to Settle Their Differences; Ravitch Is Making His Position Clear
Seven months have passed since the major league club owners announced their intention to reopen the labor agreement.
There has yet to be a meaningful bargaining session, however, because the owners' first goal has always been to try to formulate a way to better share revenues among themselves.
The public, the players and the union chief, Donald Fehr, are all still waiting to see the outcome on that first front.
But the announcement of a major breakthrough on revenue- sharing that management's chief negotiator, Richard Ravitch, had hoped would take place about midseason is now not expected until at least early August.


Nothing's Running but the Trout on the Chattahoochee


In Haiti, a War of the Printed Word
It is perhaps fitting that in a country where it sometimes seems that no two people agree, and where everyone is passionately convinced he is right, the three leading Haitian weekly newspapers are often engaged in open combat.
It is equally fitting, in a country where radio stations are the first targets of frequent coups and the instinct of self-censorship is often twinned with that of survival, that the three papers -- Haiti-en-Marche, Haiti-Observateur and Haiti Progres -- are all published in the United States.


Shots, and 2 Mothers Grieve Again; Her Faith Turns to Ashes After All 3 Sons Are Slain
Frances Davis believed in her three boys -- children whom she eased into manhood with affection, encouragement and advice: respect your bodies, avoid trouble, and most of all, stick together.
Remember, she insisted, you have to be there for one another.
Now she believes in nothing.


BASEBALL: Players Must Wait for Owners to Settle Their Differences; Union Finds Itself Left in the Dark
Unlike last season, this one has been free of intramural fighting among owners and between owners and commissioner.
But then, it also has been free of a commissioner.
The relative peace that has blessed the season, though, might soon be shattered.
First, the owners will meet in Chicago the first week of next month to try to thrash out a plan for sharing an increased percentage of their revenue.
The thrashing is certain to lead to a gnashing of teeth between small-market and large-market clubs.


Dividend Meetings
Surgical Corp Valero Energy Corp FRIDAY  Aluminium Co Amer Barnes Group Inc Comerica Inc Comsat Corp Equitable Res Inc Gencorp Inc Lincoln Natl Conv Secs Lincoln Natl Income Fd Union Elec Co


DAMASCUS WARNED BY ISRAEL ON RAIDS
Israel accused Syria today of supporting a new wave of guerrilla attacks on Israeli forces in southern Lebanon, and senior officials warned that they would not let the Middle East peace talks deter them from retaliating.
While the Israeli Cabinet was reported to have made no decision on military action at its weekly meeting today, several ministers suggested that steps would be taken soon.
News reports from Lebanon said that Israel had moved extra artillery into southern Lebanon, and that guerrillas there loyal to the pro-Iranian Party of God were bracing for bombardments.


Firebomb Suspect Sought
The police said yesterday that they were seeking a man believed to be responsible for the firebombing of a fire truck last Friday night in Washington Heights.
The police believe that the suspect, identified as Jesus Corporan, 20, threw a Molotov cocktail into the truck, severely burning two firefighters.
A second suspect, Edward Ricard, 23, of 188th Street, was arrested and charged with lighting several trash can fires on Friday night along Audubon Avenue between 181st and 189th Street, said Lieut.
Joseph Resnick of the 34th Precinct.
A detective familiar with the investigation said that Mr.
Ricard was also involved in making the firebomb.


Hearst Shifts 4 Publishers
Four publishers of Hearst Magazines have been given new assignments within the company.
Tony Hoyt was named publisher of Cosmopolitan.
Mr.
Hoyt has been publisher of Redbook since February 1992 and, before that, was publisher of House Beautiful.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Surgical Inc., Princeton, N.J., an initial public offering of 1.5 million common shares and 1.5 million warrants.
GKN Securities.


Lives Shattered by Blasts
The person behind 14 bombings has left behind indelible scars, not only on his victims, but also on investigators wrestling with the cases.
Page A12.


No Headline
"When you examine the nature of the American security commitment to Korea, to Japan, to this region, it is pointless for them to try to develop nuclear weapons. Because if they ever use them, it would be the end of their country. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON, in a warning to North Korea.  [ A2:1. ]


CHRONICLE
LIZ TROTTA , the former NBC and CBS news correspondent, is returning to her roots today -- in the world of print journalism.
She will be the first New York bureau chief for The Washington Times.
Ms.
Trotta left her last newspaper job, on Newsday, in 1965 and became a correspondent for NBC, where she did three tours of duty in Vietnam and a stint as bureau chief in Singapore.
In 1978, she joined CBS as a national correspondent, staying there until 1985.
She later taught at the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and at New York University and wrote a book, "Fighting for Air: In the Trenches With Television News," that was published in 1991 by Simon &amp; Schuster.


Nafta, Meet the Environment
A Federal judge in Washington has startled the Clinton Administration and everyone connected with the North American Free Trade Agreement by declaring that Nafta needs an environmental impact statement to be valid.
As the Administration pursues an expedited appeal, Judge Charles Richey is widely denounced as a reckless activist, a meddler bent on dashing America's hopes for dropping trade barriers with Canada and Mexico just when labor unions, protectionists and other opponents are gathering strength in Congress.


BASEBALL: Sports of the Times; How the Mets Can Salvage the Season
SOME people are wondering why they should go out to Shea Stadium anymore this season and watch the Mets play baseball, or their version of baseball, which only at certain times even resembles the game that the other major league teams play.
They wonder why they should fork out good money to watch this team stumble and bumble.
The Mets players themselves don't wonder why they should go out to Shea because they know they must show up to get paid for stumbling and bumbling.
The Mets are in last place in the


An Agency's Survey Shows that More Consumers Believe the California Dream May be Fading Away.
IF the Mamas and the Papas were to re-record "California Dreamin' " based on the findings of a survey by Young &amp; Rubicam on the state of that state, the song might become a plaintive ballad by a Californian eager to leave for any place where all the leaves are brown and the skies are gray.
The survey, conducted on behalf of the San Francisco office of Y.&amp; R., found that only 1 in 10 California residents believed the so-called California dream was alive and well.
By contrast, 8 in 10 considered that the vision of good living, as embodied by archetypes in popular culture and advertising from "Gidget" to light beer commercials, was either "struggling for life" or "alive but ailing."


At Home Abroad; Mr. Clinton Abroad
The G-7 meeting in Tokyo, however lasting its achievements, was a political triumph for Bill Clinton.
A President who has so often stumbled in the White House was sure-footed in a tricky foreign environment.
Aside from the big surprise -- agreement on a framework to correct the trade imbalance with Japan -- Mr.
Clinton was impressive in gestures outside the G-7 forum.
When he met President Suharto of Indonesia, for example, he raised human rights abuses in East Timor, which Indonesia occupies.
The situation there cries out for attention, but few American Presidents have been ready to deal with it.


Weiskopf, One Back, Too Happy To Gripe
Tom Weiskopf took one stroke too many in his sterling final round of the Senior Open today, but the often unfulfilled perfectionist was more than gratified with his artistic success.
By playing indisputably the best golf from tee to green of anyone in the field, Weiskopf satisfied his purist's need to correctly perform the most demanding and esthetically pleasing part of the game.


Recalling July '36, When Streets and Dentures Melted
The biggest difference between the current heat wave and the one that held New York City in its grip 57 years ago is air-conditioning.
When the temperature in Central Park hit 106 degrees on July 9, 1936 -- an all-time record -- methods of staying cool were short on technology, and sometimes long on moxie.
In one case, the heat got so bad for 20 unemployed men and women that they staged a protest at the Home Relief Bureau to demand ice.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  UNIONS AT POST READY CONCESSIONS
The labor unions at The New York Post have put together a package of the financial concessions demanded by Rupert Murdoch when he shut the newspaper on Friday, but it was not clear whether The Post would be able to move away from the edge of extinction.
In the new round of talks, which were prompted by Governor Cuomo, the unions said they had reached Mr.
Murdoch's goal of saving $6.2 million of The Post's annual losses of about $12 million to $15 million.
The unions were $1.2 million short of the target when Mr.
Murdoch closed the paper.
But Mr.
Murdoch's representatives said they were not convinced that the union package added up to the concessions Mr.
Murdoch demanded.
And a separate standoff with the New York Newspaper Guild, which represents about 290 news, advertising and circulation employees, appeared unresolved.
B3.
NEW SEX ASSAULT AT CITY POOL
A group of teen-age boys surrounded a 16-year-old girl in an upper Manhattan swimming pool, tore off her bathing suit and fondled her, the police said.
Three men were arrested after the incident at Highbridge Park pool in Washington Heights, which the police said was the fifth such attack reported in a New York City pool in less than a week.
B3.


Piazza, Campanella And Lasorda
One wouldn't think that Mike Piazza, 24 years young, would have had a lot to talk about with Roy Campanella.
Yes, they had the art of catching in common.
Still, Piazza, a sunny-faced rookie shining what light there is on an otherwise mediocre season for the Dodgers, was almost 50 years Campanella's junior at the time of Campanella's death last month.


Mutual Funds: A Correction
An explanation of the quarterly mutual fund tables in the "Your Money" pages on Saturday described the risk ratings of the funds incorrectly.
On the ratings' scale of 1 to 5, funds rated 1 have the lowest risk, based on historical results, not the highest; a 5 rating denotes high-risk funds.


A Trade Agreement Born of Political Necessity; A New Approach To Old Problems
The trade agreement announced by the United States and Japan on Saturday is supposed to set a new course for economic relations between the world's two largest economies.
The so-called framework is aimed at reducing Japan's huge trade surplus with the United States and the rest of the world as well as soothing trade tensions between the American and Japanese Governments.


New York Police Report Sex Assault at Another Pool
A group of teen-age boys surrounded a 16-year-old girl in an upper Manhattan swimming pool yesterday, tore off her bathing suit and fondled her, the police said.
Three men were arrested after the incident, which the police said was the fifth such attack reported in a New York City pool in less than a week.
The attack at the shallow end of the Highbridge Park pool on Amsterdam Avenue and West 173d Street in Washington Heights was witnessed by a police officer.


People
*
Patrick Morin, the president of Ross Roy Advertising, Bloomfield Hills, Mich., will return to Griswold Inc., Cleveland, as chairman and chief executive.
For the last two years Griswold was headed by Jeff Weber, who was the executive vice president and general manager; Mr.
Weber will continue as executive vice president.
Mr.
Morin's appointment is part of a restructuring at the parent Ross Roy Group that began last month with the hiring of Peter Mills as president and chief executive at Ross Roy Inc.
Mr.
Morin's position at Ross Roy Advertising has been eliminated. *
Ken Segall rejoined Chiat/Day, New York, as a senior vice president and group creative director.
Mr.
Segall, who had worked at the agency twice before, had freelanced for the last two years on computer accounts like Next and Apple.
He will lead the agency's efforts to land the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Co. account, now in review.


Italian Festival Provides a Lift in Brooklyn


Connally Too Rejected Single-Bullet Idea
To the Editor:
Re "Connally's Wounds Held No Secrets" (Op-Ed, June 25) by David W. Belin, who was counsel to the Warren Commission:


Patents; An Engineer's Bicycle Flotation Device Allows a Cyclist to Take to the Water, Gears and All.
LAST winter, Bruce D. Cunningham, a serious cyclist who lives in Hinesburg, Vt., passed by a pontoon boat parked in a neighbor's yard dozens of times before the idea came to him: why not invent a bicycle that could be pedaled across a lake?
Mr.
Cunningham received a patent last week for a "floatation apparatus for use with a standard bicycle." Mr.
Cunningham says his invention will accommodate just about any bicycle, even a tandem.


Moynihan Predicts a Deal on a Bigger Energy Tax
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, chairman of the Finance Committee, said today that House and Senate leaders would probably negotiate an energy tax larger than the 4.3-cents-per-gallon gasoline tax approved by the Senate.
Appearing on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," Mr.
Moynihan said that the gasoline tax might be increased by several more cents per gallon or that a new tax on utility use might be added to the gasoline tax.
He also raised the possibility that both options might be embraced.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, the About Real Estate column in Business Day on Wednesday about the Regal Riverfront Hotel in St.
Louis misidentified the management company in which its parent, Regal Hotels International Holdings Ltd., bought a controlling interest.
It is now known as Richfield Hotel Management Inc.


Disunity Hampering U.N. Somalia Effort
Disarray in the United Nations military operation here is fueling instability in the city and hampering relief efforts, United Nations military officials say.
They say that troop contingents are following orders from their capitals and not from the United Nations Central Command, and that concern about casualties is making commanders reluctant to mount major operations in Mogadishu.


Corrections
An explanation of the quarterly mutual fund tables in the "Your Money" pages on Saturday described the risk ratings of the funds incorrectly.
On the ratings' scale of 1 to 5, funds rated 1 have the lowest risk, based on historical results, not the highest; a 5 rating denotes high-risk funds.


New Vice Chairman For Frankfurt Gips
Philip Durbrow has joined Frankfurt Gips Balkind, which specializes in corporate identity projects and advertising, in the new position of vice chairman.
Mr.
Durbrow, 52, who was most recently the vice chairman and managing director of the corporate identity group at Landor Associates in San Francisco, will coordinate Frankfurt Gips's corporate identity business from a new office in San Francisco.


2 Ex-Defense Chiefs in Seoul Are Accused in U.S. Jet Deal
Hours before President Clinton arrived this weekend, bringing reassurances that Seoul's military ties with the United States were stronger than ever, Government auditors here recommended criminal charges be filed against two former South Korean defense ministers over a $6 billion purchase of American-made F-16 fighters.
The investigation is part of an anticorruption drive that President Clinton praised during his visit as a "very good example" for "budding democracies throughout the world."


Selina A. Long, Robert G. Marquis
Dr.
Selina Ann Long, the daughter of Elizabeth Koerner of Northport, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert George Marquis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Marquis of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Leonard Coppenrath performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Aidan's Church in Brookline, Mass.
Dr.
Long, 33, is an anesthesiologist on the staff of Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, where her husband operates a heart-lung machine.
The bride also is an instructor at Harvard Medical School in Boston.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and received a medical degree from the University of Vermont.


Dr. Colomer Gould and Dr. Tsuji
Dr.
Veronica Colomer Gould, a postdoctoral fellow in cell biology, and Dr.
Moriya Tsuji, an assistant professor in the department of parasitology, both at the New York University Medical Center in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
George Robinson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Water Club in New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Mexico City and received a Ph.D. in molecular biology from N.Y.U.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jorge Colomer of Mexico City, where her father is the chairman and founder of El Gato, a textile manufacturing company.


Pursuers Grappling With Smoke On Bomber's Long Trail of Fear
They arrive in the mail looking innocuous enough, neatly wrapped in brown parcels or in elaborately polished wooden boxes, in a book, a manuscript or a package that feels like it contains a video cassette.
Or they are left lying on laboratory desks, concealed as a notebook or a piece of scientific equipment.
Twice, they have been disguised as road hazards -- wooden boards left in parking lots with nails sticking out of them.


Shcherbo Keeps the Same Old Gold-Medal Form Under a New Flag
Last year at the Summer Olympics, gymnast Vitaly Shcherbo won the gold medal in the all-around event for the Soviet team, one of six golds he captured on behalf of the Unified Team at Barcelona, Spain.
Today, Shcherbo won a gold medal again, but this time it was in the World University Games, and this time it was for Belarus, a country that emerged from the breakup of the Soviet Union.
The heavily favored Shcherbo said winning the gold for Belarus took more preparation than last year's triumphs.


Flood Leaves 250,000 Without Water to Drink
After several days of hope that this city might escape the fate of so many others in the Mississippi River watershed this sodden summer, the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers overflowed today, ruining the fresh-water supply of 250,000 people, cutting off the electricity to thousands of homes and businesses and forcing hundreds of people to flee before dawn.
The rivers merge near the center of Des Moines, and early this morning they flooded the plant that supplies water to the city and several suburbs.
The disruption of the drinking water supply could last up to a month, officials said this evening.
And as some residents scrambled to obtain emergency water brought in by truck, long lines formed elsewhere when residents flocked to stores to buy bottled water.


Unions Hammer Out Offer To Try to Revive The Post
The labor unions at The New York Post last night put together a package of the financial concessions demanded by Rupert Murdoch when he shut the newspaper on Friday, but it was not clear whether The Post would be able to move away from the edge of extinction.
In a new round of talks prompted by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the unions said they had reached Mr.
Murdoch's goal of saving $6.2 million of The Post's annual losses of some $12 million to $15 million.
Mr.
Murdoch threatened to close the newspaper if the savings were not agreed to, and then carried through on his threat Friday afternoon, while the unions were $1.2 million short of the goal.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday Producer Prices . . .
June  Wednesday Consumer Price Index . . .
June  Retail Sales . . .
June  Thursday  Business Inventories . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday Industrial Production . . .
June  Merchandise Trade . . .
May


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Why Did Wallace Win?
It Was the Pits  Rusty Wallace, with the aid of a quick pit stop, won the Slick 50 300, the inaugural Nascar Winston Cup race, yesterday at New Hampshire International Speedway yesterday in Loudon, N.H.
The crew of the Penske Racing South team took advantage of the last of six caution flags in the 300-lap race as Wallace went into the pits second to Davey Allison and came out in front.
The green flag came out for the final time three laps later, on Lap 274, and Wallace kept his Pontiac Grand Prix in front the rest of the way as pole-starter Mark Martin got past Allison to take the runner-up spot on the 1.058-mile oval.
Most fans in the crowd of more than 60,000 were on their feet as Wallace, who has walked away from two crashes this season, took the checkered flag for his fifth victory of the year and the 26th of his career. (AP) Tracy Beats Fittipaldi and Mansell to Finish: Paul Tracy slipped past Nigel Mansell on the 15th lap and led the rest of the way for his second career Indy car victory, beating Penske teammate Emerson Fittipaldi and Mansell to the finish line of the Cleveland Grand Prix by about 30 seconds.
Tracy had won the pole but lost the advantage to Mansell immediately, while several cars farther back in the field collided on the hairpin turn at the start.
The collision ended the day for the local favorite, Bobby Rahal, and Roberto Guerrero, but no serious injuries were reported.
After a five-lap caution flag was lifted, Tracy soon regained the lead from Mansell on that same hairpin turn and led for the rest of the 85-lap race on the 2.369-mile, 10-turn temporary road course at Burke Lakefront Airport, averaging 127.913 miles an hour. (AP)


Australia Stays Late for Stock
With many investors missing out on an oversubscribed $1.67 billion offering by Woolworths Ltd., Australia's largest food retailer, strong demand is expected when its shares start trading Monday.
As a result, the Australian Stock Exchange will, for the first time, extend its trading by 3 1/2 hours, until 7.30 P.M.


Holtzman Announces Bid for Re-election


Report on Decision by VW To Cancel Plant Is Denied
The purchasing and production chief of Volkswagen A.G. has labeled as false reports that the company has canceled plans for a new automotive assembly plant in the Basque region of Spain.
In a telephone interview on Saturday, the executive, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, said comments by Ferdinand Piech, the VW chairman, had been misinterpreted in the European press and that negotiations for an assembly plant were on hold "for the moment."


A Trade Agreement Born of Political Necessity; Japan's Uncertainty Oils a Compromise
The political turmoil in Japan was supposed to have made it difficult for the United States and Japan to reach a new basic trade agreement.
Instead, it appears to have made it easier.
But there are questions about how a new Japanese Government, which might come into power after next Sunday's parliamentary elections, will treat the accord.


World Economies


Vary Those Veggies to Beat Pesticides
To the Editor:
The alarming National Academy of Sciences report by Dr.
Philip J. Landrigan on the effects of pesticide-treated fruits and vegetables on our children's health has certainly intensified the concern of thousands of parents and health professionals already troubled by the chemical soup applied to our food supply (The Week in Review, July 4).
As a nutritionist, I am greatly concerned that parents will reduce the amounts of produce offered to children.


Dreaming in Technicolor, Armstrong Ascends Stage
Finding a perilous opening along the crowd barriers in the last 50 meters, Lance Armstrong lived out his dream today by winning a daily stage in his first Tour de France.
"It came down to desire," said the 21-year-old Motorola rider from Plano, Tex., after he won a six-man sprint into the historic city of Verdun in northeastern France.
When a narrow lane opened in the dash to the finish, he surged through, caught the leader and crossed the line with his arms thrust high and pumping in victory.


Even as Heat Eases Slightly, Its Toll Rises
Like an oven turned down from broil to bake, the New York region cooled oh-so-slightly yesterday from the oppressive, triple-digit heat wave that has left the area simmering, the first sign of a more bearable week to come.
But with temperatures remaining in the mid-90's, the drop from last week's 100-plus temperatures was too little, too late.
New York City emergency workers recorded the city's second heat-related death, and businesses tallied up another devastatingly slow day in a week that has seen few customers venture onto sizzling sidewalks.


Shots, and 2 Mothers Grieve Again; 6 Grandchildren to Feed, And Little Time to Mourn
In her cramped apartment overlooking the plaza where her daughter was killed last week, Mozella Womack was preparing to set extra plates for the six grandchildren who are now staying permanently with her.
Ms.
Womack, age 50, said she would have to make doctors' appointments for the six children left orphaned by their mother's death.
Although she cannot afford to buy them expensive things like orange juice every day, she pledged that they would have meat and vegetables regularly and, hopefully, a bright future despite the family's trauma.


In Fear, Gay Soldiers Marry for Camouflage
When anyone asks, the 23-year-old Marine Corps corporal says she met her husband at college, they fell in love and were married by a justice of the peace in North Carolina with a dozen office colleagues as witnesses.
What she never says is that the story, as well as the marriage itself, is all a sham.
"It's all a game to stay alive," said the corporal, who has been in the Marines for three years, hiding the fact that both she and her civilian husband are gay.


Winding Their Way Through the Village on a Sunday
There was something surreal about the scene in Greenwich Village yesterday morning.
Like most Sundays, people were milling around, buying the newspaper, walking their dogs, going to brunch.
And yet amid it all, streets were barricaded, traffic was backed up in all directions, police were everywhere and 20 helmeted, brightly colored cyclists were racing through narrow paths at speeds of up to 40 miles an hour.
It was almost as if the Tour de France had been crossbred with a race for rush-hour bicycle messengers.


Joey Reiman Wins Bahamas Account
The Joey Reiman Agency has been awarded the Bahamas Ministry of Tourism account, pending the signing of a contract, executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said on Friday.
Billings on the account, previously at McKinney &amp; Silver of Raleigh, N.C., were estimated at $15 million to $25 million.
A review of the account had been narrowed to three finalists: Joey Reiman, BBDO New York and Bozell New York.


Juristic Park
Over the July 4th weekend, "The Firm" replaced "Jurassic Park" as the largest grossing movie in America, thus proving what everyone already suspected: Lawyers are a lot scarier than dinosaurs.
It had started as an impossible dream. Everyone told Ben he was crazy.


Review/Music; If Mostly Becomes Merely
What can a composer who writes songs without words and a symphony with words possibly have in common with Mozart?
A lot, actually, although it is not readily apparent in those particular works.
In the Year of the Overriding Theme at the Mostly Mozart Festival in Avery Fisher Hall, Mozart's relationships with other composers are being explored, and Mendelssohn shared the spotlight during the first week.
But as Paul Schiavo points out in a keynote essay in Stagebill, "Mozart as Muse," the Mendelssohn works presented on Friday and Saturday evenings, the Violin Concerto in E minor and the "Lobgesang" Symphony (No. 2), "bespeak more the Romantic aspect of Mendelssohn's personality" than the influence of Mozart.
The same might be said of the Mendelssohn piano works performed in the preconcert recital: six Songs Without Words (Op. 67) and the "Rondo Capriccioso" (Op. 14).


Bill Clinton, Emerging Asia Hand
Maybe President Clinton should travel abroad more often.
He has left the country only twice in his first six months in office, but both trips -- April's Vancouver summit meeting with Boris Yeltsin and the just completed journey to Tokyo and Seoul -- have burnished Mr.
Clinton's Presidential image and advanced American interests in important parts of the world.
The Asia-Pacific region, which includes the Americas, now accounts for 60 percent of world output, and 40 percent of U.S. trade is trans-Pacific.
Yet changing political and security forces in the region pose a challenge to American policy.
The cold war is over, the old political order has crumbled in countries like Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, and China stands poised between a bright future of market-oriented growth and the serious risk of political convulsions when Deng Xiaoping passes on.


A Berlin Palace Stirs in Its Grave
With all the talk about building a magnificent new city center when the German Government moves here from Bonn, most likely after the turn of the century, it was probably inevitable that somebody would propose rebuilding the Prussian royal palace.
The ruins that remained after a World War II bombardment were blown up in 1950 by the Communist authorities who controlled real estate in the historic city center then.
But a trompe-l'oeil replica of part of the four-story ocher palace's facade has risen where the original used to be, in front of the modern Palace of the Republic, which was built by the Communists in the mid-1970's and which contains so much asbestos that it has been condemned.
The replica was put up last month and will be in place for 100 days.


Kernel of Fear in Mexico
Corn has been central to Mexican diet and culture, but changing traditions and the free trade agreement have made farmers fearful.
Page A3.


A Swan Song at Maxwell Newspapers
As the latest round of chaos at The New York Post reminded the city, New York's convoluted newspaper history has a million footnotes.
One is Maxwell Newspapers Inc., the ambitiously titled corporation that Robert Maxwell used to buy The Daily News in March 1991.
Despite the death of its founder at sea in November 1991, the questions about his financial dealings that followed, the purchase of The News by Mortimer B. Zuckerman last winter and a dozen skirmishes since in the New York City newspaper wars, the company lives on, more or less.
No More Businesses
Operating out of a small suite of offices on the eighth floor of The News building in New York, Maxwell Newspapers has not owned a real business since Mr.
Zuckerman bought its only newspaper, The News, last winter.
Still, last week it had an announcement.


Bridge
One could form a strong team by assembling the proprietors of bridge clubs in the New York metropolitan area.
One member of the team would certainly be Audrey Kurland, who conducts the Grand Bridge Club in Franklin Square, L.I.
She and her partner, Dorothy Posner, led the field after the first day's play in the Goldman Pairs during the Memorial Day weekend.
They were aided by the diagramed deal on which Kurland, as South, had to handle a tricky six-heart contract.
South's second bid, a jump to five hearts, was unusual but effective.
It showed a strong desire to reach slam, with control of all the side suits but relative weakness in the intended trump suit.
With strong trumps, North continued.


IRAQ AGAIN REFUSES TO LET A U.N. TEAM CLOSE MISSILE SITES
Setting the stage for yet another confrontation with the United Nations, President Saddam Hussein's Government today blocked arms inspectors from sealing off a missile-test site.
The three-member team, dispatched by the United Nations special commission charged with eliminating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, abruptly left Iraq today.


James (Son) Thomas Dies at 66; Delta Blues Guitarist and Singer
James (Son) Thomas, a singer and guitarist who played traditional Mississippi Delta blues spiced with humor and irony, died on June 26 in Greenville, Miss.
He was 66 and was a longtime resident of Washington County in western Mississippi.
The cause was a stroke, the Associated Press reported.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Nearly half of Americans say they have not heard anything about the North American Free Trade Agreement, a New York Times/CBS News poll finds, four months before Congress is expected to vote on the package of economic changes.  [ Page A1. ]  Mexican corn farmers would be hard pressed to survive the fierce new competition that would come with the pact.  [ A3. ]
Japanese political turmoil was supposed to have made it difficult for the U.S. and Japan to reach a new basic trade agreement.
Instead, it appears to have made it easier.
News Analysis.  [ D1. ]  The so-called framework on trade only sets the stage for further negotiations.  [ D1. ] The Economy
Administration officials are nervous that the President's deficit-reduction plan could slow the economy further.
But they no longer see a need for an emergency stimulus package.  [ D1. ]


Philadelphians Suffering More
With 41 deaths attributed to the heat, city health officials were at a loss today to explain why Philadelphians were apparently suffering more from a stretch of 100-degree days than were their neighbors on the East Coast.
"All I know is that the bodies are here and they are piling up," said Robert K. Ross, the city health commissioner.
"Our medical examiner is seeing triple and quadruple the number that is usual for this time of year, or that they are seeing in New York, Baltimore and Washington."  Most Victims Elderly
Dr.
Ross said almost all of the victims here were between 62 and 90 years old, lived alone, were on fixed incomes and had no air-conditioning.
In two cases, he said, the victims had air-conditioners in their apartments, "but the units had not been turned on, possibly out of fear of running up the electric bill."


Alternatives to Treasuries Grow
With interest rates on Treasury securities at the lowest levels in 20 years or more, investors who rely on bonds are continuing to seek higher yields.
For individuals, the primary alternatives are municipal bonds, on which the interest payments are exempt from Federal income tax and the state and local income taxes of the issuing state.
For middle-income taxpayers paying a 31 percent Federal income tax, yields on high-quality tax-exempt bonds are well above those on Treasury and investment-grade corporate issues of similar maturity.


Ms. Weissman And Dr. Sinatra
Jacqueline Anne Weissman, the daughter of Melvin and Anita Weissman of Delray Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Vincenzo Roberto Sinatra, a son of Josephina Sinatra of New York and the late Michele Sinatra.
Raymond Chase, the town judge of Newburgh, N.Y., officiated at the Valeur Mansion in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sinatra teaches at the Phoenicia (N.Y.) Elementary School.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Old Westbury.


Queens Man, 72, Is Killed Trying to Thwart Theft of Wife's Purse
A 72-year-old man was run over in a Queens parking lot yesterday as he tried to stop a driver from stealing his wife's purse, the police said.
He died shortly afterward.
The man, George Skouras, was headed with his wife toward a Waldbaum's Supermarket in Bayside to buy groceries when a man in a gray station wagon pulled up beside them in the store's parking lot, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Ellen M. Duke, William Erhardt
Ellen Michelle Duke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton M. Duke of North Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
William Andrew Erhardt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Erhardt of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Agin officiated at the Woodbury (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Erhardt, a manager with Ernst &amp; Young's environmental consulting division in Washington, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in management from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father retired as an assistant commissioner in Manhattan of the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.


Loretta J. Garcia and David E. Elfin
Loretta Jean Garcia, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Garcia of Lakewood, Colo., was married yesterday to David Eric Elfin, the son of Margery and Mel Elfin of Washington.
Cantor David Shneyer officiated at the Bethesda (Md.) Marriott Hotel.
Ms.
Garcia, who is keeping her name, is a senior regulatory lawyer for the MCI Communications Corporation in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Colorado and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
Her parents are retired.


Mexicans Fear for Corn, Imperiled by Free Trade
Before they plant even one kernel of corn, the Perez Rueda brothers always follow the timeless Mexican custom of using the first 12 days of the year to predict the weather of the coming 12 months.
It rained here last Jan. 5 so they planted in May, the fifth month, and their corn is almost three feet high.
Joel and Benjamin Perez Rueda firmly believe that abiding by the old tradition has brought them success, the proof being that in 13 years they have moved up from two mule teams to three tractors, including one they bought just last year because it was such an "ano maicero" -- a good corn year.


Accounts
*
Sara Lee Corp., Chicago, to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, to handle its Aris Isotoner gloves and slippers account in the United States, previously at Snyder &amp; Partners, White Plains.
K&amp;B, which already handles Sara Lee's Coach leather goods account, was also awarded the account of Sara Lee's newly acquired Mark Cross leather goods company, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Brown-Forman Beverage Co., Louisville, Ky., to Carmichael Lynch Advertising Inc., Minneapolis, to handle its Korbel California champagnes and brandy and Bolla Italian wines accounts, previously at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.
Carmichael Lynch was awarded the account after a review that was narrowed to two finalists: Carmichael and Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $4 million.


Merck Won't Move Quickly To Fill Position of President
In the wake of Richard J. Markham's unexpected resignation as president and chief operating officer of Merck &amp; Company on Friday, the board has decided not to seek an immediate replacement and may wait until November 1994, a spokesman for the pharmaceuticals company said yesterday.
A decision to replace Mr.
Markham, 42, could come when Merck decides on a successor for P. Roy Vagelos, chairman and chief executive, who is to retire in November 1994, said John Doorley, the Merck spokesman.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the blimp that crashed in midtown Manhattan referred incorrectly to the craft's certification by the Federal Aviation Administration.
It was certified for nonpaying passengers.


PULSE: The Port of New York and New Jersey
Dredging was completed last week at the Newark/Port Elizabeth Marine Terminal, which handles more than 90 percent of general cargo at the Port of New York and New Jersey.
The removal of 465,000 cubic yards of silt and sludge reopens the terminal's 62 berths to the largest container ships, some of which had been diverted to other ports because of inadequate depths in these berths.
Even so, general cargo tonnage was up 6.3 percent last year over 1991.
Bulk cargoes, which are handled at other terminals, fell 18.3 percent.
Through May 1993, traffic is down 1.4 million long tons from the previous year.


Protecting A Fragile Recovery
Discouraged by recent weak economic reports, Administration officials are nervous that President Clinton's deficit-reduction plan could slow the economy further.
But they see no need for an emergency stimulus package because they are confident that growth will pick up in the second half of this year.
Reluctant to start a new battle over economic stimulus after losing one in April -- and not convinced that stimulus is needed now -- the Administration appears resigned to tinkering around the edges of the budget package to insure that any near-damage it causes to the economy will be minimal.


Gore Plans Visit To Flood Area
Vice President Al Gore said today that he would tour the flood-stricken Mississippi River watershed on Monday and that the Clinton Administration's handling of the disaster had been timely and effective.
"I've been in touch with the Governors in the affected states throughout the last week," Mr.
Gore said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press," "and President Clinton, of course, has been monitoring this on a regular, ongoing basis."


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


British Open Course Is Like Triple Bogey
No one who has competed over its bleak expanse of sand hills has ever been known to like Royal St.
George's Golf Club, where the 122d British Open will begin on Thursday in Sandwich, England.
The gnarled links' unpleasant combination of howling winds, blind holes, mounded landing areas and funny bounces has made it the golf world's capital of chaos.


Sports of The Times; Hit .400? The Dinosaur Who Did It
ONLY a few blocks away, All-Star aficionados were filling Oriole Park at Camden Yards for yesterday's workout and home-run hitting contests.
But in his hotel room, a majestic 74-year-old dinosaur, whose .406 average for the Boston Red Sox in 1941 has turned Fenway Park into baseball's Jurassic Park, sat in a soft chair swinging an imaginary bat.
"I've said it for years," Ted Williams said.
"Someday I think somebody's going to hit .400."


Machine Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


More Turmoil in the Drug Industry
Top executives have quit at five of the 25 largest drug companies this year, citing a variety of reasons.
But whatever their reasons -- personal, philosophical or old-fashioned power clashes -- they have left at a time of industry turmoil.
Earnings growth has slowed at most drug makers.
Their business is changing radically as competition intensifies and the Government and private purchasers maneuver to limit price increases.


Pinkerton's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 11


Observer; Nouveau Riche Guys
My Baltimore sisters who don't know beans about baseball came by the other night and right away started fuming about the players being scandalously overpaid.
Their ire had been fomented, if I may lapse into crossword-puzzle talk, by the imminent All-Star Game to be played today in their town.
Like everybody else who hates to see a ballplayer have a big payday, they started in on the shame of a society that pays a schoolteacher only $15 a week, or whatever the current shameful figure is, yet pays millions to Cal Ripken Jr.


20th Arrest in Abortion Protest


In Baghdad, Panic and Defiance Over Standoff
A mixture of panic, anger and defiance gripped this city today as Iraqis woke to find themselves back in an all-too-familiar world in which President Saddam Hussein is quarreling with the United Nations and their country faces the threat of another American-led air attack.
Only three weeks ago spirits here were lifted after the Government unexpectedly announced that it was reopening the talks it had broken off with the United Nations last year on partly lifting the embargo on Iraq's oil sales so it could buy more essential goods.


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Doormen Are Trained to Help Fight Crime
They sat hunched over their armchair desks like schoolboys, staring at worksheets bearing the sinister image of a pistol-packing robber.
Quick: which hand wielded the gun?
Did he have a hat?
What kind of haircut?
Type of shoes?
Height?
Weight?
Color of eyes?
The place was the 19th Precinct station house on Manhattan's East Side.
The teachers were police officers.
And the zealous pupils were doormen and superintendents of luxury apartment buildings.


The Return of the Store Label
Before the designer there was the store.
In the 1950's, before designers became stars, shoppers bought a store label.
They wore Saks Fifth Avenue or Bergdorf Goodman or Henri Bendel.
Now that the recession has made many customers more price-conscious than name-conscious, stores are hoping that history will repeat itself and people will buy store labels again.
From J. C. Penney to Barneys New York, stores are promoting women's clothes manufactured and sold under their own labels.


Gains Seen in German Phone Privatization
Analysts may have their doubts, but the Alcatel Alsthom group, the world's largest maker of telecommunications equipment, says it can benefit from the coming privatization of Deutsche Telekom, the world's third-largest telephone carrier and one of Alcatel's largest customers.
Two weeks ago, when the German Government announced that it would sell nearly half of Deutsche Telekom to the public starting in 1996, financial analysts predicted that Paris-based Alcatel Alsthom would suffer from competition with equipment makers like A.T.&amp; T. and Northern Telecom Ltd. of Canada.


Salvador Rights Panel
To the Editor:
"El Salvador Finally Removes Military Chiefs" (news article, July 2) characterizes the Salvadoran Human Rights Commission as "leftist." The only reason I can see for the use of that adjective is to denigrate the commission for its criticism of Col.
Humberto Corado Figueroa, the new defense minister.


Police List Items From Search Of Home of Suspect in Killings
Nassau County prosecutors today released a chilling inventory of items they said had been found in searches of Joel Rifkin's bedroom, garage and pickup trucks.
The list included books about serial murders and tying knots and 75 pieces of women's jewelry.
The six-page list was released on the same day that prosecutors gave a grand jury evidence in the death of Tiffany Bresciani, 22, whose body was found in the back of Mr.
Rifkin's pickup truck when two state police troopers arrested him on June 28.


Look! A Plane! And What Does The Banner Say?; It Says There's Money to Be Made in the Sky, if the Sun Shines and the Crew Can Spell
As another summer weekend approached, Amos Harari said he was already looking forward to Labor Day.
The three planes that make up his Aero-Tag flying billboard company already have all the missions they can handle, but people keep calling with last-minute requests.
"I have so many personal things this weekend," he said, looking over his schedule.
"One happy birthday to a wife. One happy birthday to a 1-year-old kid."


Thomas Odiorne, 52, A Company President
Thomas H. Odiorne, president and chief operating officer of the Celgene Corporation and a former senior executive at Johnson &amp; Johnson, died on Saturday at the Doylestown Hospital in Doylestown, Pa.
He was 52 and lived in New Hope, Pa.
The cause was a heart attack, the family said.


Metal Moves
Alcoa shares shot up in late June after the company said it would cut its aluminum production by 25 percent.
Investors bid up the stock, anticipating a rise in aluminum prices, even after Alcoa posted a 20.9 percent drop in second-quarter earnings.
Yesterday, on profit taking and possible gloom that the metal's price has not risen, the stock fell.


United Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sunair Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mercer-Ferguson Rematch Is a Strange Possibility
So now boxing, which has always had a sense of the absurd, has a sense of humor.
No sooner was Ray Mercer indicted two weeks ago on a charge of attempting to get Jesse Ferguson to throw their Feb. 6 fight at the Garden than talks began for a rematch.


Davey Allison Is Injured In Air Crash
Davey Allison, the stock car racer, suffered severe head injuries yesterday when a helicopter he was flying crashed during a landing attempt on the infield of the Talladega SuperSpeedway in Alabama.
Allison, one of the sport's most accomplished drivers and the 32-year-old son of the Hall of Fame driver Bobby Allison, was taken by another helicopter to Carraway Methodist Medical Center in Birmingham, where he was described early last night as "marginally" alive.


U.N. Again Resorts To Diplomatic Move In Iraq Arms Dispute
Postponing the use of force, the Clinton Administration and its main gulf war allies turned to diplomacy again today in their effort to defuse a confrontation over Iraqi missile sites.
They authorized a senior United Nations arms specialist to go to Baghdad to try to talk the Iraqis into complying with the United Nations' demand that they allow monitoring of the two sites or close them down.
The specialist is Rolf Ekeus of Sweden, director of a United Nations special commission that is responsible for dismantling Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.


Knopf to Publish Book By Bush and Scowcroft
Alfred A. Knopf announced yesterday that it planned to publish a book by former President George Bush and his national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, in early 1995.
Ashbel Green, a vice president and senior editor at Knopf, said the book would diverge from being a standard Presidential memoir in that it would deal exclusively with foreign policy during the Bush years.


Kraft Consolidates Dairy Accounts
Kraft U.S.A. said yesterday that it had consolidated its premium Breakstone and Knudsen cottage cheese, sour cream and dip products at J. Walter Thompson Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Life's Sweeter on the Electronic Superhighway; For Healthy Democracy
To the Editor:
Jim Weaver admonishes that "the telecommunications highway is a road to a police state" (letter, July 6).
He expects that its uses will be limited: quicker messaging and more video games.


For Opera in Munich, Optimism Seems Forced
This Bavarian capital is a city with considerable pride, but of late things have not gone well here, operatically and otherwise.
That is why German newspaper accounts of the opening productions at this summer's Munich Opera Festival and of the imminent arrival of a new British general director of the Bavarian State Opera, Peter Jonas, have concentrated on the Munich public's almost forced sense of optimism.
"The Bavarian State Opera stands at a crossroads, and so does its public," trumpeted an enthusiastic article in the company's yearbook.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Northern Virginia Transportation District Commission is tentatively offering $37.2 million of commuter rail revenue-refunding bonds through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Yields range from 2.6 percent for an issue due in 1994 to 4.2 percent in 1998, 4.90 percent in 2003, 5.3 percent in 2008 and 5.4 percent in 2010.
Because the bonds are insured by the Capital Guaranty Insurance Corp., they are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.
Ratings  *
Circus Circus Enterprises Inc.'s senior subordinated debt rating has been upgraded to Baa-3 from Ba-1 by Moody's.


A Top S.E.C. Regulator Takes Post at Salomon
Salomon Brothers said yesterday that it had hired a top securities regulator to run its retail brokerage operation.
William H. Heyman, the former director of the market regulation division of the Securities and Exchange Commission, will become a managing director and will direct Salomon's efforts to woo wealthy individual clients.


New Treatments for Autism Arouse Hope and Skepticism
SCIENTIFIC debates about new ways of treating autism, one of the most disabling and perplexing of mental disorders, are fanning both hope and skepticism.
On the one hand, hundreds and perhaps thousands of parents and families are exultant that they seem to have found an almost magical means, called "facilitated communication," to break through the walls that separate those with autism from the world around them.


Activision Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


A Commercial By Nike Raises Concerns About Hispanic Stereotypes.
SOMETIME during Major League Baseball's All Star Game tonight in Baltimore, television screens around the country will be filled for 30 seconds with visions of bright-eyed boys in tattered clothes, playing baseball in La Tierra de Mediocampistas (the Land of Shortstops), a.k.a. the Dominican Republic.
The dusty setting was chosen by Nike, the athletic apparel company, but not so much to sell shoes or equipment, Scott Bedbury, Nike's director of advertising, said.
Rather, Nike wanted a vehicle to reflect the pure joy of the game that would strip away the crass commercialism of the major leagues -- even if it meant spotlighting players who could scarcely afford a Nike T-shirt, let alone $60 baseball cleats.


Bosnia Attack Adds to Tension On Peace Talks
A mortar shell that appeared to have been fired by Serbian nationalist forces struck a crowd lining up at a backyard water pump today, killing 12 people and wounding 15.
The attack occurred at midafternoon as dozens of men, women and children waited for their turn at a water pump in the suburb of Dobrinja, in the heavily contested battle zone around Sarajevo airport.
The blast left a vista of carnage that has become familiar in the 15-month-old Sarajevo siege, with shattered bodies splayed about the area and pools of blood soaking into the grassy yard.


Fratello Hires Former Coaches
RICHIE ADUBATO and RON ROTHSTEIN, both of whom had National Basketball Association head-coaching jobs of their own at the start of last season, were hired yesterday to be MIKE FRATELLO's assistants with the Cleveland Cavaliers.


Into a Chasm, Off in a Kayak: Traveling on the Wild Side
This is the start of a 13-part series of half-hour where-tos and how-tos for travelers in fit condition.
Tonight, the host, John Viehman, the executive editor of Backpacker magazine, pedals a mountain bike up and down the rugged trails of Canyonlands National Park in Utah.
Two more experienced riders instruct him on the terrain and the care and use of the bikes.
The information seems sensible and the scenery is spectacular, but I'd bet the camera operator had a car.
Next week Mr.
Viehman, who seems determined to demonstrate that anything the pros can do, he can do almost as well, goes in for sea kayaking in Mexico, and after that he can be found climbing rocks in California and camping in a very wet Caribbean rain forest, and so energetically on into the autumn.


COMPANY NEWS
HUMANA INC., Louisville, Ky., a health-care management company, signed a letter of intent to acquire Group Health Association of Washington for $50 million.


Dow Inches Up 3.32 in Seesaw Trading
Billions of dollars sloshed to and fro in the stock market yesterday, as prices fluctuated with the news, the weather or somebody's mood.
But at the end of the day, analysts said, it all signified very little.
"It's a ho-hum market," said Rao Chalasani, chief investment strategist for Kemper Securities in Chicago.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Damage; Crippled Sewage Plants Empty Into Flood Waters
Flood waters are crippling sewage treatment plants across the Upper Mississippi Valley, and raw human wastes are pouring into the river and its tributaries, state and Federal environmental officials said yesterday.
Iowa health officials issued alerts to citizens to be vaccinated for tetanus if they have open cuts and sores and are working in the water.
In Missouri, officials told residents to bathe after coming into contact with flood waters.


Banponce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


General Microwave Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


U.S. Bond Yields Hit 16-Year Low
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond inched down to another 16-year low yesterday as traders and investors awaited reports today and tomorrow on inflation in June.
The data on inflation, which many analysts expect will show that prices were restrained or even declined, could help continue a summer rally that has shown how quickly the mood can change in the bond market.


Out of Sorts but in the Running
Now it is a five-team race in the American League East.
Now it gets quite interesting for the Yankees.
No pretenders allowed.
The Yankees lost eight of their last 10 games but stand, barely, in third place and one game out of first place in the American League East.
TEN TERRIBLE DAYS
They were horrible, and memorable.
Eight losses on the West Coast trip before the All-Star Game break.
The Yankees led in seven of those setbacks and incurred six one-run losses.
They had two chances to join the Jays in first place and fumbled both times.
"I'm not pleased with that, but it could have been worse," said reliever Steve Howe.
But it also could have been much better.
HOME SWEET HOME
The Yankees swept a three-game series from the Tigers in front of a total of 119,000 fans at Yankee Stadium before departing for the West Coast.
Then they faltered.
Jim Abbott said he noticed the team was flat in the first series in Oakland.
"It just dragged on," he said.
But the Yankees can take solace because they play 18 of their next 21 at home, where they have won 14 of 16 and are 25-14 over all.
The Stadium was turning into a raucous place for opposing teams.
Will it continue?
DON OR DAN?
HOW ABOUT DON AND DAN
Don Mattingly and Danny Tartabull are the No. 3 and No. 4 hitters in the lineup, and their consistency was one of the few superlatives on the road trip.
Both are cruising, and the Yankees desperately need them to continue.
Tartabull is hitting .320 with seven homers and 15 r.b.i. over the last 19 games, and Mattingly is hitting .385 with 15 r.b.i. in the last 19 games.
But Mattingly's r.b.i. total of 29 in 64 games is still paltry.
ONLY KEY, NOT THE BIG THREE
Buck Showalter drooled.
Jimmy Key, Melido Perez and Jim Abbott in the rotation.
A fearsome threesome, each capable of winning 20.
Not quite.
Only Key (11-2, 2.31 e.r.a.) has been special.
Abbott and Perez are each 5-8 and are allowing about 1.5 runs more per nine innings than they did last year.
"I've been battling," Abbott said.
Added Perez, "I'm going to the Dominican to work on my problems."  SUBSTITUTE TURNS STAR
Quite possibly the best Yankee story of the season so far.
Mike Stanley, career backup, seizes the chance to start, hits .316, already has a career high in homers with 11 and is two r.b.i. behind Tartabull for the team lead at 41.
He calls games deftly and is a nice guy who has become a Yankee spokesman of sorts.
"If I start pinching myself or saying I'm not this good, it will stop," Stanley said.
BULLPEN: THE PEAKS, THE VALLEYS
They have been up, they have been down.
Steve Farr saved 17 straight games at one point, but has mishandled the last three.
Steve Howe still has an e.r.a. over 6.50, Bobby Munoz and Rich Monteleone have pitched capably in some tight situations but are still over 4.00, and the bullpen has a league-worst 4.78.
It is the most likely place for a player change for the second half.
Top right-handed prospects Domingo Jean and Mark Hutton are not being observed closely at Class AAA Columbus because the Yankees are enamored with winning the International League playoffs.
WILD CARD
General Manager Gene Michael has seemingly relaxed his pursuit of a pitcher because teams are trying to take advantage of George Steinbrenner's impatience and fleece the Yankees.
Montreal wanted Bob Wickman, Hutton and minor-league third baseman Russ Davis for Dennis Martinez?
Please.
If the club felt Hutton or Jean could assist in the rotation, Showalter would prefer that route.
But Steinbrenner adores marquee names, and trade possibilities could intensify at any moment.
"It's a tough call," said Showalter, when asked about promoting from within or obtaining a starter.
HITTING HIS STRIDE
If John Olerud was not imitating Ted Williams, Paul O'Neill would be battling for a batting title.
Imagine that.
A career .259 hitter is batting .329.
He has been a superb addition and Showalter has done his best managing job with O'Neill, no batting champion against left-handers.
GEORGE IS WATCHING
He may not be making much noise publicly, but George Steinbrenner always watches closely.
He called the Anaheim Stadium press box in the first inning of Saturday night's game with the Angels and asked to speak to a Yankee official.
Then he called Manager Buck Showalter in his office about 90 minutes before Sunday's first pitch.
MILES TO GO BEFORE HE SLEEPS
Buck Showalter He does not sleep enough.
He rarely exercises.
He watches game film until his eyelids are droopy.
He takes the losses much tougher than any of his players.
If the Yankees remain in contention, or even if they don't, Showalter might erupt.
He was ornery after some of the difficult setbacks on the West Coast and called a rare team meeting, but claimed everything was fine.
"No one likes to lose when you have a chance to win," Showalter said.
He should relax a bit, take his daughter to a movie.
THE FINAL WORD
Steve Howe, who has been suspended from the major leagues seven times for repeated drug violations, told reporters Sunday, "I passed my urine test. I'll see you all after the All-Star break."


Great Salt Lake Journal; Beauty for the Eye, Yes, But Hardly for the Nose
Local teen-agers call the Great Salt Lake "the wannabe ocean." Their parents grouse that its waters reek of rotting brine shrimp.
And state officials, who otherwise ooh and aah over Utah's ski trails and copper canyons, treat the lake like an unwelcome relative.
"There's nothing 'Great' about it," said Representative Karen Shepherd, the Democrat who represents Salt Lake City in Congress and who is otherwise an avid booster of her state.
"In August, you can't get near it because it smells so bad."


CHRONICLE
MIKE WALLACE turned 75 on May 9, but his wife, MARY, didn't want to give him a birthday party in Manhattan.
She preferred to wait until summer, when they could have it at their home on Martha's Vineyard.
"We decided not to have anyone from off-island," Mrs.
Wallace said yesterday as she reveled in the success of the Saturday evening celebration.
"It gets so complicated in New York, and we wanted to keep it simple."


The Trotter That Rescued a Life
Donald Devine had driven two and one-half hours to the harness stables here from the Franklin County Fairgrounds in Greenfield, Mass.
He wore a red baseball cap that said something significant about the sick friend he was visiting and a blue T-shirt that said something significant about himself.
Devine, a 73-year-old horse trainer and former harness driver who lives in Hinsdale, N.H., was visiting D.D.'s Copter, the 4-year-old chestnut mare owned by his son, Vernon.
She has turned around the lives of both father and son.


Corvel Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Electrocon International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ocean Pioneer Mines Energy That Is Cool, Clean and Free
DR.
JOHN P. CRAVEN has made a living by taming a part of the planet that few people think much about and almost no one visits: the bottom of the deep blue sea.
As head of the Navy's Deep Submergence Systems Project in the 1960's, he pioneered new technologies to plumb the ocean's depths, developing the world's most advanced vehicles for deep-ocean search, rescue and salvage.
He also developed an abiding faith in what he saw as the sea's untapped economic potential.


Trion Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Community Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Summer Housecleaning
SOONER or later you have to clean up your act.
Things get out of hand around a personal computer, whether it is in a corner of the dining room, a more-or-less dedicated home office or a real office.
Software piles up, books accumulate, accessories multiply and hard disks fill like a hall closet.
Not long ago, we reorganized the home office, which is shared by two people with four computers, a laser printer and not enough shelf space.
The first stage, repainting, required that the equipment and furniture be moved.
It was moved back in an arrangement that best reflected the work flow and gained the maximum amount of uncluttered floor space.
The second stage involved the clutter itself.
If you are slow to take pity on one who receives most software and computer books free, look around your own work area.


Panel on Public TV Suggests Change in System
Major alterations in the way public television is financed and programmed have been urged by a panel of 23 prominent Americans whose findings and proposals were announced yesterday in Washington.
Among many recommendations for change, the group suggested that Federal financing be used solely for national programming and not also for the operations of individual local stations as is now the case.
The panel also called for an increase in the level of Federal money used for public television, and said that educational programming should be expanded and commercialization resisted.


U.S. Fears a Sharp Rise In Balkan Refugee Flow
The partition of Bosnia into three ethnic areas could require the resettlement of 1.5 million to 2 million people, a classified State Department report says.
The brief report, prepared early this month by the intelligence bureau of the State Department and based on a map drawn by President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, draws no conclusions about the desirability of carving up the country but assumes that masses of Serbs, Croats and Muslims will move, either through coercion or by choice, State Department officials said.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW Broadway and Seventh Avenue will be closed between 42d and 47th Streets, from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. for the presentation of "On Broadway."


Paramount Prices Debt Securities
Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday priced $300 million in debt securities in two equal parts through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
The first part consisted of $150 million in 5 7/8 percent notes maturing on July 15, 2000; they were priced at 99.543 to yield 5.956 percent, or about 60 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Tsunami Capital reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Merger Proposed for Two Home Shopping Giants
QVC Network Inc. said yesterday that it had proposed a merger with its major rival, Home Shopping Network Inc.
The transaction, in the form of a stock swap, is valued at roughly $1.16 billion, and would combine the nation's two largest shopping networks, which together account for 99 percent of the home-shopping market.
Stock in QVC of West Chester, Pa.; H.S.N. of St.
Petersburg, Fla., and Silver King Communications, a St.
Petersburg company that owns 12 UHF stations that carry Home Shopping Network programming, all rose yesterday on the news.
Stock in Home Shopping Network rose $1 a share to close at $13.625 on the New York Stock Exchange, while in Nasdaq trading, QVC stock jumped $2.50 a share to close at $67.75 and stock in Silver King jumped $3.875, to $16.25.
Timing Is Surprising
While the merger offer was anticipated, its timing surprised some industry analysts.
It had been thought that QVC would wait for resolution of accusations of questionable practices at Home Shopping Network, which is being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Internal Revenue Service and two grand juries in Tampa, Fla.


G.O.P. Only Needs To Court Black Voters
To the Editor:
I agree there are few signs that blacks are switching parties from Democratic to Republican if "switching" implies card-carrying Republican party membership (front page, July 5).
However, there are signs the Democrats are losing their grip on African-American voters, as shown by the 82 percent black vote for Bill Clinton in 1992 (the lowest percentage garnered by a Democratic Presidential candidate since 1960), and signs that black voters are switching to Republican candidates, as shown by the re-election of Senators Alfonse D'Amato and Arlen Specter.


Electric Boat Laying Off 800; 1993 Total May Reach 2,000
The Electric Boat Company said yesterday that it was laying off 800 people at its submarine yard in Groton, Conn., and other plants at the end of the month and that layoffs and jobs lost to attrition this year might reach 2,000, not the 1,500 that had been expected.
A company spokesman, Neil D. Ruenzel, said that Electric Boat's workload was declining faster than had been projected as submarines are completed and the company's backlog of orders from the Navy shrinks.
The company said last fall that it would cut 1,500 jobs in 1993.
The 800 layoff notices to be distributed among salaried and union employees between July 26 and Aug. 9 are part of that reduction.


Mexican Official Rebukes U.S. on Chinese Aliens
With unusual sharpness, a senior official in the Mexican foreign ministry told the United States today that the fate of 659 undocumented Chinese aliens aboard three ships off Mexico is up to the United States, and that Mexico's rejection of a request by the United States for assistance still stands.
"Mexico is not going to accept these people," said the official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified.
"This is the responsibility of the United States."


Charter Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Utility And Trenton Reach Pact On Fish Eggs
The cooling system at the Salem nuclear power plant here was killing billions of fish eggs a year.
So in 1990 the state decreed that the Public Service Electric and Gas Company should stop sucking three billion gallons of water a day from the Delaware River and build two titanic cooling towers that would draw 1/20th of that quantity, or 150 million gallons.
The cost of saving the fish, according to Public Service would be $2 billion, to be paid by the utility's customers.


John M. Falabella, 40, TV and Stage Designer
John M. Falabella, a designer for theater and television, died last Tuesday in New York City.
He was 40.
The cause was AIDS, his press representatives, Boneau/Bryan-Brown, said.


Pentair Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Automatix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


300 U.S. Troops in Macedonia To Try to Contain Balkan War
Wearing army fatigues and the light blue berets of United Nations peacekeeping troops, 200 American soldiers marched off military transport planes here today to join an effort to prevent war from spreading to this former Yugoslav republic.
The Americans are from the 502d Infantry Regiment, based in Berlin.
With 100 others who came last week to set up quarters, they are the first United States ground forces to be sent to the former Yugoslavia.
They join 700 mostly Nordic troops who have been patrolling Macedonia's 250-mile border with Serbia and Albania since the beginning of this year.


On My Mind; Can It Be Happening?
Iraqis fighting Saddam Hussein say one American organization in particular helps keep alive their hopes that democracy has a chance in their country.
China's dissidents, at home or in exile, know and bless its name -- the National Endowment for Democracy.
So do veterans of Polish Solidarity and the Czech freedom movement.
They are emotional in their thanks for past aid and passionate in their hope that other freedom fighters facing their own make-or-break years will get the help they did.


Arafat Asserts Israeli Officials Met With P.L.O., but Rabin Denies It
Yasir Arafat said today that senior figures in his Palestine Liberation Organization met with Israeli officials in Washington last month in an unsuccessful attempt to unblock the struggling Middle East peace talks.
The assertion by Mr.
Arafat, who is the P.L.O. chairman, was denied by Israeli Government spokesmen, who insisted that they had not softened their refusal to negotiate directly with the Tunis-based Palestinian group on the ground that it is a terrorist group committed to Israel's destruction.


A Living Time Bomb? The African Crocodile Finds a Home in Brazil
WITH the bang of a gavel, a judge near here recently came down with a verdict: no more crocodile sex.
Filing an appeal, lawyers cited an expert witness who argued: "Single-sex groups of adult Nile crocodiles exhibit unnatural and perverse behavior."


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Novametrix Medical reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Drysdale Services a Tribute to His Humanity
Don Drysdale Jr., 6, walked into his father's memorial service this morning and right away found a familiar face: Sandy Koufax.
The child, otherwise known as "D. J.," said hello, and Koufax waved a pinky back.
So Drysdale and Koufax were paired again, although each knew Don Drysdale Sr. -- who died July 3 at 56, apparently of a heart attack -- in a different way.
Koufax knew him as a strapping Dodger Hall of Famer who pitched inside to make hitters do swan dives, while D. J. knew him as a bear-hugging parent who taught him only one song in its entirety: "Take Me Out to the Ballgame."


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cuban Defector Appears in Miami
The Cuban pitcher who deserted his team during the World University Games now under way in Buffalo surfaced today at a Spanish-language radio station in Miami, saying he had dreamed of defecting for months and now wants to become a major leaguer.
And, according to El Nuevo Herald, the Spanish-language edition of The Miami Herald, another Cuban player defected today.
Reilando Ordonez Perreira, a Cuban shortstop, has planned a news conference on another Miami Spanish-language radio station, WCMQ, on Wednesday, the Herald reported.


No All-Star Start and No Gripe by Key
They stood there, throwbacks to another era, perhaps as incomprehensible to their modern-day peers as Stonehenge is to modern-day Britons.
Bob Gibson and Frank Robinson, honorary captains of the National and American League All-Star teams, and Bill White, president of the National League, were spinning stories of a game long gone, of battles won and lost over the inside part of the plate, of players taking it not to the mound, but out to the tunnels and alleys to settle things.


Computer Brokers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Private Guards Cooperate in Public Policing
His 32 years in blue were well behind him when Richard Dillon was phoned at home by a top police official the night of Feb. 26.
The World Trade Center had been bombed, and now law enforcement was reaching out to the private sector for help.
The next morning, Mr.
Dillon, a former Queens and Bronx police borough commander who heads one of New York City's largest private security forces, joined a handful of other private security directors in the office of Chief of Patrol Mario A. Selvaggi.


CHRONICLE
MARY MURPHY, a correspondent and weekend anchor at WCBS-TV, is moving to WPIX-TV in the fall as chief investigative correspondent.
"I've been at Channel 2 for seven years and have done lots of breaking news," Ms.
Murphy said on her cellular phone while on assignment yesterday.
"Now I will have the opportunity at Channel 11 to do more longer form pieces, more like magazine pieces."


Incstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


San Diego Sees Too Much of Success In Building Hotels to House the Poor
Over the last six years, this city has proved unusually adept at building inexpensive housing for the poor.
Too adept, it now seems, for its own taste.


What's Orange and Blue and Wept All Over?
Meet the Mess.
The Amusins.
You Gotta Bereave.
Even the wordplay involving the Mets in 1993 is exhausted.
Only Al Harazin and Jeff Torborg, perhaps on a cruise together somewhere, are the only ones likely to be enjoying the All-Star break.
They, after all, are the only ones who no longer have to report to Shea to pick up their paychecks.
TEFLON DON
John Franco, the self-appointed clubhouse capo, has treated Queens residents to regular fireworks shows.
Unfortunately, most have been staged when he's been on the mound.
Doctors revise their diagnoses of his surgically repaired left elbow to deflect responsibility for his performances.
The hard truth is that Franco, who has been awarded two lavish contract extensions since his arrival, has a history of failure.
He folded September 1990, had one of the worst ratios of baserunners allowed per nine innings in 1991, was hurt in 1992 and has been abjectly ordinary this season.
He has blown a third of his save opportunities, has allowed 20 hits and 10 walks in 19 2/3 innings and in only four of his 19 appearances has he managed no to allow a hit.
Still, Dallas Green calls him an "untouchable." COMIC DRAMA
Dwight Gooden's dread over the impending departure of Mel Stottlemyre.
Hey, Doc, be grateful it hasn't happened sooner.
Stottlemyre, despite a track record of failing to do much with young pitchers for the Mets and not exactly enhancing the caliber of the club's veteran pitchers, has somehow survived in baseball's most precarious position.
URSA FROM MINORS
It has become de riguer to ridicule the club's minor league system.
But Jeromy Burnitz's explosion at Shea (4 homers, 12 r.b.i.) demosstrates that the vault for young talent isn't empty.
The outfielder runs hard, talks tough and his teammates speak about Burnitz's power in the hushed tones of the spiritually transformed.
FIGURES DON'T LIE
The season's most appalling numbers?
Do you fancy a 9-33 record in games decided by one or two runs?
How about 64 straight without who consecutive triumphs.
No?
Try the fact that the '93 Mets haven't won three straight, ever.
Or that they have failed to win a series at Shea since the season's opening pair of games against the Rockies.
The Mets are 9-38 against club's with winning records.
MOST EMBARRASSING NO-SHOW
Al Harazin, who forced Jeff Torborg to endure the cruel and needless ignominy of managing the game on the night he understood he would be fired, failed to turn up at the news conference announcing his own resignation, and even refused to return phone calls.
Harazin also earns points for the cheapest shot of the season.
The ex-general manager, who was the brains behind hiring Torborg and embracing his family philosophy of baseball, was drinking a beer with Dallas Green 48 hours after Torborg's dismissal, talking loudly for the media about the days "of milk and cookies" being gone for good.
WORST LOSS
So much to choose from, but the 3-2 loss to the Pirates on June 20 gets the nod here.
Bret Saberhagen entered the ninth with a 2-1 lead.
He was soon gone, then John Franco walked in the tying run and yielded the decisive run.
The Pirates, who had lost seven straight and were without Andy Van Slyke, completed a four-game sweep.
BROOM DAY PROMOTION
The Mets have been swept in nine series over the first half.
Market the talent, pass out the whisk brooms, let the fans clean up after themselves after the opposition has cleaned up the Mets.
THE MEANING OF MATH
Bobby Bonilla has hit 20 homers and driven in 55 runs.
He is midway through a statistically impressive year.
Context confuses things, though.
The $29 million right fielder was embroiled in personal turmoil and defanged at the plate when the season was being decided in April and May under Torborg.
He says now he has been liberated by Green's presence and his own ability to "get over the hump" in New York.
Maybe.
Maybe not.
A lot of the club's future hangs in the balance.
Oh, and one has to wonder what the Mets will attach to Vince Coleman's recent revitalization -- no real significance or more misguided theorizing about the leadoff man's catalytic potential.
STANDING O
Joe Orsulak, playing under the duress of knowing his 14-month-old child's life is endangered by heart problems, and playing with a club that can't boast anyone else of his instincts or work ethic, has hit .310, scored 27 runs and accumulated 5 outfield assists.
GOING, GOING ...
Those with the most imperiled future under Dallas Green?
Jeff Innis (the I-Man's talent has been I-nvisible), Chico (I'm the best infielder this club's got) Walker, Jeff McKnight (the man of many positions but no impact), Frank Tanana (who turned 40 recently and whose e.r.a. might get there yet.) WEIRDEST MOMENT
Mets, smiling and hugging, leaving the field after ninth-inning victory knowing Manager Jeff Torborg would be fired upon reaching the clubhouse.
MOST DISTURBING MOMENT
Right now, as the ad says. There are 75 games to go.


Review/Music; Kathleen Battle Sings a Custom-Made Cycle
One of the more doleful complaints among established composers is the relative ease of getting that first performance but the excruciating difficulty of arriving at a second or a third.
"Honey and Rue," with music by Andre Previn to poems by Toni Morrison, has its own regenerative agent almost built into the piece.
She is the American soprano Kathleen Battle: these songs were written for her, and she made sure they were at the center of the Boston Symphony's Tanglewood Festival opener at the Shed on Friday, when she was the featured soloist.
Mr.
Previn's six settings for soprano, symphony orchestra and occasional jazz combo made a pleasant impression when they were first heard a year and a half ago at Carnegie Hall.
Second hearings add resonance to intuitive responses, if indeed something is there to resound.
Familiarity grants leisure: the room to reflect on what brought on those first feelings.


Time Warner Unit Prices Notes
Time Warner Entertainment LP, a unit of Time Warner Inc., priced $1 billion of 40-year notes yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The senior notes due in 2033 were given an interest rate of 8 3/8 percent and priced for sale to the public at 99.392 to yield 8.428 percent, or about 180 basis points above the yield of a 30-year Treasury bond.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Ralph Whelan, 81, Former Head Of New York City Youth Services
Ralph W. Whelan, a leading authority on juvenile delinquency who spent many years aiding young people in New York City, including serving as Commissioner of Youth Services, died on Saturday at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston at the age of 81.
A former resident of Manhattan, he had homes in West Harwich, Mass., and Miami Lakes, Fla.
He suffered a short illness, his family said.


No Headline
"It just happened. The river had a reason. Maybe this is the time it needed to change its bed. I always say the good Lord does not give you more than you can handle." -- GEORGIA ROBERTS, a flood victim in Alexandria, Mo.  [ A17:2. ]


Coach Hospitalized After Crash
RICH HACKER, the Toronto Blue Jays' third-base coach, was in serious but stable condition yesterday with injuries sustained in an automobile accident near St.
Louis, a hospital spokeswoman said.
The 46-year-old Hacker was in the intensive care unit at St.
Louis University Hospital with a head injury and a fractured right ankle after being admitted at 1:35 A.M.
Central time yesterday, said MARIE DILG, a spokeswoman.
Hacker was conscious.


Q&amp;A
Holes in Plugs
Q.  Why do electrical appliance plugs often have holes near the ends of the prongs?
A.
Old-fashioned electrical outlets had a circular protrusion inside each slot called a nib, and the hole in each blade of the plug corresponded with the nib, according to Sara Payne, a spokeswoman for Underwriters' Laboratories of Northbrook, Ill., which tests and sets standards for electrical appliances.


Appointments At Economist
The Economist Newspaper Ltd. announced yesterday that four top executive posts had been filled from among managers already at the company.
Willy Morgan, former director of advertising, was named publisher of The Economist in North America -- the first time in the magazine's history that it has had a publisher.


Corrections
A Pulse chart yesterday in The Metro Section about the Port of New York and New Jersey mislabeled one component in the breakdown of the port's regional economic impact.
The category that generates $2.1 billion in annual business through the port is trade-related services, not travel-related services.


Lawyer Meets With Esquinas
The former Federal judge FREDERICK B. LACEY, now a National Basketball Association consultant, declined to describe his meeting yesterday with RICHARD ESQUINAS, the San Diego businessman who says that Michael Jordan lost more than $1.2 million in golf bets to him.
Lacey, who is also a one-time United States Attorney for New Jersey, said he had met with Esquinas and his lawyer, ROBERT COSTELLO, at the league's request.


With Pratfalls, Chevy Chase's Plans For Late-Night TV
Looking to revive what he called the "cheeky persona" he created on "Saturday Night Live" 18 years ago, Chevy Chase said today that he was ready to enter the increasingly torrid competition for late-night television comedy viewers.
Mr.
Chase's new show on the Fox network will have its premiere on Sept. 7, one week after David Letterman takes up residence with his new show on CBS and one week before NBC is expected to unveil its replacement show for the departed Mr.
Letterman, starring the untried Conan O'Brien.


People
*
Hal Carlson was named to the new position of media director at the Colby Agency, Los Angeles.
He was previously the director of media planning at Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Philadelphia. *
Richard Hammond, a vice president of Bozell Europe, London, was named to the additional position of chairman of the Bozell Scandinavia Group, a new network of its Scandinavian partner agencies.


45 Gold Bars Reported Stolen From a Closet
The offices of Merkav International Trust in Queens are unprepossessing enough, without even a sign out front.
But somebody apparently hit the jackpot there sometime Sunday night or yesterday morning, the police said, raiding a broom closet and escaping with a reported $6 million in gold bars that were stored there.
Few details of Merkav could be learned last night.
Officials of the company, located on the second floor of a white stucco palazzo-style building at 13-15 37th Avenue in Long Island City, refused to come to the phone or to allow reporters inside yesterday, and would not let any of their employees divulge any information about Merkav.


Bomb Assault Is Described By Firefighters
As officials and community leaders worked to preserve a tenuous calm in Washington Heights yesterday, the two firefighters injured by a firebomb during a night of unrest last week described the horror of the attack.
But one of the men emphasized that the community was not to blame.
The two firefighters, speaking with reporters in the hospital where they are recovering from third-degree burns, described a terrifying scene that ended in a narrow escape.


President Clinton's New Agenda: Vacationing


Books of The Times; A Plague of Gray Caterpillars and a Preacher
Kipper's Game
By Barbara Ehrenreich
310 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
It's no surprise that science-fiction and futuristic novels are a favorite forum for social critics: after all, they provide an easy means of extrapolating and satirizing the problems of the contemporary world.
Certainly, this is what the author and magazine columnist Barbara Ehrenreich seems to be up to in her first novel, "Kipper's Game," a dark, convoluted piece of apocalyptic fiction that enables her to combine her scientific training (she holds a Ph.D. in biology from Rockefeller University and a B.A. in chemistry and physics from Reed College) with the moral outrage she has cultivated as an essayist and observer of the American scene.


Accounts
*
Curacao Tourism Development Foundation, Curacao, Netherlands Antilles, to Warren/Kremer/CMP/ Advertising, New York, to handle its account, previously handled by Great Scott Advertising Co., New York.
Billings were estimated to exceed $3 million. *
ARA Services Inc., Philadelphia, to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Philadelphia, to handle corporate advertising for the management services company, previously handled by Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia.
Billings were not disclosed.


Byrd's Wife Gives Birth to Girl
It's a girl for DENNIS BYRD and his wife, ANGELA.
The girl, named HALEY, was born at St.
John's Hospital in Tulsa, Okla., and weighed 7 pounds 9 ounces.
It is the second girl for the former Jets defensive end, who suffered a broken neck during a game last season. (AP)


That Fellow In Yellow Is Indurain
Big Mig romped but left some survivors.
After eight days on the road, the Tour de France began in earnest today and Miguel Indurain found himself once again the winner of a time trial and once again in the yellow jersey of the race's overall leader.


Postmark Politics
There's nothing like a hard-fought election to put House members in a writing mood.
Last year, it may be recalled, incumbents in the toughest re-election contests also chalked up the biggest postage bills -- topping $200,000 for some incumbents.
Twenty members were so prolific they had to dip into their regular office accounts to pay for all their franked newsletters.
Likewise, the latest House franking tabulation shows that two of the top three users of the Congressional free mailing privilege during the first quarter of this year -- the Texas Republicans Joe Barton and Jack Fields -- were both running at the time to fill the Senate seat vacated by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.


DF&amp;R Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Digital Communications Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Television; On the Many Splendors Of Long-Lasting Love
Five love stories are told in "For Better or for Worse," tonight's cheerfully melancholy offering in the "P.O.V." documentary series.
David Collier brings to the screen couples who are more like his grandparents, who have been married for 67 years, than his parents, who were divorced when he was 5.
He chose wisely, and his work serves both his subjects and his viewers well.
Three of the couples, all of whom have been together for more than half a century, are white and heterosexual, one is black and one is homosexual.
Yet these 10 people are very much alike in their feelings for the person who is never referred to as the significant other. (Yes, kids, there is love after 30, and after 80, too.)


Cooler Yes, but 94 Degrees Is No Arctic Cold Front
He didn't wear a jacket to work and he didn't run his usual three miles in the morning.
But Bill Cassidy, a recruiter working at a law firm in lower Manhattan, could tell the difference: yesterday's 94-degree high was eight whole degrees cooler than Saturday's triple-digit, record-tying scorcher.
"Considering the past few days, it's quite relaxing," he said. "I hate the heat."


Capt. Eric Nave, 94; Broke Japan's Code Before Pearl Harbor
Capt.
Eric Nave, an Australian who broke Japanese codes for Britain during World War II and was the co-author of a disputed 1991 book about Pearl Harbor, died last month, London newspapers reported last week.
He was 94.
In reporting his death, The Daily Telegraph and The Guardian did not give its cause or say where he lived.


3 Clothing Retailers Name Agencies
Three clothing retailers said yesterday that they had selected agencies to handle their accounts.
Fred Hayman Beverly Hills of Beverly Hills, Calif., named Z.B.H.
Promotions, in Los Angeles to handle the retailer and fragrance maker's account, previously at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated between $5 million and $10 million.


Giants Get 2 More to Re-Enlist
The Giants might not have signed any of their 1993 draft choices yet -- plodding along in this area like most National Football League teams -- but they are moving along when it comes to their veteran players.
The two latest veterans with new contracts are wide receiver Stephen Baker and offensive lineman Brian Williams.


Cable Group Selects Deutsch/Dworin
The National Cable Television Association in Washington said yesterday that it had chosen a New York agency, Deutsch/Dworin, to handle its $5 million account, handled by Bozell New York for the last two years.


CHRONICLE
Notes from the "what I did on my summer vacation" file:
Like lots of people, Pope JOHN PAUL II has been getting a suntan and doing some hiking -- but he's also been brushing up on his Lithuanian during a 10-day sojourn in Lorenzago in the Italian Alps.


Northeast Incomes Remain Relatively High
New England and the Middle Atlantic States, which boomed in the 1980's only to crash hard, have seen their troubles drag on for two years after growth revived in America's great middle.
But even as the pain continues, economists offer one bit of solace: the two regions are still more prosperous than most other parts of the country.
The Northeast was hit with the worst job losses in the nation.
Together with California, it accounted for two-thirds of the jobs lost in the recession, and neither the Northeast nor California has yet reached its pre-recession employment levels.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the return of Stephen Berger to Odyssey Partners L.P. misstated the amount of capital the investment boutique had when it was founded in 1982.
It was $150 million.


Pierce's Father in a Scuffle
The father of MARY PIERCE fought with her bodyguard yesterday in Latina, Italy, but the player's mother denied that he had been stabbed in the scuffle.
"There was a fight between Jim Pierce and a family friend, but our friend had no knife, and therefore no one was stabbed," the mother, YANNICK PIERCE, said in a statement.


Northern Japan Hit By 7.8-Level Quake; At Least 36 Killed
An earthquake under the sea followed by 17-foot tidal waves levelled several stretches of Japan's northern coast late Monday night, leaving 36 people known dead and several villages a jumble of shattered homes and overturned cars.
Police officials said they had confirmed 36 deaths, as the toll rose this morning and relief workers searched the rubble of devastated villages.
Officially, there were an additional 25 people missing, but television and news service reports said that more than 100 people were misssing and presumed dead, some of them in remote areas where normal communications had been cut.


A Computer Deal That Worked
It used to be an article of faith among high-technology strategists that mergers between computer companies were virtually doomed to fail.
The list of high hopes dashed, at least in the short term, was notable -- Burroughs and Sperry, I.B.M. and Rolm -- and the list of successes was nonexistent.
But in the two years since the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's bruising hostile takeover of the NCR Corporation, the deal has begun looking a good deal more shrewd than it did at the time.


Chess
It was a small surprise for the strong Russian grandmaster Leonid Yudasin to win the Leon International Tournament in early June in northern Spain.
Likewise for another strong Russian grandmaster, Aleksei Vyzmanavin, to take second place.
They had to hold the former world champion Anatoly Karpov to a third-place tie to do it.
But the greatest surprise of the event was that Peter Leko of Hungary shared third place with Karpov and the grandmaster Veselin Topalov of Bulgaria.
Leko is not yet 14 years old.
This achievement gave him his second norm for grandmaster rank.
One more such norm will make him a grandmaster.
And if he accomplishes this in the next year or so, he will become the youngest grandmaster ever, breaking Judit Polgar's record of 15 years, 4 months.


CHEMICAL IS SAID TO BE IN TALKS TO BUY SHELL OIL CARDS
The Chemical Banking Company is in discussions to buy the Shell Oil Company's charge card portfolio, industry sources said.
Chemical is seeking to acquire four million accounts from Shell, the sources said.
Chemical would convert Shell card holders into Visa or Mastercard holders.
The Shell card is used for buying gasoline and other products at the company's service stations.


Bridge
There is now a challenger for the title of "world's youngest bridge club." The Thomas Jefferson Middle School in Teaneck, N.J., has a talented group of 11- and 12-year-olds, as reported here recently, but Public School 158 in Manhattan has a squad of eight well-trained 10-year-olds.
For the last school year the training has been conducted weekly by Sidney Rosen, as part of the school's "talent and gifted" program, and he is prepared to help other schools similarly (telephone  [ 212 ]  427-1503).
The coaching takes place in the morning before regular school activities begin, which perhaps makes the group the world's earliest bridge class as well as the youngest.
A Manhattan-Teaneck challenge match is in prospect, with both groups arrayed in their own bridge T-shirts.


James Peck, 78, Union Organizer Who Promoted Civil Rights Causes
James Peck, a union organizer and pacifist who became widely known as a civil rights worker in the 1960's, died yesterday at Walker Methodist Nursing Home in Minneapolis, where he had lived for about eight years.
He was 78 and formerly lived in Manhattan.
The cause of his death was not clear, said his son Dr.
Charles Peck, who added that his father had been paralyzed on one side since a stroke 10 years ago.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: On the Des Moines; Flood Damage Immobilizes Des Moines
Under brilliant skies that mocked the misery below, Iowa's capital city was immobilized for a second day today as most businesses shut down and residents struggled without running water after floods engulfed the city's water-filtering system over the weekend.
Most city agencies were shuttered, the Polk County Courthouse was closed and hospitals were refusing all but emergency patients.
The fire department operated with an emergency supply of tank water that city officials acknowledged would not be enough to fight a serious fire.


Reviews/ Television; Beauty May Be Only Skin Deep, but So What?
At a glance, "Look of the Year" might seem to be just another recruitment poster for the modeling game.
The editing, saturated with quick cuts and driving music, reeks of MTV-style glamour.
But the hourlong documentary, on Fox tonight, does manage to get beyond glossy images, even if only inadvertently.
The occasion is the 1992 Look of the Year contest, Elite Model Management's ninth annual international search for female models.
As this program opens, 64 finalists from 39 countries are arriving at the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan (the music track blares out "You're Unbelievable").
The average age of the contestants is 15.


No-Names in a Little-Known Event
This is the international tennis event that's virtually unknown to the public, so it almost seems fitting that the United States Tennis Association has assembled players who are far from household names for the four-woman Federation Cup team that will compete against 31 other nations for a top prize of $100,000 July 19-25 in Frankfurt.
Spurned by the higher-profile, higher-ranked Americans like Jennifer Capriati and Mary Joe Fernandez, both of whom elected to spend the week more lucratively at a Mahwah, N.J., exhibition, the Federation Cup captain, Marty Reissen, has gone the rookie route.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST ONLY 94 DEGREES? WHAT A BREAK!
He didn't wear a jacket to work and he didn't run his usual three miles in the morning.
But Bill Cassidy, a human resources recruiter working at a law firm in Manhattan, could tell the difference: yesterday's 94-degree high was eight whole degrees cooler than Saturday's triple-digit, record-tying scorcher.
"Considering the past few days, it's quite relaxing," he said.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE POST'S EMPLOYEES RETURN TO WORK


Tariff Deal Called the Bigger Success
President Clinton's agreement with the Japanese on a process for trade talks was a political victory, but it will not mean as much for American businesses and workers as the global tariff reduction deal struck a few days earlier, business executives, economists, legislators and officials said today.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, described the agreement reached in Tokyo on Saturday as a rule book for negotiations in coming months on specific industries, not a trade agreement.


Weis Markets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Smart &amp; Final Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 20


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
T.W.A. is expected to announce that its new chairman will be William R. Howard, chairman of Piedmont Airlines until just before its merger into USAir.
He has been credited with making Piedmont one of the more successful airlines in the 80's.  [ Page D1. ]
A.T.&amp; T.'s bruising hostile takeover of NCR two years ago is beginning to look a good deal more shrewd than it did at the time.
NCR is reaping the fruits of a strategic shift to inexpensive computers linked over sophisticated networks.  [ D1. ]


Cami'z Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Girl, 16, Dies Of Stabbing After Dispute
A 16-year-old girl who planned to attend college in Florida was stabbed to death early yesterday morning outside her apartment in a Brooklyn housing project by another teen-age girl after a bitter quarrel over a boy, the police said.
The victim, Ny-Aya Hill, opened her door in the Red Hook Houses, in response to loud banging minutes after midnight to be confronted by Nakia Watson, 18, who lives several floors above her at 82 Dwight Street in the sprawling project, the police said.
After heated words, the police said, Ms.
Watson plunged a knife into Ms.
Hill's chest, fatally wounding her.


Economic Recovery Spreads But the Gains Vary by Region
For two years, the fitful economic recovery has been a fact in only half the country.
In the heartland -- the Midwest, Southeast, Texas and the surrounding states -- sales and jobs started to come back after a quarter or two of relatively mild recession.
In coastal regions like the Pacific Southwest, the Middle Atlantic States and New England, the worst layoffs and losses since the Great Depression continued for quarter after quarter.
But now, recent signs of weakness notwithstanding, the recovery that began in the nation's center seems to be fanning out to the rest of the country.
Exports to Latin America and tourists from Europe are helping to revive Florida and the rest of the Southeast.
Stronger car sales have given a lift to parts of the Midwest, although recent floods could cause a temporary setback.
In Texas and other South Central states, service businesses and high-technology manufacturing are expanding.
A few Western states have been growing so fast that businesses are running out of people to hire.
Higher Employment
In deeply depressed California and the rest of the Pacific Southwest, sales and income tax collections have stopped shrinking and business people say the economy may have touched bottom.
The northern New England states are growing again, and there are signs of life even in Connecticut, which is still reeling from military cutbacks.
And New Jersey has started to regain some of the jobs it lost.


Burnup &amp; Sims Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Post Staff Finds Way Back Home
Business at the South Street Diner picked up again as returning writers, editors and pressmen stocked up on the coffee and junk food that they needed to put out another issue of The New York Post.
Editors and reporters trickled in after watching the news on television or receiving telephone calls to return to work.
Slowly the parking lot under the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive filled again.


Backstage at the Beach: Serving Clams and Fries
WHAT separates Melissa Devlin from most beachgoers is 20 yards of boardwalk, a Formica counter top and enough kitchen heat to make people think her face is sunburned.
But she is not complaining.
Miss Devlin, a 19-year-old college sophomore, is a willing recruit in the swollen and uncountable brigade of high school and college students who flock to New Jersey's beaches annually in search of tuition money, spending money and what to the oblivious vacationer or day tripper sounds deceptively like a good time: a summer on the other side of the boardwalk, backstage at the beach.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  SOMALIS STRIKE BACK United States helicopter gunships under United Nations auspices fired into the headquarters of a Somali clan leader, and mobs of Somalis responded with an attack on foreign journalists.
A1  A survivor's story.
A8


Beijing Museum Improves Cultural Ties
To the Editor:
Regarding your June 30 news article on the opening of the Arthur M. Sackler Museum of Art and Archeology at Beijing University:


Hinunangan Journal; Townspeople in Philippines Bereft: How Befouled Is Their Eden Now
"Hinunangan is a paradise created by God and destroyed by man," said Noe Dadap, who grew up on this rural coast.
The town's name means resting place for travelers.
Inviting waves lap at its crescent beach against a backdrop of swaying palms, lowland rice paddies and verdant mountains.


A Mug's Game With Iraqi Missiles
Saddam Hussein is at it again.
It seemed that diplomats were about to resolve the dispute over Iraq's missile test sites when Mr.
Hussein yanked the rug out from under them.
No, said the Iraqi dictator, he would not accept United Nations surveillance cameras at the sites.
Nor would he allow the U.N. to seal the sites temporarily.
Now the U.N.
Security Council will give him another chance to choose -- or else face destruction of his test sites.


Intel Posts Strong Profits but Stock Slips
Investors took shares of the Intel Corporation on a bumpy ride yesterday after the world's largest computer chip producer reported record second-quarter results and forecast strong sales and profit margins for the rest of the year.
Despite the optimistic statements by Intel officials, investors at first sold off the stock because the earnings met, but did not surpass, Wall Street's expectations.


National Securities reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Constitutional Conference Backs Draft of a New Charter for Russia
The constitutional conference called by President Boris N. Yeltsin last month formally approved the draft of a new constitution today, but prospects for its acceptance any time soon were dimmed by a growing rivalries among the provinces and ethnic republics that make up the Russian Federation.
The final draft was not immediately made public, but its broad outlines have already become known: a presidential republic with a two-house parliament and extensive restraints on each branch of government.


The Vicarious Thrills Of On-Screen Baseball
BASEBALL fans will pause tonight to watch the annual All-Star Game, which brings together the wealthiest and most popular professional athletes in America's favorite spectator sport.
But let's face it, the game is mere reality.
True baseball fanatics can slide head-first into baseball fantasy on any day of the year with a personal computer or a video game machine.


Cheaney Signs With Bullets
The Washington Bullets signed CALBERT CHEANEY, their top draft choice in 1993, to a six-year contract yesterday.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Will Central Park Do, Mr. Steinbrenner?
Once upon a pennant, George Steinbrenner had free agents falling over themselves to become Yankees.
Now, he has politicians on both sides of the Hudson River zealously trying to satisfy his case of new-stadium envy.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo professes to want to keep him in the Bronx beyond 2002, when the Boss's lease on Yankee Stadium expires.
If better parking, security, sanitation and transportation don't sate Steinbrenner, Cuomo suggests a new ball park along the crumbled West Side Highway, where a bunch of huge capital projects will be built through 2000.


Merry Land &amp; Investment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design; Beads Are Back
The long, languid looks in style this summer have brought back a long, languid accessory: the bead necklace.
As in the hippie days, you can fashion this yourself.
In the trimmings district of Manhattan -- the West 30's between Fifth and Eighth Avenues -- are dozens of stores that sell the materials.


Mayor Declares Effort to Curb Pool Assaults
Mayor David N. Dinkins expressed outrage yesterday at the recent spate of sexual assaults at city pools, and he said he would initiate a public-relations campaign to try to teach young men more respect for young women.
In a forceful and emotional voice, Mr.
Dinkins said the assaults at pools, where groups of men have surrounded teen-age women, ripped off their swimming suits and fondled them, were "unacceptable behavior."


LABOR CONCESSIONS GAINED BY MURDOCH RESTORE THE POST
Employees of The New York Post, shut out of the building for two days, returned to put out today's issue after most of the newspaper's unions gave Rupert Murdoch the $6.2 million in concessions he demanded.
"Here to Stay," read the headline on page 1, beside the newspaper's familiar line drawing of its founder, Alexander Hamilton, who was smiling and flashing a thumbs-up sign.
In smaller type were the words, "Last-Minute Pact Saves Post" and "Unions Agree to $6 Million Rescue."


Transactions
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Traded Steve Carter, outfielder, to the Houston Astros for Jack Daugherty, first baseman-outfielder.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Named Richie Adubato and Ron Rothstein assistant coaches.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Signed Calbert Cheaney, forward, to a six-year contract.
Continental Basketball Association
OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Named Dawn Burroughs director of marketing; David Rudy and Jim Drummond sales executives; Kent Roberts account representative, and Mary McGivney administrative assistant.
Football  National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Jason Elam, placekicker.
Extended the contract of Arthur Marshall, wide receiver.
DETROIT LIONS -- Re-signed Victor Jones, linebacker.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Chris Gray, tackle. Waived Tim Cromartie, defensive tackle.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Stephen Baker, wide receiver, and Brian Williams, offensive lineman.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Named Dr.
Joseph Torg team physician, replacing Dr.
Vincent DiStefano who will remain with the team as a consultant.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Claimed Ryan Peery, defensive back, off waivers from the San Francisco 49ers.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Adrian Hardy, defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Signed Milan Hnilicka, goalie. Colonial Hockey League
MUSKEGON FURY -- Signed Mark Turner, forward. East Coast Hockey League
NASHVILLE KNIGHTS -- Named George Lucas director of media relations and broadcasting.


COMPANY NEWS: Study of Executives and Links; In Golf and Business, Similar Strokes Seen
Golf-playing executives beware: the golfer who secretly moves the ball to get a better lie or who does not count a missed tap-in is likely to cheat in the board room as well, a study for the Hyatt Hotels Corporation has found.
Nearly half the 401 executives surveyed agreed to the statement that "the way a person plays golf is very similar to how he or she conducts business affairs."


American City Business Journals Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marseilles Player's Admission
An Olympique Marseilles player has admitted being the middleman in a match-fixing scandal, changing his story yesterday after his wife had said the club's general manager ordered the alleged bribes.
JEAN-JACQUES EYDELIE, charged with corruption, had denied any role in the scandal.
But Eydelie changed his story during a five-hour interrogation by the investigating judge, BERNARD BEFFY, in Valenciennes, France, and corroborated accounts by his wife and the three Valenciennes players he allegedly tried to bribe.


INSIDE
More Carnage in Sarajevo
Twelve were killed and 15 wounded when a mortar shell believed to have been fired by Serbian forces exploded among civilians lined up for water in the Bosnian capital.
Page A10.
English Resort for Elderly
A seaside resort in East Sussex is a kind of proving ground for solving the social challenges facing Europe as its population grows older.
Page A3.
The Price of Success
To acclaim from advocates for the homeless, San Diego encouraged the building of cheap residential hotels.
But after merchants' complaints, the city has retreated.
Page A14.
World's Oldest Cloth
A 9,000-year-old piece of linen found in southern Turkey offers an insight into the earliest days of agriculture and civilization.
Page C1.


Executive Changes
BIDERMANN INDUSTRIES, New York, named Mary Alice Kelly executive vice president for sales and marketing for its Arrow Shirt Co. unit.
GOODY'S FAMILY CLOTHING INC., Knoxville, Tenn., appointed John Thompson executive vice president for business systems and logistics and chief information officer.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Tuesday about the PNC Bank Corporation misstated the amount by which the company expects earnings from existing operations to increase yearly.
The company expects revenues from existing operations to increase by 6 to 7 percent and earnings to increase by 10 to 15 percent because of cost-cutting.


A Utility And Trenton Reach Pact On Fish Eggs
The cooling system at the Salem nuclear power plant here was killing billions of fish eggs a year.
So in 1990 the state decreed that the Public Service Electric and Gas Company should stop sucking three billion gallons of water a day from the Delaware River and build two titanic cooling towers that would draw 1/20th of that quantity, or 150 million gallons.
The cost of saving the fish, according to Public Service would be $2 billion, to be paid by the utility's customers.


G.M. in a Deal to Supply Engine Blocks to Toyota
The General Motors Corporation announced a contract today to supply engine blocks to the Toyota Motor Corporation, an example of what Japanese auto makers say is their growing effort to reduce trade frictions with the United States.
Starting in mid-1994, G.M.'s foundry in Defiance, Ohio, will produce up to 180,000 engine blocks a year for Toyota's four-cylinder engine, used in the Toyota Camry built in Georgetown, Ky.


Family Condemns Book On Disney as Informer
The family of Walt Disney today condemned a new book that depicts the film maker as a tormented genius who served for years as an informer for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In a detailed response to the book, "Walt Disney: Hollywood's Dark Prince" (Birch Lane Press), Mr.
Disney's widow and daughter denied that he was an informer and released statements of support from two former F.B.I. agents as well as William H. Webster, Director of the F.B.I. from 1978 to 1987.


Site in Turkey Yields Oldest Cloth Ever Found
IN a village near the headwaters of the Tigris River 9,000 years ago, people descended from hunter-gatherers were planting and harvesting wheat and barley.
They were among the world's first farmers and over hundreds of years had settled down in houses of some substance.
At the same time, by adapting their basket-making technology, they began weaving crude fabrics, which are the earliest known examples of cloth ever produced.
Archeologists digging at the site in southern Turkey, a place known today as Cayonu (pronounced chi-O-noo), have found a fragment of white cloth wrapped around the handle of a tool made from antler.
The material, about 1 1/2 by 3 inches, was preserved because it was semi-fossilized from contact with calcium in the antler.
It is probably a piece of linen, woven from the fibers of the flax plant.


Stock Issue In Australia
Investors bid up shares in Woolworths Ltd., Australia's largest food retailer, by 15 percent when the company's stock was traded today for the first time after being heavily oversubscribed at the issue price of 2.45 Australian dollars.
The deluge of orders set a record on the Australian Stock Exchange for trading in a newly listed stock with more than 91.75 million Woolworths shares traded.
The previous highest trading on the initial listing of a stock was 10.5 million shares for the Commonwealth Bank of Australia in 1991.


Editorial Notebook; A Ticket to Ride If Sydney Can Do It, Why Not New York?
That I am not Australian was obvious to the driver of the bus I boarded in Sydney a few weeks ago.
The hand that extended the fare was timid; the voice that asked how many stops before Circular Quay was untouched by that distinctive accent known as "Strine." "Are you planning to use the buses much while you're here?" he asked when we reached the harbor.
"Or ride the ferries? Because if you are, you'll save a lot of money if you buy a pass."
Actually, I planned to use the buses and ferries a lot.
Doing so gives me the illusion that I'm a resident, not a tourist, in a city I fell in love with 22 years ago.
Also I was touched -- and, being a New Yorker, startled -- that the driver found the time and the courtesy to tell me about passes, draw a rough map and list the buses that went near my hotel.
So I bought a one-week fare card, at the green kiosk toward which he'd pointed me, for about $10.
I could also have bought it at just about any newsstand.


New Chief Expected At T.W.A.
Trans World Airlines is expected to name a chairman as early as today: William R. Howard, the former chairman of Piedmont Airlines, who was widely credited with turning that carrier into one of the more successful airlines of the 1980's.
T.W.A., which has been operating under bankruptcy protection since January 1992, decided on Mr.
Howard because he is highly regarded on Wall Street, as well as within the airline industry, people familiar with the appointment said.
In recent years, the airline has had leaders with plenty of one or the other quality, but not both.
The Icahn Years
Carl C. Icahn, for example, was better known as a financier than as an airline leader before he turned over T.W.A.'s reins this year to the current co-chief executives, Glenn R. Zander and Robin Wilson, whose experience far outweighs their name recognition.
Those two executives are expected to be named to other senior management positions at T.W.A.


Anchor Financial Corp. of Myrtle Beach, S.C. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Educational Development Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jordan Is the Wrong Star at the All-Stars
"Michael's pitching!" a vendor at Oriole Park gushed in excited delight.
A few minutes later, when Michael was finished pitching, he walked off the field and set off the kind of squeals and screeches usually heard from teen-age girls at rock concerts.


Industry to Set Its Own Data Security Code
An international industry group led by Novell Inc., the leader in network software for corporate computer systems, plans to announce on Wednesday a set of standards for protecting information stored in computers or transmitted over networks, industry executives say.
Neither Novell nor most of the other companies or user groups involved would discuss the announcement, which is seen as an indirect challenge to the Clinton Administration's effort to impose a national encoding standard for computer and telephone communications.


Now Fielder Is Where He Knows He Belongs
Cecil Fielder, the player whose absence cast a giant shadow on last year's All-Star Game, arrived as a member of the 1993 team feeling welcomed.
"Basically, I'm here and I feel I'm supposed to be," said Fielder, who leads the major leagues in runs batted in, with 77, and has 23 home runs.


Andres Wines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CPC International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Let Rail Link Cross Washington Bridge
To the Editor:
It is welcome news that New York's Metro-North commuter railroad is considering a rail link from Manhattan to Rockland and Orange counties.
Before Metro-North rushes to spend billions on a bridge or tunnel, is it aware that the George Washington Bridge was designed to carry a railroad on its lower deck?
Sixty years ago this was pointed out to us engineering students as an example of good forward thinking.
I had always hoped that either the IRT or IND tracks could break out of their tunnels at 181st Street and be swung over the bridge.
I was disappointed after World War II when a vehicular roadway was built instead.
What a costly error that has proved to be in money, time and air pollution!


Artful Surgery: Reattaching a Penis
SIXTEEN days after surgeons reattached his severed penis, a man left a hospital here last weekend to convalesce from a rarely performed operation.
In it, surgeons peered through microscopes as they worked nine and a half hours reattaching blood vessels less than a millimeter in diameter and sewing other tissues.
So far there have been no complications, although it is too soon to tell how much penile function the man will regain, his surgeons said in interviews.
But they said they believed that it would be near normal, including sexual activity.


Micropolis Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


English Retirement Resort Is a Model for Europe
Down at the police station, where the usual crime wave involves con artists preying on the elderly, constables have begun a program to install door chains free of charge.
At the whitewashed De La Warr Pavilion, on the seafront, promoters are hoping to lure sellout audiences of retirees with a summer program of big-band revivals and light musicals like "The Dancing Years," one of London's most popular prewar shows.


Lab Limits Plan to Give Company Discoveries
Bowing to criticism, the Scripps Research Institute has decided to cut back on a $300 million agreement that would have given all its discoveries for up to 20 years to a single pharmaceutical company, a Scripps spokesman said today.
The agreement had come under attack from Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy, who until two weeks ago was director of the National Institutes of Health, and from Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, chairman of the Small Business Subcommittee on Regulation.


Candor, Conscience and Dr. Elders 1
"We cannot afford to let Dr. Elders do to America what she did to Arkansas," thundered Jan Parshall, a spokeswoman for Concerned Women of America, about President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General.
"She believes in comprehensive sexuality education beginning in kindergarten. These are children, may of whom don't know their colors and numbers yet, and she would propose violating their innocence and modesty."
The Concerned Women of America aren't alone in their condemnation of Dr.
Joycelyn Elders.
The anti-feminist organization is being assisted by the Christian Coalition, the Traditional Values Coalition and the Family Research Council.


Heading to Florida, Nearer the Homeland
After 18 years in the nerve-grinder that is New York, Jean-Claude Sanon decided that he had had enough.
So four years ago he sold his home, quit his job as an assistant manager at an insurance company and moved his wife and two children to Miami.
Soon he will be joined by Winston Small of Cambria Heights, Queens, who recently bought a plot of land in central Florida where construction workers have already began to nail together the wooden frame of his new house.


Life's Sweeter on the Electronic Superhighway
To the Editor:
As a citizen eagerly awaiting the arrival of a true telecommunications highway, I am compelled to respond to the questions raised in Jim Weaver's July 6 letter, "Road to Police State."


Apple Cuts Prices Again To Aid Sales
In an effort to revive sluggish sales and make its computers more attractive to mainstream business buyers, Apple Computer Inc. cut prices today on many of its portables, desktops and departmental computers.
The new round of price reductions is the third in three months.


New York Public Advocate Office Has Potential
To the Editor:
In "Does New York Need a 'Public Advocate'? (letter, July 7), Stephen E. Phillips misses the point with his too-quick dismissal of the role of the public advocate in New York City government.


Mark L. Morris, 92, A Developer of Diets For Cats and Dogs
Dr.
Mark Loren Morris, a pioneer in animal health who developed diets for dogs and cats, died on Thursday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 92.
The cause was atherosclerosis, a disease of the arteries, the family said.


Market Place; Investors' Hopes May Be Too High for Maker of Female Condoms.
FEW women probably even noticed yesterday as one company started a new business that Wall Street hopes will soon yield profits from their sex lives.
Investors reacted with bubbles of happiness as Wisconsin Pharmacal, the maker of the controversial female condom named Reality, announced it had begun the product's first shipments.
The company's shares jumped as much as $1 each, closing at $13.375, up 87.5 cents, in Nasdaq trading.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: On the Mississippi; Bewildered but Determined After Flood Swallows Town
Donald Young remembers the four telephone calls he made, and how in 20 minutes 20 people, and then 40, arrived to help.
He remembers pulling the clothes out of the closets and packing away the crystal, the family photographs, his wife's 400 cookbooks.
He remembers rounding up the 14 geese, emptying the grain bins, driving out the tractors, the plows and the combine.
He remembers everything about the night the river forced him and his wife out of the house where they had lived for 27 years -- except for this: "I can't tell you what day it was," he said today.
"All I can tell you is that the river stage was 26 when we left."  Time Halted at 5:40
Donald and Geneal Young returned to their farm on Sunday to survey the damage, riding in a boat across the river that used to be their fields of corn and soybeans.
The crops, all 1,200 acres -- about one-and-a-half Central Parks -- were gone.
Stalks of corn that just six days ago had been ready to tassle had floated into the house and now drifted from room to room in murky, calf-deep water.


Canadian Manoir Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


India Orders Safety Steps at Nuclear Plants
India's top nuclear safety agency has ordered periodic closings and detailed inspections of atomic power plants beginning July 31.
The plan is a result of an investigation of an explosion at a nuclear plant in March, officials said.
"We have identified the problem, and it relates to turbines and generators," said Adinayarantambi Gopalakrishnan, chairman of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board.
"It is nonnuclear in the sense that it is not directly related to the nuclear reactors."


Bridge
There is now a challenger for the title of "world's youngest bridge club." The Thomas Jefferson Middle School in Teaneck, N.J., has a talented group of 11- and 12-year-olds, as reported here recently, but Public School 158 in Manhattan has a squad of eight well-trained 10-year-olds.
For the last school year the training has been conducted weekly by Sidney Rosen, as part of the school's "talent and gifted" program, and he is prepared to help other schools similarly (telephone  [ 212 ]  427-1503).
The coaching takes place in the morning before regular school activities begin, which perhaps makes the group the world's earliest bridge class as well as the youngest.
A Manhattan-Teaneck challenge match is in prospect, with both groups arrayed in their own bridge T-shirts.


Sonic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Patterns
Kors Seeks Reorganization
It may have been 100-plus degrees outside, but a chill went through Seventh Avenue on Friday with the news that Michael Kors Inc. had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The message, as if anyone needed it underlined, is that it is extremely difficult to make money from designer fashion these days.
"Through the height of the ostentatious 80's, we stayed low-key," Michael Kors said.
"What is going on now, how people shop and want to dress, is what I do."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.96
3.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.00
3.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.10
3.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.35
5.37
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.62
6.63
7.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.36
7.37
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.70
5.71
6.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Paying for Mental Health
By approving a bill last week that would funnel more state money to community mental health programs, the Legislature boxed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo into the most awkward of corners: It forced him to threaten to veto a major initiative whose underlying principle he has long supported.
Seeking a way out, Mr.
Cuomo has found a way to buy time, a maneuver that strengthens the possibility that a compromise can still be forged.


Preserve Redwoods For Future Inspiration
To the Editor:
Wood industry spokesmen in the Northwest claim jobs will be lost if they are not allowed to cut the remaining stands of virgin timber in the national forests.
If they are allowed to cut these stands, the woods will be gone in 20 years.
Then the jobs will be lost anyway and with them any chance for permanent employment for thousands to serve the people who would forever come to view these magnificent forests, had they not been destroyed by shortsightedness and greed.
MARC W. SUFFERN 2D  Slate Hill, N.Y., July 2, 1993


4 Cornerstones of Harlem Life Are Designated as Landmarks
Four cornerstones of Harlem's spiritual, social and religious life became official New York City landmarks yesterday.
The city's Landmarks Preservation Commission designated the Abyssinian Baptist Church, 132 West 138th Street, where the Rev.
Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Harlem's powerful Congressman from 1945 to 1970, was pastor; Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, 140 West 137th Street, home of the city's oldest black congregation, and St.
Philip's Episcopal Church, 208 West 134th Street, which attracted black New Yorkers to Harlem.


Hans Hopf, 76, Tenor In Wagner Repertory
Hans Hopf, a German tenor who specialized in Wagnerian roles during a long career at the Munich Opera, died on June 25 near his home in Germany.
He was 76.
A friend of the family said the cause was a heart attack.


Students Focus on a Lot of Hot Air


Sports of The Times; The 'Yards' Plays Small And Loud
In the galaxy of last night's All-Star Game, the ball park was as much an attraction as the players.
Oriole Park at Camden Yards, with a red-brick warehouse towering behind right field, has a look that is so old, it's new.
But if you want to know what a ball park is really like, ask a pitcher.
"This is going to be a true test of how good a pitcher you are," the old Oriole right-hander, Jim Palmer, had said.
"This ball park plays real small."


High Court Nominee Is Given Bar Association's Top Rating
The American Bar Association has given Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg its highest rating on her fitness to be a Supreme Court Justice, Congressional officials said today.
The rating of "well qualified" underlined the vastly changed political context in which Judge Ginsburg will face the Senate Judiciary Committee next Tuesday for her confirmation hearings, compared with that of the last Supreme Court nominee, Clarence Thomas.
In 1991, the A.B.A.'s Standing Committee on the Judiciary gave Judge Thomas a mixed rating, a majority giving him the middle grade of "qualified" and a minority deeming him "not qualified." The rating was conveyed today to the Senate Judiciary Committee and to the White House.


After a Short Rest, Tour de France Riders Will Head for the Alps
Out there, to the south, under sinister skies, lie the Alps.
Only their foothills are visible from Grenoble, the southeastern city that was the hub of the Tour de France today, a day off for the racers as they moved downcountry from Lorraine by nearly every known conveyance except bicycles.
Cars, trucks, trains and planes all helped transport the 171 remaining riders, their managers, masseurs and mechanics, the news media, the officials, advertisers and police force of the Tour, its post office and its bank (the only one in the country allowed to remain open on Wednesday, France's national day.)


Value Merchants reports earnings for 13wks to May 1


Panel Submits List of Nominees for New York's Highest Court
A special state panel today gave Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo a list of six nominees to fill a vacancy on the state's highest court.
The list includes four appellate division justices, a Brooklyn law school expert on criminal law and a former New York City police officer.
The new associate judge on the Court of Appeals will fill the seat vacated by Judith S. Kaye, who was elevated to Chief Judge of the court in March.
Judge Kaye's predecessor, Sol Wachtler, resigned last November after being charged with extorting money from a former lover.


CHRONICLE
MUHAMMAD ALI, the former world heavyweight boxing champion, is in the Middle East, seeking the release of Iranian and Iraqi prisoners of war.
He arrived in Baghdad, Iraq, last Wednesday and is hoping to meet with President Saddam Hussein.
Earlier, he spent 15 days in Teheran, the capital of Iran, where he met with President Hashemi Rafsanjani, The Associated Press reported.


Hartsbeesfontein Journal; South African Commandos: Vigilant, or Vigilante?
The sky was a splash of stars above the cold African prairie.
A huge orange moon hovered at the horizon.
For the volunteers of the Hartbeesfontein Commando, riding patrol in the Plexiglas cage they call the Mobile Microwave, the spectacle overhead was the only excitement offered this night.


BIG RISE IN BIRTHS OUTSIDE WEDLOCK
Highlighting the changes sweeping the American family, the Census Bureau today reported sharp increases in the number of women who become mothers without marrying, an increase that was particularly steep among educated and professional women.
Nearly a quarter of the nation's unmarried women now become mothers, the bureau reported, an increase of almost 60 percent in the past decade.


Preserve Redwoods For Future Inspiration
To the Editor:
The issue around the old-growth redwood forests of the Northwest is not really about jobs and spotted owls.
There is an abundance of very large, young trees in national and private forests all over the country that can be harvested satisfactorily.


Wine Talk
GEORGES DUBOEUF has been described as the Pope of the Vine, the General, the Patron, and more commonly, the King of Beaujolais.
Did anyone mention Florenz Ziegfeld?
Because along with producing about $100 million worth of Beaujolais every year, Mr.
Duboeuf is a master showman.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Ritual's Violence Continues


GENERAL ELECTRIC CO. (N)
Led by its finance, broadcast, appliance, electrical equipment and plastics divisions, the General Electric Company reported a 9.7 percent increase in second-quarter earnings, to $1.33 billion.
The company said its profit margin for continuing businesses was a record 14.2 percent in the quarter, up from 12.8 percent for the quarter a year earlier.
It said earnings of its long-troubled appliance division were "much higher" because of gains in productivity, despite flat revenues.


Now Older and Wiser, Dickerson Starts Anew
For 10 pro football seasons, Eric Dickerson's career has alternated between brilliance and turbulence.
He has run with the best and complained with the worst.
Something or someone always seemed to upset him and overshadow his big performances.
Now he is starting anew with his fourth National Football League team, and this team, the Atlanta Falcons, is coached by Jerry Glanville, who thinks pass in his run-and-shoot offense.
A running back, even one as gifted as Dickerson, could be an afterthought.
Dickerson Is Grateful
A player who moved from the Los Angeles Rams to the Indianapolis Colts to the Los Angeles Raiders and now the Falcons could be bitter.
So why does the former Southern Methodist University star say he is happy, that he is grateful for a chance to show he is still a great runner?


It's Racist, But Hey, It's Disney
Most Americans now know better than to use nasty generalizations about ethnic or religious groups.
Disparaging stereotypes -- the avaricious Jew, the sneaky Chinese, the dumb Irishman, the lazy black person -- are now so unacceptable that it's a shock even to hear them mentioned.
Thanks to current international politics, however, one form of ethnic bigotry retains an aura of respectability in the United States: prejudice against Arabs.
Anyone who doubts this has only to listen to the lyrics in a song from the animated Disney extravaganza "Aladdin": Oh, I come from a land From a faraway place Where the caravan camels roam.
Where they cut off your ear If they don't like your face It's barbaric, but hey, it's home.


Personal Health
CONCERNS about fragile bones have joined worries about being overweight and at risk for heart disease in prompting millions of women near or past menopause to start exercising.
Having heard that exercise can help maintain and even increase bone mass, they are walking, running, swimming, cycling and even lifting weights to ward off the fractures caused by osteoporosis.
But many exercise enthusiasts are not getting the benefits they think they are, recent studies indicate.
First, not all kinds of exercise are equally beneficial to bone strength and some types may do little good.
And second, exercise is but one of three crucial factors in maintaining healthy bones.
The other two, an adequate intake of calcium throughout life and, for women at or past menopause, estrogen replacement therapy, complement the effects of exercise and may even be essential to its potential bone-building benefits.


How to Donate To Flood Relief
Across the country, people have seen images of the Midwest on television and in newspapers, and now they are donating money and supplies to flood victims in Iowa, Illinois and Missouri.
Volunteers at several relief organizations said they were establishing special funds and sending disaster teams to the region to decide what to donate and how to allocate the cash donations.


Robert McCarthy, 83, A Founder of Law Firm
Robert Joseph McCarthy, a founding partner of the law firm of McCarthy, Fingar, Donovan, Drazen &amp; Smith in White Plains, died on Saturday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 83.
At his death Mr.
McCarthy was of counsel to the firm, which he founded in 1946 with Arthur M. Gaynor.
Prominent legal figures like Frederick T. Close, Gerald P. Nolan and Arthur D. Brennan, who became judges, later joined the firm.


Mother Nature and Ol' Man River
Weeks of rainfall in the Midwest have flooded countless acres of open farmland and even cities and towns supposedly protected by dams and levees.
Flooding causes more damage each year than other natural catastrophes, and this year's in middle America will set a record of its own when it finally crests.
Huge amounts of relief will be needed, and should be forthcoming.
But no less needed is a thorough review of measures to limit the threat of flooding in years to come.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a 16-year-old boy arrested in the killing of a mother of eight misstated the residence of the suspect, Derek Anderson, based on information supplied by the police.
Mr.
Anderson lives in the Langston Hughes Apartments.


Newspaper Guild Once Again Finds Itself Left Out
When 10 unions of The New York Post made their deals with Rupert Murdoch on Monday, it was no surprise in the newspaper industry that there was one newspaper union that was left out.
The New York Newspaper Guild, which represents reporters and some editors as well as advertising, clerical and circulation employees, has grown accustomed to that position.
It seems always to be the left-out union.


Dow Drops 8.94, for First Loss in 5 Sessions
Despite the support of low inflation figures, the stock market slipped yesterday for the first time in five sessions.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 8.94 points to close at 3,515.44.
The Government reported that the Producer Price Index for June fell by three-tenths of 1 percent.
But leading market indicators were mixed, as investors continued their anxious vigil for some clear sign of where to put their money.
As they wait, they are becoming more finicky about equities, said Robert Freedman, chief investment officer of John Hancock Mutual Funds.


Voices of Japan: Anger at the Old Politicians and Skepticism About the New
From the presidents of Japan's largest corporations to small shopkeepers, everyone in Japan seems to be wary over the recent political turmoil.
Elections for Parliament on Sunday could end nearly four decades of rule by the Liberal Democratic Party and set Japan on the road to a two-party system, or to a period of unstable rule by coalitions.
Japan's industrial prowess and its relations with the United States could be affected.


Stein Investigators Need More Time
The National Hockey League said the legal team investigating former league president GIL STEIN'S appointment to the Hockey Hall of Fame needs more time.
Originally scheduled to submit their report July 16, lawyers ARNOLD BURNS of New York and YVES FORTIER of Montreal have told the N.H.L. that their findings will now be delivered Aug. 9.


Protesting Grape Sales


Notre Dame's Coaching Legends of the Fall
The first thing LOU HOLTZ wants you to know is that he really doesn't think he belongs on Moose Krause's list of Notre Dame's greatest football coaches.
After all, the others on the list are legends, Knute Rockne, Frank Leahy and ARA PARSEGHIAN, while Holtz, who is entering his eighth season at Notre Dame, was portraying himself yesterday as, aw shucks, just a pretty fair country coach.


Forget the Tiananmen Fixation
The U.S. should stop punishing China for the massacre of demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
China is too important to make this the pivot of our policy.
China -- a nuclear power with intercontinental ballistic missiles and a permanent member's seat on the United Nations Security Council -- has enormous capacity to do mischief on the world stage.


BANK OF NEW YORK CO. (N)
Second-quarter earnings at the Bank of New York increased 49 percent, higher than Wall Street forecasts for the country's 17th-largest bank.
Net income rose to $130 million, or $1.49 a share, up from $87 million, or $1.11 a share, a year earlier.
Analysts had expected earnings of $1.37 a share for the quarter.


Miscellany
*
The 1993 Clio Awards ceremony has been rescheduled to Sept. 13 at the City Center Theater in Manhattan.
The deadline for entries has been extended until tomorrow. *
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported that magazine advertising pages for June totaled 13,364.5, down one-tenth of a percent from June 1992.
For the first six months of 1993, pages totaled 81,024.8, up 2.5 percent from the first six months of 1992.


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Health-Care Pitch Is Given a Preview By Hillary Clinton
Speaking at a heavily scripted community forum here, Hillary Rodham Clinton today previewed the sales pitch she will take on the road this fall to make her case for extensive changes in the nation's health-care system.
Mrs.
Clinton visited a florist's shop to talk with small-business owners and later joined Gov.
John Waihee 3d for a televised round-table discussion that included health-care lobbyists, doctors, nurses and business people.
At each stop, she stressed the themes that had already emerged as likely elements of the health-care proposal that she said would be presented in September.


Gilding the Berry for a Satisfying Finale to Summer Meals
PART of the pleasure of berries is their refreshing fragrance in warm weather.
The local berry season starts in June with minuscule wild strawberries that are picked with one's nose to the ground.
Then come dark, ripe strawberries -- not mammoth but juicily sweet.


Eating Well
ON May 27, a bank-branch manager in Redmond, Wash., was taken to the emergency room of the local hospital.
He had not slept more than an hour on each of the previous 10 nights and had been acting so irrationally -- preaching about visions of rapture and the true meaning of the Bible, screaming at his family -- that he had been locked out of his office.
The cause of all this anguish turned out to be not some illegal substance bought on a dark street corner, or even the overuse of a prescription drug.
It was an herbal dietary supplement that had been recommended to him by a friend at his health club.


Nigerian's Ruse Fails
To the Editor:
The decision of Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida to annul the Nigerian elections of June 12 is a microcosm of the general's nine-year reign.
He came into power brandishing many lofty ideas.
Most he abandoned, and the few he acted upon were implemented half-heartedly.
The country is not better off now than when he took office.


Only Half a Donor Was Required for This Transplant


Office Depot reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Personal Health
CONCERNS about fragile bones have joined worries about being overweight and at risk for heart disease in prompting millions of women near or past menopause to start exercising.
Having heard that exercise can help maintain and even increase bone mass, they are walking, running, swimming, cycling and even lifting weights to ward off the fractures caused by osteoporosis.
But many exercise enthusiasts are not getting the benefits they think they are, recent studies indicate.
First, not all kinds of exercise are equally beneficial to bone strength and some types may do little good.
And second, exercise is but one of three crucial factors in maintaining healthy bones.
The other two, an adequate intake of calcium throughout life and, for women at or past menopause, estrogen replacement therapy, complement the effects of exercise and may even be essential to its potential bone-building benefits.


David Kirschenbaum, 30, Leader Against Violence to Homosexuals
David E. Kirschenbaum, a leader against violence directed at gay people because of their sexual orientation, died on Sunday at home in Manhattan, at the age of 30.
The cause was complications from AIDS, his family said.


Marlboro Billboard at Shea Is Target of Group's Lawsuit
Opponents of smoking hung yet another target on the tobacco industry yesterday, when a coalition of plaintiffs sued the City of New York in State Supreme Court, demanding the removal of a billboard in Shea Stadium advertising Marlboro cigarettes.
The suit was the first filed against the city in a months-long dispute over the billboard.


People
*
Wally Weis was named executive vice president and chief creative officer at Dunn Reber Glenn Marz Advertising, Las Vegas and Reno, Nev., succeeding Bob Browand, who left.
Mr.
Weis, who will be based in Las Vegas, was previously a senior copy writer at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York. *
Irwin Kornfeld was named associate publisher of advertising and marketing at Playboy magazine, New York, succeeding James Spanfeller, who was recently named associate publisher at Inc. magazine, New York.
Mr.
Kornfeld, who was also named a senior vice president for Playboy's publishing division, was previously director of advertising programs at Forbes magazine, New York.


Tiverton Petroleum reports earnings for Year to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.12
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.04
3.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.14
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.38
5.35
6.44
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.61
6.62
7.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.36
7.36
8.64
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.70
5.70
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Renovations Set for Area Near Yankee Stadium
New York City is planning to renovate the Bronx Terminal Market, a hulking collection of warehouses and stores just south of Yankee Stadium, officials said yesterday.
City officials said the plan, which is to be announced at City Hall today, was an effort to reverse the blight in the neighborhood around the ballpark.
But it could also provide additional parking space for the stadium, according to one City Hall official.


Bridge
An unfortunate combination of circumstances have combined to deprive two players from the New York metropolitan area of world ranking in the Epson World Pairs held on June 4.
Julius Fields of Manhattan and Calvin Morris of Rochdale Village, Queens, had a big score at a game in Rochdale Village played under the auspices of the American Bridge Association.
The larger American Contract Bridge League, collating scores in Memphis, treated the results as from an invitational game, and therefore ineligible for world honors.
This would not have mattered but for the fact that the reported score of 74 percent was inaccurate and a major correction had not been made.


A New Button Can Take a Beating
Buttons are the bane of the $2.5 billion men's shirt business.
Never mind fine fabrics, microscopic stitching and exquisite tailoring: If shirt buttons crack under pressure or the heat of commercial laundering, that is what customers will remember.
Some women's shirts have the same problem.
But button breakage is taken far more seriously by men's shirt makers, probably because men do not abandon their clothes as willingly as women do.


In America; Dodgers Deja Vu Again
Compared with George Steinbrenner, Walter O'Malley was Mr. Nice Guy.
O'Malley was widely regarded as the most hated man in Brooklyn because he answered the call of greed in 1957 and took his Dodgers west to Los Angeles.


Course Correction Needed in Somalia
What started as a humanitarian U.N. mission to feed starving Somalis seems to be turning into something far less benign.
The U.N. says 15 people were killed in Monday's raid by U.S. helicopter gunships and ground troops against the headquarters of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid; the Red Cross counts 54 dead.
The bodies of four journalists have also been recovered, apparently victims of mob retaliation.
Whatever the final death count, enough is enough.
Italy now rightly asks that offensive actions be suspended while the international community reassesses its goals.
The Security Council needs to ask what purpose the U.N. military operation is serving, and whether it is worth the heavy price in lives and good will.


Personal Health
CONCERNS about fragile bones have joined worries about being overweight and at risk for heart disease in prompting millions of women near or past menopause to start exercising.
Having heard that exercise can help maintain and even increase bone mass, they are walking, running, swimming, cycling and even lifting weights to ward off the fractures caused by osteoporosis.
But many exercise enthusiasts are not getting the benefits they think they are, recent studies indicate.
First, not all kinds of exercise are equally beneficial to bone strength and some types may do little good.
And second, exercise is but one of three crucial factors in maintaining healthy bones.
The other two, an adequate intake of calcium throughout life and, for women at or past menopause, estrogen replacement therapy, complement the effects of exercise and may even be essential to its potential bone-building benefits.


Unless Situation Improves, U.N. Should Quit Bosnia, Mediator Says
The United Nations mediator for the Balkans said today that he might have no choice but to recommend the withdrawal of United Nations forces from Bosnia and Herzegovina unless the situation improved.
Such statements have been made before, and the possibility surfaced again this month as peace talks stalled.
But the mediator, Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway, also repeated earlier denials that the threat of a withdrawal of United Nations personnel was being used as a way of pushing the Bosnian Muslims into agreeing to a peace plan proposed by the Serbian and Croatian sides.


Jennifer Convertibles Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. Reviews How to Restore Utilities in Sarajevo
President Clinton's top national security aides failed today to agree on how to break the Serbian blockade of basic services to Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, which is in its fifth week without electrical service, tap water and natural gas.
Some senior Administration officials said today's meeting, which was attended by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Defense Secretary Les Aspin and the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, among others, was never intended to decide on specific recommendations for Mr.
Clinton.


MCI's Blimp Unlikely to Crash
While the crash of a Pizza Hut blimp in New York last week deflated the chain's Bigfoot pizza promotion, the MCI Communications Corporation said a blimp would continue to soar in a campaign for its new collect-phoning service.
But there is a big difference between MCI and companies like Pizza Hut that use promotional blimps: the MCI blimp has appeared only in the advertising for its 1-800 Collect Service, not in the sky.
That is because the blimp, featured in a television commercial created by Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York, is only four feet long and is superimposed on the screen so it appears to be flying.


Red, White and Blue, Almost Out of the Blue
Surprise, surprise.
Only a half-dozen years ago, the male selection of American tennis prodigies offered all the promise of a black hole; this year a half-dozen of these wunderkids reached the Round of 16 at the most intimidating Grand Slam in the world, Wimbledon.
"In 1987, nobody was willing to put a nickel on the prospects of the American men," said Ron Woods, head of the United States Tennis Association's player-development program.
"Now we're looking around and shaking our heads trying to explain what happened, why this glut?"


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  EARTHQUAKE TOLL RISES  Japanese authorities said that 97 people died and more than 167 may be missing in Japan's strongest earthquake in 25 years.
Many of the dead fell victim to towering waves or raging fires.
A1  JAPAN: VOICE OF THE PEOPLE  The Japanese are looking toward parliamentary elections with a mixture of hope and dread, but some common threads run through the opinions that they voice.
A8


TWO GERMANS DENY A ROLE IN ATTACK
Two Germans who went on trial today for destroying a Holocaust memorial at a former Nazi concentration camp told the court they had nothing to do with the attack.
Ingo Kehn, 19, and Thomas Haberland, 22, were charged with arson and violating arms laws in connection with a fire in September that gutted a former barracks for Jewish prisoners at the Sachsenhausen camp in eastern Germany.


Eagle Precision reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Stewart Could Buck American Trend for Losing in Britain
American golfers have few reasons to feel particularly confident of victory at this week's 122d British Open, despite the fact that no one feels quite at home amid the foreboding dunes of the Royal St.
George's Golf Club.
Bill Rogers of Texas was the winner here in 1981, but since Tom Watson took home his fifth silver claret jug in 1983, only one native of the United States -- Mark Calcavecchia in 1989 -- has won the world's oldest major championship.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Mike Devlin, center; Sebastian Savage, defensive back; John Parella, defensive tackle; Corbin Lacina, guard; Chris Luneberg, tackle; Pat Akos, tight end; and Russell Copeland and Willie Harris, wide receivers.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Traded Gene Williams, guard, to the Cleveland Browns for an undisclosed future draft choice.
Signed Robert O'Neal, safety.
Placed Chuck Carswell, cornerback, on the waived-injured list.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Coleman Rudolph, defensive lineman; Fred Baxter, tight end; Kenny Shedd, wide receiver-kick returner; and Alec Millen, tackle.
Waived Lonnie Young, safety, and Darren Drozdov, defensive tackle.
Hockey  National Hockey League  SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Traded Jeff Hackett, goalie, to the Chicago Blackhawks for a conditional selection in the 1994 entry draft.
American Hockey League  ST.
JOHN FLAMES -- Named Bob Francis coach.
College
BUCKNELL -- Named Ellen Grosso women's assistant basketball coach.
DUQUESNE -- Named Kris Lamb women's assistant basketball coach.
EAST TEXAS STATE -- Named Rich Lawrence assistant football coach.
NEW HAMPSHIRE -- Named Chris Serino baseball coach.
NICHOLLS STATE -- Announced the resignation of Phil Greco, athletic director.
N.C.-ASHEVILLE -- Named Katie Meier women's assistant basketball coach.
PENNSYLVANIA -- Announced the resignation of Steve Baumann, men's soccer coach.
Named Brian Ierardi and Todd Kennedy sports information interns.
ST. PAUL'S, VA. -- Named Edward B. Joyner men's basketball coach.
TEXAS -- Named Susan Watkins women's golf coach.


Making Home Dialysis Easier
For more than half a million people around the world suffering from chronic kidney failure, life is measured in blocks of time spent hooked to kidney dialysis machines.
Survival depends on either an organ transplant or regular and frequent dialysis, a process that mimics the kidneys' cleansing of wastes and deadly toxins from the blood.
Though dialysis can extend a patient's life for 20 years or more, it is an exhausting regimen.
The most common approach, known as hemodialysis, requires three visits a week to a clinic, where for four to six hours the blood is filtered by a machine.


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consolidated Papers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


C.I.A. Officer Signed Visa For Sheik, U.S. Says
In an odd twist to a bizarre tale, American officials said today that the diplomat at the United States Embassy in Khartoum who signed off on Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's request to enter the United States was an officer of the Central Intelligence Agency.
But he did not act in his capacity as a C.I.A. officer, officials said, rather, he was acting as a consular official, a role he had been assigned at the embassy.
The episode allowed Mr.
Abdel Rahman to travel for the first time to the United States, where his followers now include central suspects in the World Trade Center bombing and a second bomb conspiracy case uncovered in late June.


On the Trail of the Mob, All Roads Lead to Food
FORGET about the plethora of legal and sociological reasons offered for the decline of America's Mafia.
Yes, a soupcon of credit is due to unrelenting crackdowns by the F.B.I. and other investigators, but the underlying cause of the mob's deterioration is more simple: the modern mobster talks too freely and eats too prodigiously.
Gastronomy has evolved into a defining force in the collective persona of the mob, and undercover agents and informers are exploiting the Cosa Nostra's eating habits to undermine the crime families.
Omerta -- the sacred code of silence -- seemingly vanishes when mobsters gather around a restaurant table, an espresso bar in a storefront clubhouse or a saucepan in one of their own kitchens.


Hi-Fidelity is Enlisted In Long-Distance Battle
It may not strike rock-and-roll fans as news, but A.T.&amp; T. announced yesterday that it was introducing a "major breakthrough" in sound quality for ordinary long-distance phone calls: more volume and more bass.
At a splashy news conference in New York, the telephone giant said it would soon start tweaking up sound quality of calls in the United States and Canada with a new technology called True Voice.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: Fighting the River; Along the Levee As People Fight A Tireless River
For 14 days now, through thunderstorms, sweltering heat, swarms of mosquitoes and never-ending mud, the people here have been working side by side around the clock in a war against the elements.
The troops are the National Guard, prison inmates, the county sheriff, local radio broadcasters, farmers, college students, construction workers, retirees, housewives and even the Boy Scouts.
Everyone but the National Guard is a volunteer in the battle against the Mississippi River.


We All Lose Big at Student-Loan 'Casino'
To the Editor:
Two letters defending the role of middlemen in the Guaranteed Student Loan Program (July 2) show why rational reforms are so difficult, even in a program that studies show to be structurally unsound.


With Congress Back in Town, Supporters of Budget Bill Gear Up
With Congress back from a 10-day recess and most Administration officials home from the economic summit in Tokyo, the Government's top policy makers began planning today for the final burst of energy that they hope will lead to enactment of the President's budget.
At the White House, officials said a special office they call "the boiler room" was being set up under the direction of Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman to coordinate the lobbying and public relations tactics for the deficit-reduction legislation.


AT DINNER WITH -- Mark Shields; With Sidekick Gone, The Pundit Next Door Still Guards the Left
MARK SHIELDS has trouble talking about "the separation."
First he tries humor: "You're always the last to know," he says, his lip quivering with mock emotion.
"I thought things were good between us."


Gibson (C.R.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Unitrin Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 9
July 2
July 10
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.1
Gasoline stocks
222.0
220.1
221.7
Distillate stocks
113.7
109.5
107.4
Crude imports, daily
7.1
6.1
7.4
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.8
2.1
Crude stocks
353.8
349.7
330.1
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
96.9
96.3
92.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


As Heat Expands, Nature Contracts
In the heat of the summer, a lot of trees seem to think it is October and are shedding their leaves.
Just about everything and everyone else forced to spend any time in the New York region in the last two weeks has no doubt that it is summer -- a very hot and very dry summer, at that.


A Cellular Call
Shares of Motorola Inc. have surged since late January, from $51 to a 52-week high of $90 in intraday trading yesterday.
Investors have been drawn to the company's strength in cellular communications.
On Monday, Motorola posted a rise in second-quarter earnings, to 83 cents a share from 54 cents for the quarter a year earlier.


Guilty Plea in Fraud Over Check Cashing
Robert M. Felzenberg, the president of a large New Jersey check-cashing company, pleaded guilty in Manhattan yesterday to Federal fraud charges involving the loss of $30 million.
Mr.
Felzenberg's company, the Payroll Express Corporation of Elizabeth, N.J., provided check-cashing services for more than 100 companies, hospitals and governmental agencies.
They advanced cash to Payroll Express, which cashed the payroll checks of their employees at work sites in the New York area.
Payroll Express is now bankrupt.


Khmer Rouge Hint They May End Rebellion
The president of the Khmer Rouge suggested today that the Maoist-inspired rebels were willing to call off their 14-year-old insurgency if they were guaranteed a formal role in Cambodia's new coalition Government.
Ending a three-month self-imposed absence from Phnom Penh, the Khmer Rouge president, Khieu Samphan, returned to the Cambodian capital today and said his rebel troops were willing to be merged into a national army.


Review/Pop; Tina Turner Turns A Little Softer
Tina Turner made one of the more memorable grand entrances at Radio City Music Hall on Monday evening, where she is appearing through Saturday.
As her show opened, a flying saucerlike bank of lights floated down from the top of the stage and opened into a staircase, which the star descended, wearing high spike heels and a filmy mini-dress.
On alighting, Ms.
Turner, accompanied by a seven-man band, flung into her 1989 hit "Steamy Windows," while she and two female dancers flexed and stretched through a strenuous aerobics routine.
The entrance set the tone for a show in which Ms.
Turner, who is 54, maintained a studied distance from her raunchier image of earlier days.
Before her 1984 album, "Private Dancer," made her an international pop diva, her performances were sweatier, more provocative affairs in which she good-humoredly parodied the role of streetwalker.


It's Another American Midsummer Night's Dream
The ghosts of Hank Aaron, Willie Mays and Roberto Clemente shuddered again tonight as the National League limply lost the All-Star Game for the sixth successive season.
The days when those storied sluggers led the Nationals to dominance unparalleled in All-Star play were pushed further into the past when the suddenly strident American Leaguers won, 9-3, and extended the third longest winning streak in the game's history.


Nationwide Health Properties Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fraternization and Friction in the Store Aisles; New York Challenges Wal-Mart Over Dismissal of Two Who Dated Against the Rules
The seeds of romance between Laural Allen and Samuel Johnson were sown in a most unlikely place: the sporting goods department of the new Wal-Mart in Johnstown, N.Y.
When he first laid eyes on her, she was showing a hunting rifle to a customer.
Several months after that encounter, Ms.
Allen and Mr.
Johnson, both sales associates, fell in love.
The relationship ultimately cost them their jobs.


Times Names Editors to Senior Posts
Appointments to four senior editing positions at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
Gerald Boyd, the metropolitan editor, and Soma Golden, the national editor, were promoted to assistant managing editor.


English Journalist Is Named Editor of Daily News
The Daily News has a new editor in chief, an English journalist who trained on Fleet Street.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the chairman and co-publisher of The Daily News, announced yesterday that he had named Martin Dunn, 38, editor in chief.
Mr.
Dunn has been the editor of The Boston Herald, a tabloid, for the last four months.


Comic Reversals in 'Arms and the Man'
EVEN at his most lighthearted, George Bernard Shaw didn't let an audience off lightly.
Look at "Arms and the Man," by his own designation a "pleasant play," also an early and a minor one.
It leaps into farce and crosses over into operetta, having inspired the libretto for "The Chocolate Soldier," but that doesn't disguise Shaw's insistence on rationality and his contempt for hypocrisy.
Against a veneer of frivolous dalliance, he was debunking posturing patriotism and the glorification of war and, of course, commenting on class differences, while mocking the shameless romanticism and idealism that suited his story.
Consider the preface, which Shaw says provides a "hint as to what I am driving at."


A Free Show On Broadway
"Broadway on Broadway," the second annual free outdoor concert in Times Square, will begin at 11:30 A.M. today on the traffic island between 43d and 44th Streets on Broadway.
The hourlong concert will feature stars from 16 Broadway shows accompanied by a 28-piece orchestra.


Abandoned By Clinton, She Finds Acceptance
Lani Guinier, the lawyer who only a month ago was jettisoned by an embarrassed President Clinton as his choice to be the Justice Department's civil rights chief, was embraced as a newfound hero today at the N.A.A.C.P.'s annual conference.
In an address to the association's delegates, Ms.
Guinier criticized the Clinton Administration, Congress and most pointedly the Supreme Court, saying it has neglected to resolve racial inequalities.


High Hopes in Manchester, England
International Olympic Committee President JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH lifted the hopes of Manchester, England, yesterday when he toured the city and said its chances of winning the bid to be host of the 2000 Olympic Games were "very, very high."
Samaranch made his visit on the day an I.O.C. study was released on the six cities vying for the Games.
"You gave us a unique and wonderful lesson in how to present an Olympic bid," Samaranch said after a ceremony at Manchester's town hall.


That's a Drift of Fisherfolk, if You Please
To the Editor:
A front-page caption on an unusually artistic photograph July 2 identified a "group" of fishermen engaged in their favorite sport on Sandy Hook peninsula.
A "group" indeed!


Clinton Names R.T.C. Choice
The Clinton Administration today nominated Stanley Tate, a Republican who is a Florida real estate developer, to be chief executive of the Federal agency that sells the assets of failed savings and loans.
The announcement came on the eve of the House's consideration of legislation to finance the agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation.


U.N. Says It Will Press Effort to Disarm Somalis
A day after angry mobs killed four Western journalists in retaliation for a United Nations military strike against a Somali clan leader, senior United Nations officials in Mogadishu said the United Nations would press ahead with its goal of disarming the capital and increasing its forces as it searched for a the fugitive clan leader.
United Nations military officials said the United Nations had no intention of backing off militarily despite increasing criticism and pressure from relief agencies as well as member nations, particularly Italy, which has several thousand troops in Somalia and whose Government today called for the suspension of United Nations combat operations in Somalia and a review of the peacekeeping mission.
Over the last weeks, Italy has stressed the need to negotiate a solution to the conflict with Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid and his faction, a move that has angered United Nations officials.


Not Quite Hog Heaven
Lillehammer's Olympic organizers have dropped plans to make two million disposable plates from potato starch and then feed them to pigs.
"We'll be using recyclable paper plates instead," said KATHRINE KJELLAND, spokeswoman for Norway's 1994 Winter Games organizing committee.


Girl, 5, Is Killed by a Hit-and-Run Livery-Cab Driver
A 5-year-old girl crossing a street on the Upper West Side of Manhattan yesterday morning with her mother was struck and killed by a livery cab, which then sped off, the police said.
The 23-year-old livery driver was stopped on the Upper East Side by the police shortly after the accident and taken into custody.
The cabby obtained his driver's license in June, but the authorities said they believed that he had accumulated eight violations, dating back to 1991, to which he had never responded.


Market Place; Debt Still Threatens to Prevent Airlines' Recovery from Taking Off.
THE oft-recited bullish formula for airline stocks typically points out that many carriers are cutting costs by means like grounding planes and shedding unprofitable routes.
With a little boost from the economy and a break from heavy fare wars, this lean approach should translate into quick profits.
Or so the argument goes.


Sony Purchases a Little Help In a Classical-Video Venture
Two major forces in the classical-music world reached agreement yesterday on a transaction that is sure to resonate throughout the field.
Sony Music Entertainment, a division of the Japanese electronics conglomerate Sony Corporation, acquired CAMI Video, a production and distribution arm of Columbia Artists Management, which represents many musical superstars.
"There has been no commercially successful classical video," said Peter Gelb, the president of CAMI Video.
"Sony feels there is a future market, and so do I."


First Charges Are Brought In Inquiries Into Deaths
Joel Rifkin, the unemployed landscaper who the police say has confessed to killing 17 women, was indicted today on charges of murdering a 22-year-old Manhattan woman whose body was found here on June 28 in the back of his pickup truck.
In the first formal accusation to arise from investigations in several jurisdictions, a Nassau County grand jury indicted the 34-year-old East Meadow man on two counts of second-degree murder in the death of Tiffany Bresciani.
Mr.
Rifkin was also indicted on a charge of reckless endangerment for leading state troopers on a high-speed chase before crashing his pickup on a Mineola street, officials said.


Cuban Official Downplays Players' Defections
Since arriving at the World University Games, the Cuban delegation has seen three of its athletes -- two baseball players and a fencer -- try to leave the delegation.
But at a news conference today, the head of the delegation said there was no problem other than "just craziness" on the part of the athletes.
"Even if there's five, our delegation is made up of 125 athletes," said Manuel Morales Quintana, speaking through a translator.
"In the case of the baseball team, the baseball team that plays at home is an elite team of at least 600 players. I don't consider three out of 1,000 anything to worry about."


Executive Changes
CHIRON CORP., Emeryville, Calif., a biotechnology company, appointed Renato Fuchs senior vice president.
ENVIROFIL INC., Philadelphia, appointed Gerald J. Lynam executive vice president and chief financial officer.
MATTEL INC., Los Angeles, appointed Michael L. Durik senior vice president of human resources and administration.
NEW ENGLAND INVESTMENT COS., Boston, named G. Neal Ryland executive vice president and chief financial officer.
PUTNAM INVESTMENTS, Boston, named Peter Carman senior managing director and chief of global equity investments.
PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO., Cincinnati, named Erik G. Nelson senior vice president and chief financial officer.
RUSSELL CORP., Alexander City, Ala., an apparel marketer, appointed J. T. Taunton executive vice president of sales and marketing.
James D. Nabors was named executive vice president and chief financial officer.


John E. Bordley, 90, Professor and Expert On Treating the Deaf
Dr.
John Earle Bordley, a Johns Hopkins researcher and educator who worked to improve the treatment of the deaf and hard of hearing, died Monday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 90.
He was professor emeritus of otolaryngology at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, which said the family did not disclose the cause of death.


COMPANY NEWS
ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES INC., Sunnyvale, Calif., has begun construction of a semiconductor manufacturing plant costing up to $1 billion in Austin, Tex.
SIEMENS A.G., Munich, Germany, sold part of its tube business to the French electrical company Thomson CSF.
Terms were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO, OPPOSING BILL, MANEUVERS
Facing political pressure to sign a mental health spending bill that he vehemently opposes, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has managed to hold on to his options by incrementally shifting his line of defense while seeking common ground.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  C.I.A.
LINKED TO SHEIK'S VISA
In an odd twist to an already bizarre tale, American officials said that the diplomat at the United States Embassy in Khartoum who signed off on Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's request to enter the United States was an officer of the Central Intelligence Agency.
B6.


Service Merchandise Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Rock; Who's Still Rocking? 'Tommy's' Father
Pete Townshend was wearing a black suit and white shirt, buttoned to the collar, when he performed at the Beacon Theater on Monday night.
He used a third of his three-hour show to perform his latest album-length musical theater work, "Psychoderelict" (Atlantic).
But with an electric guitar in hand, the 48-year-old songwriter was still a rocker, singing with fervor, duckwalking and jumping around and, at one point, accidentally careening into a speaker cabinet as he bounded across the stage.
The first hard-rock pioneer to win a Tony Award has not succumbed to middle-aged decorum.
The concert, part of Mr.
Townshend's first American tour leading a band that's not the Who, balanced crowdpleasers and obscurities.
He drew on his solo albums and on "Rough Mix," a 1977 collaboration with Ronnie Lane.
But he didn't hesitate to sing material he wrote that was originally belted by Roger Daltrey with the Who.
Mr.
Townshend even came up with a reasonable match for the drawn-out shout of "Yeahhhh!" in "Won't Get Fooled Again."


Review/Dance; A Dark Meditation on Death by Martha Clarke
Past and present were united here this week on an unusual program at the American Dance Festival that ranged from a dumbfounding performance by Gary Chryst in a new work by Martha Clarke to major revivals, both rousing and poignant, of 1930's social-protest works by the modern-dance pioneer Helen Tamiris.
Miss Clarke's "Dammerung," created last spring in the Netherlands, received its United States premiere on Sunday night at the festival, and the effect of this 11-minute piece was nothing less than shattering.
Mr.
Chryst, a former leading dancer in the Joffrey Ballet who is often seen on Broadway (most recently in "Guys and Dolls"), has always been an outstanding, versatile artist.


Food Notes
Eating U.S.A.
"The practice of medicine would be made much easier if I could persuade my male patients to diet more and my female patients to diet less." These words, which sound so familiar, are surprising only because they were written 60 years ago, back in 1933, in an article called "The Rise and Fall of Food Fads" that appeared in American Mercury magazine.
They are quoted in a new book, "Paradox of Plenty," by Harvey Levenstein (Oxford University Press, $27.50), a compelling history of food and eating in modern America.


T.W.A. Chooses a New Chairman
Trans World Airlines confirmed yesterday that it had named William R. Howard, the former chairman of Piedmont Airlines, to be its chairman when the carrier emerges from bankruptcy protection.
The airline also said yesterday that it had rescheduled its next bankruptcy hearing to Aug. 11 from next week.
It hopes to bid farewell to bankruptcy courts, which have overseen its operations since January 1992, by the end of August.


Federal Express Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Resort Income Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Issue, Again: The Rein on Hussein
Iraq may be quarreling with the United Nations over arms inspections again, but the focus of debate has shifted in a way that reflects the monitors' success in shutting down the country's nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs.
No longer is President Saddam Hussein playing hide and seek with United Nations arms inspectors trying to ferret out his secret arms storage, manufacture and testing sites, as he has for the last two and a half years.
Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapon programs are virtually dead.
The arms inspectors have found nothing for more than a year.


Legent Stock Loses One-Third of Its Value
Shares of the Legent Corporation lost more than a third of their value yesterday after the mainframe software developer said third-quarter earnings would fall far short of Wall Street expectations.
Legent stock closed at $17.75, down $10.125, on Nasdaq.
Trading was extremely heavy, with more than 9.4 million shares changing hands.


Cricket Is Coming to Manhattan
Bowler, batsman, wicket and test may not be household terms when it comes to everyday sports parlance, but a group of local cricketers is trying to change that.
By staging the Sir Gary Sobers Cup at Baker Field's Wien Stadium in upper Manhattan this Sunday, the New York Cricket Tourers are trying to get more exposure for their sport.


Abandoned By Clinton, She Finds Acceptance
Lani Guinier, the lawyer who only a month ago was jettisoned by an embarrassed President Clinton as his choice to be the Justice Department's civil rights chief, was embraced as a newfound hero today at the N.A.A.C.P.'s annual conference.
In an address to the association's delegates, Ms.
Guinier criticized the Clinton Administration, Congress and most pointedly the Supreme Court, saying it has neglected to resolve racial inequalities.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York named Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, to handle advertising and promotional projects meant to combat the recent spate of sexual assaults in swimming pools known as "whirlpooling." Korey, Kay, which has handled other projects for the city, will introduce a print, radio and eventually a television campaign carrying such themes as "Whirlpool ain't cool; Don't dis your sis, and Don't dis yourself." *
Childhope, New York, to Merkley Newman Harty, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for the nonprofit organization.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: Effects on Business; U.S. Economy Too Vast To Be Hurt by Flooding
For all the spectacular devastation of the Mississippi flood of 1993, the impact on the huge American economy is likely to be very small, many experts say.
While the flood has threatened to interrupt shipments of food, chemicals, cars and other products, nearly every obstacle has so far been overcome or bypassed -- avoiding the damage that might have resulted from grain shortages or interrupted shipments from Midwestern factories.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Broadway and Seventh Avenue will be closed between 42d and 47th Streets, from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. for the presentation of "On Broadway."


June Drop In Producer Price Index
Held down by persistent weakness in economic growth, prices received by American producers fell by three-tenths of 1 percent in June, the biggest monthly decline in more than two years, the Labor Department reported today.
This was the second consecutive reading of the Producer Price Index to provide reassurance that large increases early in the year were an aberration and not the early stages of revived inflation, analysts said.
The index was unchanged in May after a six-tenths of 1 percent rise in April.
It had risen at a 4.7 percent annual rate in the first four months of the year.


Personal Health
CONCERNS about fragile bones have joined worries about being overweight and at risk for heart disease in prompting millions of women near or past menopause to start exercising.
Having heard that exercise can help maintain and even increase bone mass, they are walking, running, swimming, cycling and even lifting weights to ward off the fractures caused by osteoporosis.
But many exercise enthusiasts are not getting the benefits they think they are, recent studies indicate.
First, not all kinds of exercise are equally beneficial to bone strength and some types may do little good.
And second, exercise is but one of three crucial factors in maintaining healthy bones.
The other two, an adequate intake of calcium throughout life and, for women at or past menopause, estrogen replacement therapy, complement the effects of exercise and may even be essential to its potential bone-building benefits.


John Codella, 64, Who Helped Build Intelligence Society
John J. Codella, the New York public-relations man who brought American Mensa to the country's attention and watched it grow, died on Thursday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 64 and lived in Marlton, N.J.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.


Merfin Hygienic reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSH SUBPOENAED IN BANKER'S TRIAL
Former President George Bush was served with a subpoena today to appear as a witness at the trial of an Atlanta banker accused of making nearly $5 billion in unauthorized loans to finance Iraq's arms buildup.
The lawyer for Christopher P. Drogoul, the banker, said Mr.
Bush's testimony was needed to demonstrate the main point of his client's defense -- that Mr.
Drogoul was carrying out the Bush Administration's policy of tilting toward Iraq in its war with Iran and of trying to woo President Saddam Hussein with American arms and dollars.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about airplanes that pull advertising banners over beaches misstated the business commitments of the Aero-Tag Company.
The company has been fully booked some weekends, but is not booked for the entire summer.
A caption repeated the error.


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: In the Heartland; In Each Town, People Try to Cope With the River That Runs Through It
City Hall is sandbagged.
So is the Methodist church, which is now the town's food distribution center.
Grafton, Ill., and its 918 residents are surrounded by water.
So people boat into this Mississippi River town and tie up to the fences, street signs and the church steps.
Dozens floated over to the church on Sunday for a candlelight service and sang "Amazing Grace."


Davey Allison, Stock-Car Driver, Dies at 32 After Helicopter Crash
Davey Allison, the 1992 Daytona 500 winner and a member of one of stock-car racing's most prominent families, died yesterday at Carraway Methodist Medical Center in Birmingham, Ala., of head injuries suffered in the crash of a helicopter.
He was 32.
Allison was piloting the craft on Monday, only three weeks after having purchased it, when it went down at the Talladega (Ala.) Superspeedway.
He underwent surgery to relieve pressure on his brain, but never regained consciousness.
Dr.
Evan Zieger, a neurosurgeon at the hospital, pronounced Allison dead at 7 A.M. yesterday.


Presidential Ball in Spotlight
Presidential Ball is feeling like a million. Again.
After winning the $1 million North America Cup on June 26 at Greenwood Raceway in Toronto, the top-rated standardbred in North America is heavily favored to win the $1 million Meadowlands Pace on Saturday night at the Meadowlands.
Only Precious Bunny has won both, in 1991.


MDC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Thinking Small -- A special report; Is Smaller Better? Educators Now Say Yes for High School
The big urban high school, a place of opportunity, anonymity and most recently fear, is under siege by a growing army of critics who want to abolish it.
A generation ago, educators endorsed large high schools because they could offer a wide range of subjects and extracurricular activities at a relatively low administrative cost.
But now many researchers and educators alike see big urban high schools -- those with 2,000 to 5,000 students -- as Dickensian workhouses breeding violence, dropouts, academic failure and alienation.


One Killed And 4 Hurt In Shooting
A man wielding a 9-millimeter pistol opened fire in front of a South Bronx bodega yesterday, killing the young man with whom he had been arguing and wounding four bystanders, the police said.
The police said they knew little about the dead man, 22-year-old Jose Rivera.
But several people who said they knew him, including a correction officer, said he was a crack dealer who had complained only the night before that other dealers would not let him sell drugs in the area.


Book Notes; Writer Uses Her Plot To Attack an Enemy
Martha Grimes's new novel, "The Horse You Came In On" (Alfred A. Knopf) is not only a triple-murder mystery, but also a powerful indictment of literary theft, whose plot turns on a newly discovered Edgar Allan Poe short story that may or may not be the work of a clever plagiarist.
At the same time, one of Ms.
Grimes's characters, a novelist named Ellen Taylor, confronts her own writerly dilemma: how to deal with another author, Vicki Salva, who she believes has filched much of her material.
All's fair in fiction, of course, and what Ms.
Grimes has done, apparently, is use her book to air her own grievances, in the tradition of 18th-century satirists who changed their enemies' names and then skewered them in print or, more recently, of Nora Ephron, whose book "Heartburn" was one big howl of fictional rage against her ex-husband, Carl Bernstein.
In this case, Ms.
Grimes's bete noir happens to be another mystery writer, Elizabeth George.


60-Minute Gourmet
POACHING seafood in a court bouillon is one of the oldest techniques of French cooking.
The classic court bouillon imparts a subtle, herby flavor to all kinds of seafood.
The carrots and onions give a touch of sweetness, and even the pinch of cayenne plays an important role in the overall balance.
Poaching in a court bouillon is not only one of the most healthful methods of cooking fish but also one of the easiest.
You just have to watch the clock to prevent overcooking.


Big 3 Rebuffed on Minivans
Detroit's Big Three auto makers lost another round today in their attempt to convince trade officials that the Japanese were selling minivans below cost in the United States.
The United States Court of International Trade, which serves as an appeals tribunal in trade issues, rejected arguments by the General Motors Corporation, the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation that Japanese manufacturers had inflicted financial harm on them by selling minivans at less than fair market value, which is called dumping.


97 Japanese Reported Killed By Quake and Huge Waves
As rescue workers and survivors dug through the rubble of coastal communities devastated by Japan's strongest earthquake in 25 years, Japanese authorities said today that 97 people died and upwards of 167 may be missing, many of them victims of towering waves and raging fires.
The worst damage, and more than half of the confirmed deaths, occurred on Okushiri, a small island of fishermen and vacationers in the Sea of Japan off the southwestern coast of Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost territory.
Television images of the island's low-lying village showed scenes of utter devastation, with houses and Buddhist temples splintered in the mud, boats thrown far inland, and roofs of some homes floating out to sea.


When They Can't Live in a Hospital or Outside
To the Editor:
A July 2 news article on a dispute in the New York State Legislature over funds for the mentally ill discusses the mental health costs involved in community care versus hospital treatment.
Unfortunately, these two choices do not really apply to many mentally ill people.


Aspin Reported To Have Settled On Gay Policy
Defense Secretary Les Aspin will recommend to President Clinton that homosexuals be allowed to serve in the military as long as they do not make public or private declarations of their sexual orientation, gay-rights advocates said they were told today by senior Pentagon officials.
Mr.
Aspin's decision as reported by the advocates would put the Secretary behind one of the more conservative proposals offered in the debate over homosexuals in the military.


Judge Requires Yonkers To Build 168 Apartments
Chastising the city of Yonkers for continuing to avoid integrating its housing, a Federal judge yesterday ordered the city to proceed in building 168 subsidized and market-rate apartments on three sites and to work on plans for scores of additional units.
In a decision that he took one hour and 10 minutes to read, Judge Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court in Manhattan made it clear that he was not satisfied with a plan that city officials had submitted that relied principally on finding 450 existing condominiums and cooperatives to house poor and middle-income families in white neighborhoods.
Furthermore, he criticized the plans for the 115 apartments that the city had said it would build.


When They Can't Live in a Hospital or Outside; Budget Sacrifice
To the Editor:
As the parent of a wonderful son, stricken with a devastating psychiatric illness while an honor student at college, I applaud your July 2 news article on the fight over funds for the mentally ill and your July 3 editorial "Help for the Mentally Ill."


Is 42d St. Development in Hands of 'Professional Crackpots'?
To the Editor:
Walking down the 42d Street entrance to the IRT subway, I glanced at a movie marquee reading, "A lot of professionals are crackpots," which you describe in a July 7 news article on the art that has replaced kung fu movies in Times Square because of the actions of the 42d Street Development Project.
I had just left my office at Broadway and 43d Street after spending a hostile day on the phone with representatives of the Governor's office, the New York State Urban Development Corporation and the development project.


A Versatile Marinade
A Chinese-style marinade is good not only for lamb, but for pork and beef as well.
It penetrates the meat quickly and adds a lot of flavor.


Campaign to Fight Attacks in Public Pools
Wearing a button that read "Don't Dis Your Sis," Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced the start of a public relations campaign aimed at encouraging young men to respect their female counterparts.
The campaign was spurred by a recent spate of sexual assaults at city pools in which young men, often chanting rap lyrics, wrapped arms and churned through the water, ripping the bathing suits off young girls and fondling them in a phenomenon known as "the whirlpool." The police said five such attacks, all at different pools, were reported in less than a week with the latest reported on Sunday.
Three youths were arrested in that attack.


Critic's Notebook; Upstaging a New Lloyd Webber Musical
In the narrow world of British show business, little short of an earthquake could upstage the opening of a new Andrew Lloyd Webber musical.
But as it bizarrely happened, just such a tremor shook the West End on Monday.
Hours before the opening of Mr.
Lloyd Webber's "Sunset Boulevard," the newspapers gave big play to the unexpected announcement that the West End production of the Broadway hit "City of Angels" would close after only a four-month run.
"City of Angels" received rave reviews, and its box-office collapse was blamed on the gravity of the recession and the declining sophistication of West End audiences.
Since both "Angels" and "Sunset Boulevard" happen to be about Hollywood in the late 1940's, the abrupt failure of the American show cast a particular pall over Mr.
Lloyd Webber's gala premiere.
Although "Sunset" boasts the cushion of a large advance sale -- at $:4 million ($6 million), neck and neck with a new revival of "Grease," starring Debbie Gibson -- any visitor to its box office last week could discover that seats are readily available, as they are for virtually every West End attraction.
No wonder, then, that The Evening Standard ran an editorial on Monday all but praying for the musical's success, reminding its readers that a "smash hit show" not only "lifts our thoughts from humdrum, everyday toils" but "also draws foreign visitors to London."


Reed's Signings Come Down to Walters and Dudley
P.
J.
Brown was the top draft pick of the Nets last year, but decided against attending New Jersey's summer camp.
Instead, he chose to go to Greece and play in the European league.
Brown doesn't think that will happen to this year's top pick, Rex Walters.
"I think he'll be here," Brown said today as the Nets opened their summer camp at Fairleigh Dickinson University without Walters.
"He's too high a draft pick for that."


Cuomo Names Ex-F.B.I. Agent Inspector General
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today appointed a former F.B.I. agent to be New York State's top investigator of government corruption.
The former agent, George R. Moresco, replaces Joseph A. Spinelli as State Inspector General.
Mr.
Spinelli resigned on June 30 to join the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand in Manhattan.


Jack Bittner, 76, Actor and Singer On Stage and TV
Jack Bittner, an actor and singer in theater, television and the opera for half a century, died on June 26 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76.
His wife, Mae Cooper Bittner, said the cause was a heart attack.


Limited Has Deal on Unit
The Limited Inc., which operates several specialty apparel store chains including Express, the Limited and Victoria's Secret, said yesterday that it had a tentative agreement to sell a 60 percent stake in its Brylane direct mail division.
The buyer is an affiliate of Freeman Spogli &amp; Company, a Los Angeles-based merchant banking company.
The Limited declined to disclose the terms of the agreement and cautioned that the deal was subject to "certain material contingencies."


Portrait of Boxer: Artemiev to Be Honored
SERGEI ARTEMIEV, the Russian boxer who suffered a cerebral hemorrhage in a March 21 fight against CARL GRIFFITH in Atlantic City, will see his portrait installed tomorrow night at the Manhattan Brewing Company restaurant on Thompson Street.
He will also receive a check for $20,000, the money from a recent fund-raising event staged for him.
Boxers expected to attend are: KEVIN KELLEY, BUDDY MCGIRT, VINNY PAZIENZA and BOBBY CZYZ.


Chief Executive Is Resigning From First Boston
In a sign of continuing turmoil at the firm, the CS First Boston Group Inc. announced late yesterday that Archibald Cox Jr., the president and chief executive of the First Boston Corporation, had submitted his resignation, effective Sept. 1.
In a terse five-paragraph news release issued by the firm, Mr.
Cox said he was resigning to "seek other personal interests."


Merrill Lynch Net at a High; Paine Webber Up Sharply
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest brokerage firm, yesterday reported record second-quarter earnings led by double-digit increases in income from trading, commissions, interest and dividends income and asset management.
Net income for the quarter surged 52.5 percent, to a record $345.04 million, or $3.05 a share, compared with $226.23 million, or $1.97 a share, for the corresponding quarter a year earlier.
Revenues rose 18.2 percent, to $3.97 billion, from $3.36 billion last year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Producer prices fell three-tenths of 1 percent in June, the biggest monthly decline in more than two years.
The decrease probably means the Fed will not raise interest rates soon to combat inflation, which had surged early in the year.  [ Page D1. ]
The economic impact of the Mississippi flood is likely to be small.
Although shipments of many products have been interrupted, most obstacles have been overcome or bypassed.  [ A17. ]


Judge Reaffirms Award to Reynolds
A federal judge in Columbus, Ohio, reaffirmed yesterday the $27.4 million he awarded to BUTCH REYNOLDS, the 400-meter world-record holder, who was banned by track's world governing body for allegedly using steroids.
United States District Court Judge JOSEPH KINNEARY rejected an appeal by the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
The I.A.A.F. based its appeal on the argument that United States courts had no jurisdiction over the international body.


U.S. and Florida Growers Reach Pact on Everglades
In an action aimed at ending the biggest environmental debate in Florida history after five years of litigation, the Federal and state governments today announced an agreement with agricultural interests on a $465 million plan to help clean up the endangered Everglades.
Under the accord, made public this morning by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt at a news conference in Washington, sugar companies and other large farming concerns would pay as much as $322 million over the next 20 years to restore the quantity and quality of water flowing into Everglades National Park.
The Federal Government and state and regional agencies would bear the remaining costs.


New York Will Help Pay for Buffalo Arena
The State of New York kicked in $25 million yesterday toward a new arena in downtown Buffalo that the Sabres say they need to remain in the city.
The money was included in a bill signed by Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO that will provide up to $60 million for stadium projects statewide.
The money will be doled out as loans or grants for new sports facilities, mostly minor-league baseball stadiums.


Wheat In Your Beer? Thirst-Killer From Europe Catches On
A SUMMERTIME thirst for beer usually leads to the nearest frosty can or bottle.
But beer drinkers with a taste for tradition are beginning to discover the extra refreshment in wheat beers, long the classic summer beers of Germany and Belgium.
Everything about wheat beers is distinctive, starting with the grain used to make them -- wheat, rather than the usual barley.
These beers are light-bodied, often delicately effervescent -- with a sprightliness likened to champagne -- and extremely quenching.
Ideally, they are poured into foot-high, vase-shaped glasses that hold the typically thick, creamy head.
The brew is often cloudy with sediment.


Sony Purchases a Little Help In a Classical-Video Venture
Two major forces in the classical-music world reached agreement yesterday on a transaction that is sure to resonate throughout the field.
Sony Music Entertainment, a division of the Japanese electronics conglomerate Sony Corporation, acquired CAMI Video, a production and distribution arm of Columbia Artists Management, which represents many musical superstars.
"There has been no commercially successful classical video," said Peter Gelb, the president of CAMI Video.
"Sony feels there is a future market, and so do I."


After a Long Goodbye, A Time of Catching Up
THERE were times in the past week when they both wept.
Never in front of each other, though.
They found private times and spaces.
Both were overwhelmed by joy and melancholy at the same time.
Ariana Krawitz cried when she thought of all those years she didn't know her own ethnic heritage and would look in the mirror and puzzle over her large nose and her olive skin.


A Fat Drug: Hopes and Reality
A NOVEL type of diet drug has entered the final stretch of clinical testing in the United States and Europe, and, as might be expected with any new strategy on the weight-control front, rumors about its prowess have been greatly exaggerated.
The new medication, called either by its chemical name, tetrahydrolipstatin, or by its generic name, orlistat, works in what seems to be the sweetest possible fashion, blocking the absorption of much of the fat that has been consumed and allowing it to pass right through the intestines before the body's annoyingly efficient storage system has a chance to claim it as its own.
In so doing, the drug can help eliminate about 10 to 15 percent of the day's caloric intake with relative ease, sort of allowing dieters to eat their cake and not have it, too.


A Look at the North American Pact's Added Costs
As the Clinton Administration and Congress grapple with the political problems of the North American Free Trade Agreement this summer, one issue keeps coming up: the potential cost of the pact to the Federal budget.
Estimates range up to $40 billion in lost tariff revenue, benefits for American workers who are unemployed as a result of new competition from Mexican factories, and bridges and highways to carry additional traffic.


ProGroup Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stolt Comex Seaway S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Careful Player Moves Closer To the Top at Bear Stearns
James E. Cayne's company biography devotes 10 lines to his achievements at Bear Stearns, 13 lines to his achievements at the bridge table.
Yesterday, the sum of those achievements helped him to succeed Alan C. (Ace) Greenberg as the company's chief executive.
Employees and analysts said Mr.
Cayne's elevation brought him appropriate recognition at a company that had been increasingly under his guidance.
But they noted that Mr.
Greenberg, as chairman, would remain the final authority at Bear Stearns.
He plans to keep his seat at the head of the company's trading desk, ruling with a growl and a scowl.
Mr.
Greenberg is 65; Mr.
Cayne, 59.


Puncturing the Many Pooh-Bahs
The Wish for Kings
Democracy at Bay
By Lewis H. Lapham
213 pages. Grove/Atlantic Press. $22.
The self-important personalities and their courtiers who are skewered with delight by Lewis Lapham in "The Wish for Kings" call to mind the closing line of Mort Sahl's comic turn at the old Hungry I in San Francisco: "Is there anyone here I haven't insulted?"


The Pop Life
Rod Stewart
Rod Stewart is taking a band, an orchestra, singers and, of course, his distinctive rasp to Madison Square Garden on Oct. 31 and Nov. 1 as part of a coast-to-coast American concert tour.
Tickets will go on sale on Monday.


Funds Lend Where Others Won't
"Come back next year and you'll see a miracle," said Michael Dawkins, muscling a concrete pillar as heavy as the July heat into the gutted row house he is helping to rebuild.
To call them decrepit would flatter the shells that Mr.
Dawkins and other construction workers employed by the North Camden Land Trust are overhauling.
And to call the neighborhood destitute would understate the enduring poverty on State Street, where the nonprofit organization is halfway through rehabilitating 20 units of affordable housing.


Campus Journal; Actor-Turned-Teacher Brings Elan to Classroom
It could have been a 13-year-old's nightmare: French class on a sunny Saturday afternoon during summer vacation in a classroom without air-conditioning.
But when the teacher's antics include pirouettes, singing, jumping, shouting, falling into students' laps, wearing vampire teeth and throwing vegetables around the room, it helps ward off the old French-class ennui.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
RICHARD H. SOLOMON, a former United States Ambassador to the Philippines and a former assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, has been selected as the new president of the United States Institute of Peace.
He will take over the organization, whose headquarters are in Washington, in September.
The institute is an independent, nonpartisan organization financed by Federal funds that was established by Congress in 1984 to promote the nonviolent resolution of conflicts throughout the world, using education, training, research, policy analysis and the distribution of grants.


G.M. Plans To Increase 1994 Prices
Amid an increasingly robust automotive market, the General Motors Corporation said today that it would raise the prices of its 1994 models by an average of 1.5 percent for cars and 2.2 percent for trucks.
At the same time, more equipment that had been optional would become standard and included in the price of a vehicle, the company said.


Abrupt Death In Abortion Is Investigated
Criminal and civil investigations have begun into the death of a 33-year-old Bronx woman who died during an abortion last Friday.
The woman, Guadalupe Negron, died Friday afternoon after her uterus was perforated during a second-trimester abortion at the Metro Women's Center in Corona, Queens.


Jefferies Sizzles, While Mets Burn
It has been two and a half years since Gregg Jefferies wore a Mets uniform, and the repercussions of what his presence meant to the team still fly.
Just last month, for instance, as Mets co-owner Nelson Doubleday was witnessing the disintegration of his front office, he took a moment to once again slap down a former manager, Davey Johnson.
That was for Johnson's pampering of Jefferies during the infielder's first full season, in 1989.


Mortgage Risk Great in 3 States
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut do not fare well in a new analysis of mortgage default rates.
The three states are projected to have among the highest default rates over the next five years.
The analysis, done by Fitch Investors Service Inc., the credit rating firm, divides the country into 43 regions and uses a set of economic indicators -- unemployment rates, personal income growth, housing starts, existing home sales, industry diversification and population growth -- to project future default rates.


Kruk's Nightmare Is Wild And Fast
John Kruk hadn't just dreamed about Randy Johnson.
He had nightmares about the Seattle Mariners' left-hander and thanked the baseball gods he never had to face the 6-foot-10-inch strong-arm man.
The nightmare turned real tonight, however, as the Philadelphia Phillies' most prolific hitter had his legs turn to jelly in the face of the game's leading strikeout artist (171 in 144 2/3 innings).


Mobilizing Support For a Stricken Family
Like a small Southern town that somehow picks itself up and migrates from one race track to another each weekend, the sport of stock-car racing has developed its own emotional and spiritual support system over the years.
And now, once again, it will be put to the service of two of the community's most admired and star-crossed citizens, Bobby and Judy Allison.


U.S. Embassy Strikes a Sour Note in Bulgaria
Problems between the United States and Bulgaria used to arise from big-power hostility, magnified by Bulgaria's tendency to follow Soviet suggestions beyond minimal requirements.
Now a conflict has arisen from Bulgaria's eagerness to please the United States at any cost.
The Government, yielding at last to a long-standing American request to provide a larger, more easily protected building for the United States Embassy, has offered the home of Bulgaria's spawning ground of musicians, the 85-year-old Lyubomir Pipkov High School of Music.


INSIDE
Shooting in Bronx Leaves One Dead And 4 Injured
A man with a 9-millimeter pistol opened fire in front of a South Bronx bodega, killing the young man with whom he had been arguing and wounding four bystanders.
Page B1.
The Voices of Japan
With elections on Sunday, seven diverse Japanese reflect the nation's anger at the old politicians and skepticism about the new.
Page A8.
Work Near Yankee Stadium
New York City plans to renovate the Bronx Terminal Market to reverse blight around Yankee Stadium.
The plan could lead to more parking for the ballpark.
Page B1.
U.N.
Presses On in Somalia
The United Nations said it would not back down in its fight to disarm Mogadishu in spite of criticism that followed the deaths of four journalists in a retaliatory attack.
Page A6.
Producer Prices Decline
Producer prices fell three-tenths of 1 percent in June, the biggest drop in two years.
The inflation news is likely to keep interest rates low.
Page D1.
A.L.
Stars Make It 6 in Row
Sparked by home runs from Kirby Puckett and Roberto Alomar, the American League won its sixth straight All-Star Game, 9-3.
Page B9.


When They Can't Live in a Hospital or Outside; A Necessary Law
To the Editor:
New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo says he agrees that more money should be spent on community mental health services, but he wants control over it (news article, July 2).
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin doesn't want a confrontation with the Governor "just to make the advocates happy."


Atmel Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hostetler Shoulders Load Without Looking Over Shoulder
Jeff Hostetler wore his Super Bowl XXV shorts to lunch today.
He looked like a New York Giant, but this could hardly have been the Giants: Phil Simms and he were not connected at the hip.
Flying solo for the first time in his National Football League career, Hostetler now has the reins of the Los Angeles Raiders and knows for certain that, if healthy, he will start on opening day.
Bill Parcells made a star out of him, Ray Handley made a yo-yo out of him and Dan Reeves made him history, but Hostetler was beaming today -- even with an ice pack on his elbow -- and said, "I'm told Phil's more relaxed since I'm gone, too."


John Harvard, Meet B. B. King
Harvard University is investing $10 million or so to help spread the blues.
Its endowment is the leading investor in a $32 million plan by the House of Blues, an eight-month-old Cambridge blues club, to go nationwide, with outposts in New Orleans and Los Angeles.
The club's founder is Isaac B. Tigrett, who also helped found the Hard Rock Cafe, the London night spot that grew into an international chain.


Metropolitan Diary
OVERHEARD by R. Chester Redhead in an outdoor cafe on upper Madison Avenue.
Mother to boy, about 6: "Hurry and finish your soup before it gets dirty."
Overheard by Elizabeth Hunter in the cafe at the recently renovated Jewish Museum.
Gray-haired woman, almost certainly a tourist, to gray-haired man: "Ellis Island was nice, but the Statue of Liberty I could have done without."


In Cuba, Baseball Is Major but Not Major League
Pedro Jova Perez shaded his eyes and shifted his weight in a creative but futile attempt to avoid the heat.
Then the Cuban baseball manager stepped into a shaded area beneath a news media tent and braced for an avalanche of reporters' questions.
The game spoke for itself.
Cuba, in classic red jerseys and red caps with the neat, scripted C, had battered Italy, 12-0.
The game was mercifully ended after seven innings by the 10-run rule.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Overview; MORE RAIN SLOWS DES MOINES BATTLE AGAINST THE FLOOD
Torrential rains drenched the Iowa capital early today, swelling already bloated rivers and slowing the effort to clear out the contaminated water system that has brought the city to a virtual halt.
The whole state was declared a Federal disaster area today, and President Clinton cut short a visit to Hawaii to tour devastated areas on Wednesday.


Judge Allows Stricter Rules on Emissions for New York
A Federal judge said yesterday that he was wrong in January when he barred New York State from adopting California's strict rules on air pollution from cars -- rules aimed at eliminating the kind of smog that blanketed the region last week.
District Judge Thomas J. McAvoy in Binghamton said yesterday that the state may require additional pollution equipment and longer warranties on that equipment on all cars and light trucks sold beginning with the 1995 model year.


CHRONICLE
When DAVID S. GOTTESMAN took over last month as the chairman of the board at Yeshiva University, he was simply upholding family tradition.
His grandfather Mendel Gottesman was the treasurer of the board from 1922 until his death in 1942.
As the vice chairman of the school's building fund, he was among the leaders instrumental in moving the school in 1929 from the Lower East Side to its current home in Washington Heights.


School Reform Gridlock
School reform was the buzzword phrase in education for the past decade.
But how much of the activity centered on schools brings about real reform?
Not much, judging from a recent study by the Public Agenda Foundation and the Charles F. Kettering Foundation.
The foundations studied four school districts, but didn't name them in order to protect confidentiality.
The districts are described as average to good, small to large and geographically diverse, with one near New York City, and one each in the South, Midwest and West.


Medicus Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


No Headline
"In the attempts to build the comprehensive, 'we can do everything' high school, we left out something to belong to, to believe in." -- WILLIAM AYERS, professor of education at the University of Chicago.  [ A1:5. ]


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Is in a Quandary as Chinese Wait Off Shore
Ten days after the Coast Guard stopped three ships trying to smuggle 659 Chinese into California, senior officials in the Clinton Administration continued to argue over solutions -- none attractive -- to the increasingly difficult and embarrassing situation.
As the United States continued to press the Mexican Government to accept the refugees, the crowded, fetid ships remained about 100 miles southwest of San Diego, surrounded by Coast Guard cutters.


4 Jet Draft Picks in Accord
The Jets yesterday said that they had come to terms with four of their nine draft choices, including their second-round pick, Coleman Rudolph, a defensive end from Georgia Tech.
The others are Fred Baxter, a tight end from Auburn, who was the first of the team's three fifth-round picks; wide receiver Kenny Shedd, the third of the fifth-round picks and a kick returner at Northern Iowa, and Alec Millen, an offensive tackle from Georgia, who was taken on the seventh round.


4 Israeli Teen-Agers Arrested In Grenade Death of an Arab
The Israeli police said today that they had arrested four teen-age members of a militant Jewish group in connection with a grenade attack that killed an elderly Arab in the Old City in November.
A police spokesman said the suspects, all 17 years old, were members of Kahane Lives, an extreme anti-Arab group led by the son of Meir Kahane, the militant rabbi who was assassinated in New York in November 1990.


Corrections
An article yesterday about layoffs at the Electric Boat Company in Groton, Conn., misstated the location of the nearby Navy submarine base.
It is also in Groton, not New London.


Corrections
The Personal Computers column in Science Times yesterday misstated the year that Mickey Mantle of the New York Yankees was a rookie.
It was 1951, not 1953.


Microtek Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE DOCTOR IS ON THE AIR
Some of the most revolutionary technology in medicine today is also the most familiar -- the television and the telephone.
This new approach to medicine is called "telemedicine" and it is redefining health care.
A1.
EARLIER DATE FOR BOMB PLOT REVEALED
A new Federal indictment reveals that the government informer who broke up a bombing and assassination plot last month had infiltrated a conspiracy to blow up various targets in the New York City area as early as November 1991.
A1.
The man accused of leading the plot to bomb targets in New York City has called the United States Government "highly unjust." B4.
NEW YORK CITY  TWO ARRESTED IN DISTRICT INQUIRY
One present and one former member of scandal-plagued community School District 12 in the central Bronx have been arrested on charges of filing fraudulent petitions to qualify to run in the school board elections in May.
B3.
SECRECY IN CHANCELLOR SEARCH DEBATED
As the Board of Education met behind closed doors to ponder how to move ahead in its search for the next schools chancellor, some parents, school advocates and educators debated the competing roles of secrecy and public accountability in the search proceedings.
B3.
FOR HEVESI, BATTLE OF RECOGNITION
Almost everything in Alan G. Hevesi's campaign for New York City comptroller is in place: the money, the heavyweight endorsements, the record.
All he needs to do now, he says, is to make sure that voters know he exists.
B3.
REGION  RACISTS LEAVE FLIERS ON LAWNS
Anti-Semitic and anti-black leaflets apparently distributed by white supremacists were placed on the lawns of more than 100 people in Commack, L.I.
Police investigators said they were not sure that even if they found those who had distributed the leaflets they could charge them with a crime.
B6.
WALKOUTS STALL ROAD PROJECTS
A widening work stoppage by a union that provides heavy-equipment operators for highway and other construction projects has halted work worth hundreds of millions of dollars from Camden to Bergen counties and threatened the timely completion of the projects.
B6.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT STANDARD SET
New Jersey's highest court has set the first standards for employees and employers in New Jersey to use in determining whether certain behavior constitutes sexual harassment.
B6.
A CABARET STRUGGLES FOR LIFE
As its debts mounted and attendance fell in the last few years, Bridgeport's Downtown Cabaret Theater found itself far from immune from bad times, but its supporters say the popular dinner theater where the audience supplies the meal is making a comeback.
B6.
PRISONS DEPARTMENT ADMITS ERROR
Admitting that it erred in letting a murderer work outside prison walls, the Connecticut Correction Department says that it will tighten regulations on granting such freedom.
B7.
Chronicle B8


Review/Pop; At Lollapalooza, Rites of Rock Are Civil, Even in the Mosh Pit
Toward the end of a hot and happy day at Lollapalooza, hundreds, maybe even thousands, of people started throwing plastic water bottles into the air.
The sun was going down and the air filled with bottles, sun glinting as they soared in arcs.
People ran through the piles, or stood underneath the fountain, taking the pelting.
Completely safe, the eruption was mildly anarchic, just the right symbol for the whole show: people could go home having participated in something spontaneous.
For all its body-piercing, ostensibly alternative rock, tattoos and bare flesh, Lollapalooza -- held today at Waterloo Village here (where it will be on Friday) -- might be taking place in the 1950's.
Politeness and propriety ruled, admirable given the 90-degree-plus heat, beer and a sold-out crowd of 18,000.
The audience was here to have a good time, and to say thank you and please.
They weren't the Boy Scouts, but neither were they beyond the fringe.





More Ways to Keep Cool
To The Home Section:
I read with nostalgic enjoyment the reminiscences of your nine New York Times editors and reporters on how they managed to keep cool before the advent of air-conditioning ("Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail," July 8).
But no one recalled two practices that are all but forgotten in this era of window-unit and central air-conditioning.


Andreas Hellrigl, 61, Innovative Chef and Hotelier
Andreas Hellrigl, an international chef, restaurateur and hotelier, died on Sunday at a hospital in Newark.
He was 61 and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Odd Duo Teams Up for Charity, Only
They disagree on their obligation to serve their country and sport by suiting up in a Davis Cup uniform for relegation-round play against the Bahamas in September: one plans to take a vacation, the other plans to play.
And Pete Sampras recently put an end to Andre Agassi's reign as Wimbledon's defending champion by defeating him there two weeks ago in a five-set quarterfinal.
The loss sent Agassi spiraling to 22d in the world and precipitated his involuntary breakup with his longtime mentor, Nick Bollettieri.


A Comptroller Candidate Fights for Recognition
Almost everything in Alan G. Hevesi's campaign for New York City comptroller is in place -- the money, the heavyweight endorsements, the record.
All he needs to do now, he says, is to make sure that voters know he exists.
The truth is, hardly anyone does.


Union Stops Highway Work, Delaying New Jersey Projects
A widening work stoppage by a union that provides heavy-equipment operators for highway and other construction projects has halted work worth hundreds of millions of dollars from Camden to Bergen Counties and threatened the timely completion of the projects.
Jeff Lamm, a spokesman for the New Jersey Department of Transportation, said that the six state highway projects affected so far could be finished on schedule if the dispute were resolved in the next two weeks.
A spokesman for the New Jersey Turnpike Authority said work had been stopped for two weeks on a $120 million widening project but that it could still finish on time.


Top Executive Joins A Fledgling Agency
Barbara L. Titus, executive vice president for research and strategic planning at Scali, McCabe, Sloves of New York, said yesterday that she would leave that agency after 17 years to become president at Houston Effler Hampel &amp; Stefanides Inc. of New York.


M. Milton Glass, 87, An Urban Planner And an Architect
M.
Milton Glass, senior partner in the New York architectural firm of Glass &amp; Glass and former head of New York city's Board of Standards and Appeals, died yesterday at Tisch Hospital of New York University.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Nelson Seitel, Associate Publisher Of The Law Journal, Dies at 78
Nelson Seitel, the associate publisher of The New York Law Journal and a veteran of public service, died yesterday at his home in Peter Cooper Village in Manhattan.
He was 78.
The cause was cancer, the paper said.


First Albany Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Democracy, Nigerian Style
Credit Nigeria's military rulers with a novel approach to promoting democracy in Africa's most populous nation.
They will keep holding elections until the people of Nigeria learn to vote as their rulers expect.
It has not been easy to mold the electorate.
The military regime abolished the old parties, organized two new ones, wrote their platforms and picked all candidates.
Nevertheless, Nigerian voters on June 12 chose Moshood Abiola as President when they were supposed to prefer the other candidate, Bashir Tofa.


First Chicago reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Suspect in Bombing Plot Denies Role in Conspiracy
The 32-year-old Sudanese Muslim charged as a ringleader in the plot to bomb four targets in New York City called the United States Government "highly unjust" and warned it yesterday to cut its ties with "tyrants" abroad.
He also issued various denials of any role in the bombing conspiracy.
In a jailhouse interview, the defendant, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, ranged widely over his grievances with secular Arab regimes in Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia, his work for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, his training as a teacher and computer technician, and his contacts with a Federal informer who Mr.
Siddig Ali claimed had entrapped him by "putting my manhood to the test."


Osie Hawkins Is Dead; Met Opera Stalwart, 79
Osie Hawkins, a baritone who sang at the Metropolitan Opera for 25 seasons, died on Tuesday at Phenix Medical Park Hospital in Phenix City, Ala.
He was 79.
A statement from the Metropolitan said he died of natural causes.


Good Summer Memories
To The Home Section:


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Police Say They Find Gun Used in Killing
The gun that the police say was used to kill the journalist Manuel de Dios Unanue 16 months ago was found on Tuesday in a canal off the East River, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday.
Divers from the Police Department's scuba unit, working on information developed after seven men were arrested in May in connection with the killing, dredged up the gun, which was in a bag in several pieces, Mr.
Kelly said.
It was found in the 12th Street canal, near 45th Road in Queens, a few blocks north of the Midtown Tunnel.


Review/Dance; Routines That Avoid the Routine
Diquis Tiquis, a two-member dance troupe from Costa Rica, is typical of the foreign companies that have been both nurtured and introduced at the American Dance Festival in recent years.
That is, their distinctiveness is immediately apparent but they are also part of a general international trend that, for better or for worse, plays down the very danciness of dance.
Whether nearly nude as nature's children in a ritual of their own making or all dressed up with no place to go, Sandra Trejos and Alejandro Tosatti have an obvious originality.


An Oversight? No, It's Just Entertainment
It's a good thing that the feud between the Toronto Blue Jays and the Baltimore Orioles emerged alive and well from the 64th All-Star Game.
Because the one between the National and American League did not.
Toronto and Baltimore fueled their fires because of a manufactured slight.
Cito Gaston, the Jays' manager and the man in charge of the American League team, did not use Orioles starter Mike Mussina in the American League's 9-3 victory over the Nationals on Tuesday night.


Johnson Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New Wave in Health Care: Visits by Video
Every month, specialists at the Erie County Medical Center in Buffalo watch on a two-way video system as 6-year-old Jessica Bogdan relearns how to walk.
They observe increments in progress, make suggestions to her therapist and prescribe future care -- all as easily as if the little girl were in the same room, rather than at Cuba Memorial Hospital, 85 miles away.
Some of the most revolutionary technology in medicine today is also the most familiar -- the television and the telephone.
The video link between Buffalo and Cuba, N.Y., is but one example of this new approach to medicine -- called "telemedicine" -- and how it is redefining health care.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article yesterday about the New York Newspaper Guild misidentified the international company headed by Rupert Murdoch.
It is the News Corporation.


Embargo on Iraq Backfires for Israel
Presumably, Israel would rank far down on lists of countries eager to ship arms, or anything else for that matter, to Iraq.
And since that is so, officials here say, they do not understand why the United States, French and British navies, in the name of enforcing the embargo against Iraq, have been stopping Israeli ships headed for the southern Israeli port of Eilat and, in some instances, diverting them to Mediterranean harbors.


Where Suburban Tribes Gather for Sand and Surf; At Family Resorts on the Jersey Shore, Seasonal Time Creeps at a Biblical Pace
Like a Bedouin to his tribesmen, Richard Dupras called to the families gathered round him on the burning midday sands: "How many people did we have at dinner the other night?"
"Thirty-five," the satisfying answer came.


Five's a Crowd in American League Races
In the past month and a half, four American League East teams had these stretches: The Boston Red Sox lost 13 of 16 games, the Detroit Tigers lost 10 in a row and 13 of 14, the Toronto Blue Jays lost 10 of 11 and the Yankees lost 8 of 10.
Yet as the season resumes Thursday, all four teams remain solidly entrenched in the running for the division championship.
Not only that, but because those teams have floundered, the Baltimore Orioles, who began the season badly, had a chance to pull themselves into contention.
The Orioles won 20 of 24 games during one span and have joined one of the two most crowded division races the major leagues have ever had at this stage of the season.


Iowa Offering Short-Term Notes
A short-term financing by Iowa was tentatively priced for sale to the public yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The $600 million of tax and revenue anticipation notes due on June 30, 1994, were given a coupon of 3.25 percent.
They were offered at a price of 100.369 to yield 2.85 percent.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about Frances Davis, whose three sons were slain in Brooklyn over the last six years, incorrectly described changes in the family's lives in the months before the death of her youngest son, Frankie.
It was the son -- not the mother -- who had been preparing to enter a counseling program and was considering finishing high school and going to college.


Japan's Old Guard Mounts Last-Ditch Fright Campaign
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa has a vision of what Japan may look like after the elections on Sunday.
Should the opposition win, he tells crowds on a stumping tour across the country, the Japanese should brace themselves to slide back into third-world chaos.
If the Socialist Party, which opposes nuclear power, joins in forming a new government, he warned the other day, "it is clear that we will have hours of blackouts everyday like in the Philippines," where Japan is pouring in foreign aid to keep the lights on.


China Starts Effort to Slow Overheated Economy
Alarmed that inflation is spinning out of control, the Chinese leadership has begun a far-reaching effort to try to rein in the nation's badly overheated economy.
The Communist Party is circulating a secret order, Central Committee Document No. 6, providing for a 16-point plan to bring down economic growth to a more reasonable level that can be sustained.
"Work teams" are fanning out through the provinces to try to insure that Beijing's edicts are obeyed.


Critic's Notebook; Witnesses for the Nation
As the rains continue and network reporters are still at their posts, herewith a word of gratitude for their many-sided and sustained coverage of the floods in the Midwest.
Disasters are made for the cameras, of course, and once again television has displayed nature's power.
But more important, the bewilderment, loss, pain and grit in the faces on the screen has brought Americans together.
And the presence on the scene of the three famous network anchors -- Tom Brokaw, Peter Jennings and Dan Rather -- has been an affirmation of national concern and solidarity that went beyond the customary functions of journalism.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Move Up
The bond market got the kind of news it likes yesterday -- that inflation is low and economic growth is moderate -- and traders responded with enthusiasm, pushing prices of Treasury notes and bonds higher.
The buying sent the yield on the 30-year bond down to another 16-year low and yields on Treasury notes to their lowest levels in more than two decades.


After 7 Years, Buckner Finally Takes Hint
A week after he confronted a heckler in Rhode Island, the former Red Sox first baseman BILL BUCKNER said he was leaving New England.
He said he wants to forget his infamous error in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series.
"At least once a week during the baseball season, I hear something," Buckner said.
"I'm definitely out of there. I don't want to hear it any more."


Farmer Is Released From Hospital
RED FARMER, who survived the helicopter crash that killed the Nascar star Davey Allison, was released from the hospital yesterday.
Farmer, a stock-car driver for 45 years, broke several bones, including his collarbone.
He said his "natural instincts from race cars" probably saved his life because he braced himself when the helicopter started to crash.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Circus Circus Enterprises Inc., Las Vegas, Nev., is offering $300 million of noncallable debt in two issues through Salomon Brothers.
A $150 million issue of 6 3/4 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2003 is priced at 99.894 to yield 6.765 percent, and $150 million of 7.625 percent senior subordinated debentures due in 2013 are priced at 100.
The issue is rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investor Service and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.
*
Connecticut Light and Power Co., Berlin, Conn., is offering $100 million of 7 1/2 percent first and refunding mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 99.52 to yield 7.54 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The issue is callable in five years and rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Aficionado Of Subway Spared Prison
Duty-bound to make it clear that people may not play subway motorman whenever they like but wary of punishing a folk hero -- and a mere boy, at that -- law-enforcement officials settled yesterday on three years' probation for the 16-year-old who took the controls of a subway train for three and a half hours in May.
The penalty appeared not to dim the youth's dreams one whit.
Leaving a Manhattan court with a plea bargain that will keep him out of jail, Keron Thomas said, "I'm going to become a train operator."


People
*
Sarah Chubb was named advertising director at Allure magazine, New York, succeeding Lisa Henriques, who joined Vanity Fair magazine, New York, in the same position.
Ms.
Chubb was previously advertising manager at Vogue magazine.


2 Arrested in Corruption In a Bronx School District
One present and one former board member of a scandal-plagued community school district in the Bronx have been arrested on charges of filing fraudulent petitions to qualify to run in the board elections in May.
The two suspects, Kenneth Drummond and Veronica James, who were arrested late Tuesday night, have long been involved in the politics of District 12.
Both were implicated in a scathing corruption report that was released shortly before the May 4 elections, and which led to the removal of the entire board.


South Africa Looks Better to Investors
To the Editor:
Your July 6 Business Day article on reinvestment in South Africa raises important questions about the challenges faced in encouraging investment in a future democratic South Africa.
However, the article lacks balance, arguing that when Nelson Mandela, the head of the African National Congress, calls for the lifting of sanctions and opens the door to investors, the reaction will be great caution from companies and investors who have a policy against investing in South Africa.
We disagree.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR some families with teen-agers, taking a vacation together is an exercise in frustration for both generations.
For others, it's an opportunity to rebuild relationships and discover things about one another away from the day-to-day stresses of home.
"Unless you travel with your teen-agers, your time with them is likely to be limited to swapping car keys and telephone messages," said Candyce H. Stapen, a travel writer in Washington who has traveled extensively with her 11-year-old daughter and 23-year-old son.
"It's a chance for you to get to know each other as people. Your kids get to see you as a person, not just a parent."


Knicks Might Juggle To Get Some Players
The Knicks, with no room under the salary cap, are exploring roster maneuvers anyhow.
Charlotte guard Kendall Gill, a restricted free agent, is due to accompany his attorney Arn Tellem to the Knick offices this week and some creative management could not only keep Gill in New York but land the unrestricted free agent A. C. Green, too.
It would be complicated, but not impossible.
There are emerging reports of a three-way trade that would send Knick forwards Charles Oakley and Tony Campbell to the Philadelphia 76ers (which would provide rookie center Shawn Bradley with rebounding partners), Philadelphia guard Jeff Hornacek to Charlotte and Gill to New York -- assuming Gill first accepts a Charlotte qualifying offer.


A Ship of Fear Reaches Japan's Devastated Island
When Emiko Sato was growing up on Okushiri, island residents wanting to travel to the mainland had to endure a three-hour ride on the cramped deck of a cargo ship.
Tonight, more than 30 years later, Mrs.
Sato is in a familiar position, crouched on the crowded deck of a ship laden with cargo, leaning against a carton containing a portable toilet and wrapped in a sheet to protect her from the chill air.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Heat Alert
Extraordinarily high temperatures take a toll on gardens as well as gardeners.
To avoid damaging plants, don't apply any chemical fertilizers or pesticides until normal temperatures return.
Proper watering is important, too.
And this means slowly and deeply, preferably early in the day.
A second deep watering may be needed in containers and by especially vulnerable garden plants that repeatedly show severe wilt.
The Sex Life of Hollies
Q.
How close must a female holly be to a male to have berries?
Does only the female produce berries? -- Joe Markovich, New York.
A.
Gardeners are sometimes surprised to discover that most holly plants are either male or female.
And while both sexes have flowers, only the females develop a beautiful fruit or berries whose colors include classic Christmas red as well as black, yellow and white.
But "it takes two to pollinate," as Alan D. Cook writes in a new handbook he edited for the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, "Hollies: A Gardener's Guide." Plants of the same species must be within bee-flying distance of each other (or less than half a mile).
If you have a terrace or a tiny garden, with not enough room to grow both a male and a female, the handbook suggests giving a male holly to a neighbor even though he or she may wonder later why your plant has berries and his or hers doesn't.
The holly handbook is $6.95 at stores or can be ordered from the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Brooklyn 11225; (718) 941-4044, extension 272.
Add $3.75 for shipping.
A free flier on holly care is available by sending a legal-size, self-addressed, stamped envelope to the Holly Society of America, Linda R. Parsons, Secretary, 1138 West Murdock, Wichita, Kan. 67212.
More Safe Weedproofing
Some weeks back, I wrote about the use of landscape fabrics as a safe weedproofing method and soon received an intriguing suggestion from Tery Solomon of Hopewell, N.J.
"I use a simple, cheap and environmentally sound method," she wrote.
"It's boiling water. And it's especially useful for places like stone patios, walks, gravel paths and driveways."
She pours it slowly, "so that it soaks into the roots of the weeds."
"In a day or two," she continued, "both the green tops and the roots are dead and can be pulled out. It works even on dandelions. And a few kettles of water early in the season stops small weeds before they take hold."
Address questions to Garden Q.&amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Policy Questions; Flood Control at Dam: Bureaucratic Logjam?
Late Sunday morning, after flooding had already wiped out the drinking water supply for 250,000 people here and caused up to $250 million in damage, the Army Corps of Engineers reduced the flow of water thundering through the Saylorville Dam into the Des Moines River, one of the city's two rivers.
Officials in Des Moines felt like cheering.
Once the engineers reduced the flow at Saylorville, 10 miles upstream, the Des Moines river stopped rising, giving the city a few crucial hours to regroup.


Special Deals for Prudential Official Detailed
A former senior officer of Prudential-Bache Securities received gifts and special investment deals worth hundreds of thousands of dollars from sponsors of limited partnerships sold through the firm's retail network, according to a confidential Prudential report.
The dealings between the sponsors of the real estate deals and James D. Darr, the former head of direct investments at the firm, raise the specter of kickbacks being used to induce the firm to sell the real estate deals through limited partnerships it assembled, lawyers said.


Sports of The Times; Looking Before They Leap
BETWEEN innings of Cuba's game with Italy on Tuesday, Ernie Perez chatted with members of the Cuban team as they walked between their dugout and the bullpen.
Nothing weighty, just "Hi," "Hello" and an assortment of baseball small talk.
The game had all but been decided in the first two innings, and by the fourth, Cuba led by 10-0.
So players signed autographs, joked with each other and gladly talked with anyone in this foreign place who spoke their language.


A Network Says Baseball Ignores Its Cable Offer
ESPN is expected to retain cable rights to major league baseball for $40 million to $45 million a year, but officials of Prime SportsChannel Networks said yesterday that they were willing to pay baseball more but have been ignored.
"This hasn't been a serious negotiation," said Peter Barton, president of Liberty Media, the programming spinoff of Tele-Communications, the nation's largest cable company.
Liberty is part of the ownership team that merged Prime Network with SportsChannel early this year.


Illinois Central reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Where Japan's Deadly Quake Struck the Hardest


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


The Fine Print: A periodic look behind the law.; Assets Intangible? Congress Has an Idea for You.
If ever an issue cried out for simplification, it is the amortizing of intangible assets, a topic so bizarrely arcane that many people are ignorant of it, experts get lost in it and judges regularly disagree on just how to do it.
So this spring, Congress inserted into President Clinton's economic package a proposal to do just that.
Now it is about to reap the whirlwind.


CHRONICLE
He is known simply as Bernard to the movie stars and models, producers and agents who hang out at Spago, Wolfgang Puck's trendsetting restaurant in Los Angeles.
And next winter, they will have to change locales for his coddling.
BERNARD ERPICUM, who as maitre d'hotel has been culinary guide, sommelier and cooking coach for 11 years at Spago, said farewell there on Saturday evening as he left to open his own restaurant.


Mattingly's Confidence In Yankees Is Growing
Don Mattingly has a different feeling about baseball and the Yankees this summer, a feeling of rejuvenation, excitement and anticipation.
Mattingly will not have to trick himself into believing that games played in August this season are important.
They will be, with or without mind games.
Mattingly is hopeful that these feelings will carry into September and October, hopeful that the Yankees will stay entrenched in the pennant race and turn Yankee Stadium into a special place to visit.
For the first time since 1988, the Yankees initiate the second half with as much right as any other team to discuss their chances of winning the American League East.
Legitimate chances, that is.


Lance Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 12


Study of Greenland Ice Finds Rapid Change in Past Climate
To the astonishment of climate specialists, an analysis of ice extracted from the full depth of the Greenland ice sheet has shown that except for the 8,000 to 10,000 years since the last glacial epoch, the climate over the past 250,000 years has changed frequently and abruptly.
The findings suggest that the period of stable climate in which human civilization has flourished might be unusual, and that the current climate may get either warmer or colder much more quickly than had been believed -- in spans of decades or even less.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Topics of The Times; Broadway: The First 100 Years
It was standing room only, and the heat was the kind that melts ice cream in a minute.
True, there was a breeze, but it was unreliable.
Even so, thousands of people stood in Times Square for two hours yesterday: sweating, occasionally swooning (one of them, anyway) and clapping like crazy.
They were watching the casts of 16 Broadway productions knocking themselves out for an audience too big for any Broadway theater.
Some of the music was old and some was new, and if the former took the palm, it wasn't because it was the more familiar.
It was because people like George Gershwin and Frank Loesser don't come along more than a few times a century.


Accounts
*
Gesellschaft Zahlungf System Co., Frankfurt, to TBWA Advertising , Frankfurt, to handle its Eurocard credit card's image advertising account, previously at MWI, Hamburg.
TBWA was awarded the $13 million account after a review that also included the incumbent, McCann-Erickson Hamburg, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Frankfurt.


No Headline
"He has a lot of power, but he doesn't have that kind of power. He can't make the rain end." -- RODNEY ANDERSON, a Des Moines resident, speaking of President Clinton.  [ A10:1. ]


Libya Hires Former U.S. Official As Attorney in Pan Am Bombing B
Abraham D. Sofaer, the former State Department legal adviser for the Reagan and Bush Administrations, is representing the Libyan Government in trying to resolve criminal and civil cases stemming from the bombing of a Pan Am airliner over Scotland in 1988.
Mr.
Sofaer's representation of Libya is not illegal, but it has concerned senior State Department officials who said today that it raised questions about the appearance of impropriety because of his position as the Department's chief lawyer from 1985 to 1990.


Elinor Merrell, 98, Textile Dealer And Museum Consultant, Is Dead
Elinor Merrell, a decorator and dealer in antique textiles, died on Saturday at the Mary Manning Walsh Nursing Home in Manhattan.
She was 98 and lived in Cross River, N.Y., and Manhattan.
Her lawyer, Theodore R. Wagner, said the cause was complications from a stroke last October.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-15  EMBARGO ON IRAQ HURTS ISRAEL  In enforcing the U.N. embargo against Iraq, the United States, French and British Navies, have put a dent in the economy of Eilat, the southern Israeli port.
A3  IRAQ TAKES PROTECTIVE STEPS  President Saddam Hussein is reportedly trying to protect strategic industries and important Iraqi Government installations by removing crucial machinery, records and equipment and hiding it.
A3


At This Restaurant, You'll Just Have to Try the Hogs
THERE are some restaurants known for their chef, plat du jour, sublime flower arrangements, tasteful decor or simply their oh-so-chic atmosphere.
The Harley-Davidson Cafe, scheduled to open in October at West 56th Street and the Avenue of the Americas, will offer something extra: motorcycles.
For the first time in its 90-year history, Harley-Davidson Inc. will lend its name and paraphernalia to a restaurant.
The restaurant (rendered above) is co-owned by Marc Packer, who started about 30 years ago as a busboy in his father's Burger Ranch in New York and now owns Wolf's Sixth Avenue Delicatessen and Canastel's.
Drew Nieporent will oversee the new restaurant's menu.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Nerve Center; From Vital to Mundane, A Big Story for WGEM
No one who lives along this stretch of the Mississippi or anywhere near it is listening to Rush Limbaugh anymore.
People from here to Burlington, Iowa, and to Kirksville, Mo. -- in their cars and homes, in shops and on the levees -- are listening instead to Leo Henning, Steve Cramblit, Bob Turek, Tom Vodak, Jeff Dorsey, Rich Cain, John Tripp and Tammy O'Neil, who have been telling people everything they need to know about the flood 24 hours a day since July 1.


WHERE TO FIND IT
BERNICE GALEF is always pleased when a splashy art exhibition opens or a painting sells at auction for a record-breaking price.
Ms.
Galef is a mail-order print sleuth whose 13-year-old company, Print Finders, locates hard-to-find art reproductions, from print replicas to museum posters.
And paintings that make news or attract fresh attention are in the greatest demand.


Imports of Oil by U.S. Jumped 9.2% in 6 Months
American dependence on imported oil jumped by 9.2 percent in the last six months as domestic production plunged to the lowest level in 35 years, returning the country to the consumption patterns of the early 1980's, when imports were surging.
The dependence on currently cheap and plentiful foreign oil is expected to grow even further as oil companies continue to cut back on drilling in increasingly exhausted domestic fields while being prevented for environmental reasons from drilling in offshore coastal areas.


AT HOME WITH: Bailey White; Turning Life With Mama Into Front-Porch Radio
THERE are bellowing alligators, the world's loudest frogs, and a man-eating clamshell from the Philippines at what's left of the family estate where Bailey White lives with her mama, Rose.
There are fluffy blue hydrangeas, gardens of thyme, rosemary and scented geraniums, put-out-to-pasture automobiles, an antique gasoline pump, bright orange Mexican sunflowers, and monarch and parsnip swallowtail butterflies.
In short, this looks about right for the world of Miss White, whose commentaries on National Public Radio about eccentric relatives and rural life and whose surprise bestseller, "Mama Makes Up Her Mind," (Addison-Wesley) have transformed her from a first-grade teacher living with her mother in South Georgia to a reluctant and somewhat baffled minor celebrity.


3 Designers Finally Get Their Due
THEY have been until recently among the lesser-known designers of their generation: Jean Prouve, an architect and engineer; Charlotte Perriand, who worked closely with Le Corbusier on furniture design, and Serge Mouille, considered one of the most talented lighting designers of the mid-20th century.
The three are the subjects of the exhibition and sale "French Postwar Design: Rare Architectural Furniture and Fixtures, 1943-1961," running through July 31 at the Moderne Gallery in Philadelphia.
On display are 17 pieces, including Mr.
Prouve's painted metal and oak "Visiteur" chair (right), designed in 1943 ($7,250).


Balkan Envoy To U.S. Gets New Respect
Two months ago, Ljubica Acevska could barely get her phone calls to the State Department returned.
Her requests for appointments with top officials at the National Security Council went unanswered.
Now, with some 300 American troops in Macedonia, Ms.
Acevska, the country's representative in the United States, says there has been a "tremendous change in our interaction."


At 50, Still Climbing, Still Sliding
ALTHOUGH it seems to have been around forever, the game Chutes and Ladders, a favorite with the kindergarten set, is celebrating its 50th birthday.
The Milton Bradley game was inspired by the Checkered Game of Life, introduced by Milton Bradley in 1860, and by the traditional Snakes and Ladders.
"A playground setting replaced the snakes that were thought to put kids off," said Eric Blinderman, a company spokesman.
The game moves players along ladders and chutes, teaching consequences of good and naughty deeds.
In the early 70's, the cover showed five children; now there are a dozen.
Black children first appeared on the board in 1974.
The game is available for about $6.


ABC Agrees to a Cable Deal, Breaking Networks' Ranks
ABC broke with the other two major networks and many of its affiliates today, making a deal permitting a cable operator to carry ABC-owned stations without paying a fee.
The deal separated ABC from CBS and NBC in a bitter conflict with the cable industry over the fees that, under Federal law, broadcasters can seek from cable operators.


Deaf Athletes Prepare for Their Big Event


Don't Finagle Social Security to Reduce Deficit; Equity in a Pig's Eye!
To the Editor:
Robert M. Ball says President Clinton would tax a fixed 85 percent of Social Security benefits "because it just isn't worth doing (and explaining) the complicated individual calculations necessary to apply the exact rules for private pensions to millions of Social Security beneficiaries" (Op-Ed, July 2).


Events: Shows, Talks and a Cruise
Two Plus One  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
"Gertrud and Otto Natzler: Collaboration/Solitude," a retrospective of the ceramic artists' work, starts today and runs through Oct. 10.
The couple collaborated on vessels from the 1930's until Mrs.
Natzler's death, in 1971, after which Mr.
Natzler has continued on his own.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer inflation disappeared for June, with prices remaining level with May.
It was the first time in two years that prices did not rise in a month.
Another report showed that retail sales rose four-tenths of 1 percent last month.  [ Page D1. ]  Sales of domestically built cars and trucks rose 14.6 percent in early July.  [ D3. ]
The Government sold six prestigious golf clubs at auction for $395.4 million, ending one chapter in the history of Oak Tree Savings Bank of New Orleans, which was taken over in 1991.  [ D1. ]


Anti-Abortion Drive Surprisingly Quiet
Abortion rights advocates, and even some abortion opponents, call it Operation Fizzle.
Operation Rescue organizers say everything is going according to plan.
What is certain is that six days into the anti-abortion group's 10-day offensive here and in six other cities around the country, there have been only a smattering of arrests and no violence.


Allison's Team Won't Race at Pocono
The owner of Davey Allison's racing team said yesterday he will not enter a car in this weekend's Nascar race at Pocono International Raceway.
"When we go to a race, we go to win," said ROBERT YATES, choking back tears.
"We don't think we can win this race."
Allison, 32 years old, died Tuesday after the helicopter he was piloting crashed while trying to land at Talladega (Ala.) Superspeedway.


Imitation May Be Flattery, but Conehead Ad Is Alien to the Gap.
WHEN they arrived on earth more than 10 years ago, they just wanted to blend in.
That, and consume mass quantities of beer and junk food the way lots of other Americans do.
But it was only recently that Beldar and Prymaat Conehead, the pointy-headed suburbanites from "Saturday Night Live," showed just how smoothly they have assimilated.
Like so many of their friends and neighbors, they dress themselves in clothes from the Gap.


Intel Cleared Of Charges By the F.T.C.
More than two years after it began an investigation into the Intel Corporation's business practices, the Federal Trade Commission today notified the company in a letter that it had found no evidence to support the charges of unfair competition brought by some of Intel's smaller competitors.
Intel is the dominant maker of the microprocessors that control the operations of personal computers and thousand of other types of consumer and business appliances.
But the decision, which had been widely rumored since the beginning of the year, will only have a limited impact on the Santa Clara, Calif., chip maker, according to analysts.


Jets Sign Hentrich, a Notre Dame Kicker
The Jets reached an agreement yesterday with punter/place- kicker CRAIG HENTRICH, their eighth-round draft choice, who set two career records at Notre Dame.
Terms weren't given.
Hentrich, who is 6 feet 3 inches and 200 pounds, averaged 44.4 yards as a punter while with the Irish and scored 294 points.
He ranks third among Notre Dame kickers, with 35 field goals.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the reaction of business lobbyists to the 1993 legislative session in Albany referred imprecisely to the position of people in the construction industry on a bill that would have required contractors to pay union rates on private projects awarded public money.
While construction companies generally oppose the measure, construction unions generally support it.


About 250 Jews Are Said to Have Immigrated to Israel from Yemen


Killing of Police Officer Brings Death Sentence


World Of Decor Is Whole Again
There's nothing like a charity event to lay an old feud to rest.
Mario Buatta, the society decorator, and Mollie Wilmot, the society race horse owner, who had not spoken since the Winter Antiques Show in New York in 1985, were reconciled this week during the festivities surrounding the opening of the Saratoga Designer Show House 1993.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about criminal and civil investigations into the death of a woman during an abortion misidentified a doctor whose license was suspended in 1986.
When his license was suspended, he was called Elyas Bonrouhi; he later changed his name to David Benjamin.


JITTERY IRAQ HIDES INDUSTRIAL ASSETS
In anticipation of renewed American and allied air strikes, President Saddam Hussein is trying to protect strategic industries and important Government installations by removing crucial machinery, records and equipment and hiding it, foreign diplomats and Iraqis say.
This wholesale dismantling of the light industrial and Government sites thought to be targets appears to have begun in earnest in June, they say, before President Clinton launched a Cruise missile attack against an intelligence center in Baghdad.


MEXICO, IN SWITCH, DECIDES TO RETURN STRANDED CHINESE
In a sudden reversal, the Mexican Government apparently bowed to American pressure today and agreed to take responsibility for 659 Chinese refugees aboard three ships about 60 miles off the Mexican coast that were intercepted by the Coast Guard while headed for the United States.
Only hours after officials here had reiterated their stance that the smuggled Chinese were an American problem, a senior official announced that Mexico would allow the ships into port and then immediately return the immigrants to China.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Oddibe McDowell, outfielder, to a minor league contract and assigned him to Tulsa of the Texas League.
National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Recalled Chuck Carr, outfielder, from a rehabilitation assignment with the Marlins of the Gulf Coast League.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Extended the contract of Tom Lasorda, manager, through the 1994 season.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Promoted Terry Clark, pitcher, from Rancho Cucamonga of the California League to Wichita of the Texas League.
Reinstated Sean Mulligan, catcher, to Rancho Cucamonga's active roster.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Activated Matt Williams, third baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Robby Thompson, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 5.
Placed Willie McGee, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 11.
Recalled Luis Mercedes, outfielder, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Announced the resignation of Art Modell, chairman of the NFL broadcasting committee.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Announced the resignation of Alan Veingrad, offensive lineman.
Signed Barry Minter, linebacker; Brock Marion, safety; Rich Bartlewski, tight end; and Casey Gamble, defensive lineman.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Fred Jones, wide receiver, to a one-year contract.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Ronnie Bradford, cornerback.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Everett Lindsay, guard, and Gino Torretta, quarterback.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Announced the resignation of Jim Finks, general manager.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Craig Hentrich, placekicker-punter.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Joe Cocozzo, guard.
Released James Johnson and Kenneth Sims, running backs.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Stan Gelbaugh, quarterback, and John Hunter, guard.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Agreed to terms with Lamar Thomas, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League
FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Signed Dallas Eakins and Greg Smyth, defensemen, and Jeff Greenlaw and Darin Kimble, forwards.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Signed Terry Carkner, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
College
SOUTHEASTERN CONFERENCE -- Named Sharon Gaunt assistant commissioner for women's officiating.
SUN BELT CONFERENCE -- Named Dale Kelley supervisor of men's basketball officials and Sue Kennedy supervisor of women's basketball officials.
CORNELL -- Named Rob Koll wrestling coach.
FAIRFIELD -- Named H. Andrew McAleer equipment manager.
GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Promoted Stan Williamson to associate athletic director for business operations and promotions.
Named Mark White men's assistant basketball coach.
LOUISIANA STATE -- Announced the resignation of Rick Villarreal, football administrative assistant.
MIAMI -- Promoted Larry Wahl to senior associate athletic director; Pam Young to ticket manager; and Dave Scott to assistant athletic director for operations.


Express Gains
The recent movement in Federal Express's shares shows how wrong investors can sometimes be.
The company's stock dipped on Monday apparently because investors were nervous about coming quarterly results.
But yesterday, after the company reported fourth-quarter results on Tuesday that in some ways exceeded analysts' expectations, its shares shot up.


Meeting to Examine Sex Attacks in Pools
Police precinct commanders will meet with swimming pool administrators to discuss ways of stopping sexual assaults on young women, officials said yesterday.
The plan grew out of a meeting on Tuesday between officials of the Police Department and the city's Department of Parks and Recreation.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
FEW building materials seem so fundamentally unworkable as hardened concrete, which may explain why many amateurs forgo trying to repair it themselves and sometimes doubt that it can be repaired even by a professional.
But concrete floors, walls, patios, walkways, steps and other surfaces can be repaired successfully by amateurs and professionals alike, provided the right materials and methods are used.
Most home centers carry products developed especially for repairing and maintaining concrete.


Judge Gingerly Re-enters Fight in Yonkers
Desegregating a teeming and splintered city like Yonkers is a project so formidable that it has proven paralyzing.
So Judge Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court in Manhattan decided this week simply to wade in.
In the five years since he extracted a consent decree to integrate the city's housing, the judge has been able to create public housing for 200 minority families in largely white suburban stretches.
But he has long wanted to scatter an additional 800 low- and moderate-income black and Hispanic families in privately owned housing -- a goal that has proven more elusive.


On 25th Anniversary, It'll Be Amazin's Inc.
If you've forgotten just how much the 1969 Miracle Mets' championship meant to New York City and the world of baseball, don't fret.
The 1969 Mets have come together again to remind you.
The 29 surviving players and coaches, plus the widows of Manager Gil Hodges and Coach Rube Walker have formed Miracle of 1969 Enterprises Inc., a company that plans to turn next year's silver anniversary into gold.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Flood-Worn; Grateful for a President's Compassion but Realistic About His Helping Hand
Christy Gustafson stood in a mall parking lot with 500 other flood-worn Iowans to hear President Clinton talk about how he would do all he could and how "this will pass."
She had a baby in her arms, two young sons at her heels and a living room under water.
Lodged at her mother's house, she has not flushed a toilet or taken a shower in days.
Out of desperation, she dunked her head in a garbage can filled with rainwater on Tuesday to wash her hair.
Then she and her children took baths in the garbage cans.


ITT Studying Ways to Make Wide Job Cuts
The ITT Corporation said yesterday that it was conducting a study of personnel in its legal, human resources, corporate relations and controller departments that would result in widespread layoffs.
The study, which is being conducted by McKinsey &amp; Company, the New York-based management consulting firm, covers some 4,000 employees at ITT's offices in New York and Secaucus, N.J., and at the company's eight major businesses.
The company said it expected layoffs and other cost-saving moves to result in a saving of $100 million a year before taxes.


Confetti, Crowds and Music to Celebrate Broadway Theater


Executive Changes
BANK OF TOKYO TRUST CO. , New York, named James J. Wallace Jr. executive vice president and Kenneth J. Abere senior vice president and chief credit officer.
BEI ELECTRONICS INC., San Francisco, appointed Gary D. Wrench chief financial officer and senior vice president.


Graf Is Likely to Play for Germany
STEFFI GRAF will likely play for Germany as it defends its Federation Cup championship.
Germany yesterday drew Australia as its first-round opponent in the women's team tennis competition.
Graf, who returned this week from a vacation in the Caribbean, has been bothered by a foot injury for weeks.
Despite the injury, Graf won both the French Open and Wimbledon titles.


U.S. Trust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Port-au-Prince Journal; Haitians Get Message: Condoms Are a Fact of Life
On a junk-strewn hillside behind an open-air auto garage, Rosanne Auguste, a Haitian health care worker who mixes a forceful personality with a ready smile, encounters nothing but hoots as she holds a wooden anatomical model to demonstrate the use of condoms to mechanics.
Moving with self-assurance through their locker-room humor, Mrs.
Auguste is finally distracted by the loud complaints of a young woman, the only other woman present, who angrily upbraids her for stopping the work on her car for what she sees as some lurid briefing.


Charting Our Secret Selves Before Freud
To the Editor:
The idea that "Freud discovered the unconscious" is a modern myth repeated in your review of "Listening to Prozac" by Peter D. Kramer (Books of The Times, July 1).
Society became conscious of the unconscious as far back as the 18th century, the same way that Freud did a century later, by witnessing and using hypnosis.
Another popular pre-Freudian method of gaining access to the unconscious was automatic writing.


Arizona Power Revenue Bonds
The Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District of Arizona is offering $580.2 million of electric system revenue bonds that were initially priced yesterday to yield a maximum 5.625 percent for an issue due in 2029.
Underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said yields on two other long maturities were 5.62 percent for a bond due 2019, and 5.57 percent for another due in 2013.


'Trade Only' Walls Weaken
NOWHERE has the slump in decorating been felt more directly than in the to-the-trade showrooms.
These exclusive arenas, often grouped in design centers in big cities, are where the business of decorating mainly takes place.
For many years it has been easier for the public to meet Madonna than to get past the receptionist in a designer showroom.
But now a number of design centers are beginning to lift the so-called chintz curtain that has kept lay people from seeing, let alone buying, some of the choicest merchandise around.


Family Circle's New Publisher
Wenda Harris Millard, executive vice president and group publisher of the Adweek Magazines, has been named senior vice president and publisher of Family Circle, which is owned by The New York Times Company.
Before assuming her position at the Adweek Magazines last year, Ms.
Harris was general manager and partner of the Peer Group, a marketing communications company specializing in media marketing and promotion.
From 1985 to 1989, she was the publisher of Adweek magazine.


Canada's Daughters Up in Arms Over Anthem
After singing the line in Canada's national anthem that goes, "true patriot love in all thy sons command," the hands of 7-, 8- and 9-year-olds often went up in Judith Olson's music classes in Chester Public School.
"Inevitably the children would ask, 'When do we get to the part about thy daughters?'," Mrs.
Olson recalled, "and I'd have to say, 'There isn't any,' and then they'd say, both boys and girls, 'That isn't fair.' Anyone who has taught small children knows they have a very strong sense of fairness."


Lords Turn Back Thatcher Revolt on Europe
Baroness Thatcher, who as Conservative Prime Minister gave only lukewarm support to European unity, broke openly with the Tory Government that succeeded her today to lead a revolt in the House of Lords, demanding a national referendum on the Treaty on European Union.
Despite Lady Thatcher's stinging criticism of the treaty and her first vote against Conservative Party leadership in her 34 years in politics, the revolt fell short, moving Britain one step closer to completing what has been a politically tortuous ratification.


Paul Sharits, 50, Avant-Guardist Whose Films Explored the Senses
Paul Sharits, an experimental film maker widely known in his field as a master of abstract film and film-projector installation, was found dead last Thursday in his home in Buffalo.
He was 50.
He died of natural causes, said his son, Christopher Sharits of San Francisco.


UNDOING OF BUDGET STARTS IN CAPITAL
In a tradition old as Congress itself, small groups of senators and representatives on Thursday will start burrowing into the Capitol's many unmarked and well-appointed private offices, where they will set about undoing some of the very compromises that enabled them to pass President Clinton's economic plan only a few weeks ago.
This is the conference committee on the budget measure.
Its task is to take the differing House and Senate versions of Mr.
Clinton's proposal and puree them into a single bill that will pass both chambers.
This happens almost every time the House and Senate pass legislation, but conference committees are normally such boring and anonymous affairs that their doings pass unheralded.


Topics of The Times; Pressure Works in Belgrade
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia is an autocrat, but not a fool.
On June 2 his regime jailed Vuk Draskovic, the leader of the largest opposition party, on charges of treason following a demonstration in which a policeman was killed.
Mr.
Draskovic's wife, Danica, was also arrested, and both were reportedly beaten severely.
Their injuries were serious enough, and the charges fishy enough, to prompt a protest from Danielle Mitterrand, wife of the French President.
When that failed to free the couple, Mr.
Draskovic began a hunger strike.


Mexico's Position on Aliens Contradicted by Past Deeds
Despite its recent declarations that Mexico will never act as an agent of American immigration policy, the Mexican Government has for years been quietly deporting undocumented aliens heading to the United States.
For at least the last three years, Congress has appropriated $350,000 a year to pay Mexico for its costs in deporting residents of third countries passing through Mexico on the way to the United States.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a movement to create smaller urban high schools misstated the affiliation of Prof.
William Ayers, who is helping several Chicago high schools create smaller schools within their walls.
He teaches at the University of Illinois at Chicago, not the University of Chicago.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.99
3.38
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
3.02
3.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.13
3.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.32
5.38
6.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.56
6.61
7.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.29
7.36
8.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.69
5.70
6.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Investors Buy Macy's Bonds On Rumors of a Bid by Tisch
Investors scrambled to buy R. H. Macy &amp; Company's junk bonds yesterday as a rumor swept the market that Laurence A. Tisch, the Macy board member who tried to save the retailer from bankruptcy last year with a $1 billion offer to buy it, was preparing another bid.
A person close to Mr.
Tisch and the Loews Corporation, which is controlled by his family and owns about 15.5 percent of Macy's equity, said the rumors were just that.
And an adviser to Macy told one analyst that "there is a better chance of Elvis buying the company" than of Mr.
Tisch renewing his bid for it.


Ruth Krauss, 91, Dies; A Writer for Children
Ruth Krauss, the author of "The Carrot Seed," "A Hole Is to Dig: A First Book of First Definitions" and other books for children, died on Saturday at her home in Westport, Conn.
She was 91.
Ms.
Krauss was born in Baltimore, where she attended the Peabody Institute of Music.
She received a bachelor's degree from the Parsons School of Fine and Applied Art in New York City.


CBS INC. (N)
CBS Inc. reported yesterday that its net income jumped nearly 56 percent in the second quarter, mainly because of the improved performance of its television network, which is No. 1 over all in the ratings.
"The network did somewhat better than what we had anticipated," David Londoner, a media industry analyst for Wertheim Schroder &amp; Co., said.
"Operating profits at the network more than doubled."
CBS's earnings of $107.4 million were also aided by $14.2 million of pretax gain from the sale of securities and $10.7 million in pretax income from the settlement of an insurance claim related to CBS's television station in Miami.
The company's net sales rose 7.1 percent.


MicroAge Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


From Balkans to Boston, Radja Is Keeping It in Context
In a different context, he can make a joke of brutality.
"Here, in the N.B.A.," said Dino Radja, the 6-foot-11-inch Croatian forward and heralded Boston Celtic rookie, "there is no foul except when somebody kill you. If you stay on the floor with blood dripping, then they call foul. It's more rougher than in Europe."
By that, of course, he meant European basketball, where he has played professionally for the last several years with a club in Rome, Team Virtus Roma, formerly known as Il Messaggero.
Radja knows about killing and death, however, because in a literal sense they have come home to him.


Boating Doesn't Need Useless Bureaucracy
To the Editor:
Re "Boom in Boating Crowds the Summer Sea" (front page, July 4): Don't we have enough to worry about without the fuss about the "potential dangers" of boating accidents, which now claim 800 deaths a year among 20 million boats?
My almanac tells me that that many people die each year from, for example, mechanical suffocation at home.
Boating has an enviable and ever-improving safety record.
You almost sound as if you wished it were not so!


Burton Is Young And Restless
Brandie Burton has been the L.P.G.A.'s 1991 rookie of the year, has finished in the top 10 in 13 events in 1992 and finished that year fourth on the tour's money-winning list.
But, at 21, she has some goals left.
"Player of the year," she said following the pro-am event today at the JAL Big Apple Classic, which begins Thursday at Wykagyl Country Club.


This Is Progress? A Boardwalk That Isn't Wood


Hunt (J.B.) Transport (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Schourek Under Gun As Mets Seek Help
Pete Schourek boarded the plane for California yesterday in a self-described state of limbo.
He does not know what role he will fill for the Mets in the future.
He does not know what his manager, Dallas Green, thinks of his abilities.
All he knows is that the second half of this dreadful Mets' season cannot be any worse than the first.
"I'm in limbo," Schourek said.
"I haven't been doing exactly what was asked of me in the first half of the season, so I can't complain. But if I my do best now, hopefully things can change."


It's a Big Upset if There's an Upset
Ever since Arnold Palmer resuscitated the world's oldest major championship in the early 60's, the British Open has the been the site of fewer upsets than any other big event in golf.
There is something about the heavy winds and firm ground of a classic links that seems to be fluke repellent.
In the last decade alone, the names of the champions have included Tom Watson, Seve Ballesteros, Greg Norman and Nick Faldo.


Political Memo; Middle Ground on Abortion Shifting Into Terra Incognita
Over the next few months, Congress and the White House will face one of the most complicated, unpredictable and perhaps politically perilous phases of the abortion struggle yet.
Like it or not, the lawmakers will be forced to define a new political center on abortion.
Gone are the days when it was enough to simply support or oppose the legalization of abortion.
Now, lawmakers have to decide whether being "pro-choice," a label many of them claim with pride, means supporting public financing of abortion for poor women, sharply curtailing the states' abilities to regulate abortion and including abortion services in a national health-care plan.


CHRONICLE
Last summer, Dr.
EDWARD JOYNER, director of the Yale Child Study Center's School Development Program, got to know Patrick Francis Daly, the much-admired elementary school principal in the Red Hook neighborhood of Brooklyn.
Mr.
Daly was enrolled in the Yale program, which is designed to help educators improve schools so that children, regardless of social or economic background, will learn.


Bridge
The biggest theoretical gulf between experts and average players lies in the field of pre-emptive bidding.
Those who wish to close the gap should read "Preempts From A to Z" by Ron Andersen and Sabine Zenkel, available for $17.50, including mailing, from A-Z Books Inc., 40 East Ninth Street, No. 908, Chicago, Ill. 60605.
In 290 pages the authors have presented with clarity everything from the nuts and bolts of their subject to a series of hypermodern weapons, plus counterweapons to them.
Some of these are from the methods used by the world-famous partnership of Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, who provided an introduction.


Coltec Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Consumer Prices Flat Last Month
Consumer price inflation disappeared in June, the first time in more than two years that prices remained level in a month, the Labor Department reported today.
Although the highly favorable reading was anticipated -- partly because of Tuesday's report that prices at the producer level actually declined in June -- financial markets advanced smartly on the news.
Stocks rose broadly and long-term interest rates skidded to their lowest levels in decades.  [ Pages D10 and D18. ]


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dow Rises 27.11 as Inflation Fear Subsides
News yesterday that consumer prices remained level in June prompted investors to set aside nagging fears that inflation and rising interest rates would squash the delicate recovery.
Oil and gold prices fell, yields on 30-year bonds sank to a 16-year low and money started pouring into the stock market, driving up most leading market indicators.


Resort Income Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mental Health Politics
What to do about New York's mentally ill who roam the streets, often homeless, incoherent and deranged?
The State Legislature has shown compassion but little courage.
It passed a bill that would reduce the number of beds in state psychiatric hospitals and apply more than $200 million of the savings to desperately needed community mental health programs over five years.
But it lacked the courage to close any hospitals entirely.


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
COMPANY REPORTS ** Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N)
Qtr to June 30
1993
1992
Revenue
264,600,000
219,100,000
Net inc
31,600,000
18,500,000
Share earns
.53
.31
Shares outst
59,300,000
59,100,000
6mo rev
534,600,000
484,100,000
Net inc
67,000,000
48,200,000
Share earns
1.13
.81
Share earnings and shares outstanding reflect a 3-for-2 common stock split declared March 25.


Hate Fliers Left at Houses In a Suffolk County Town
Peter Quinn walked out of his family's home on a quiet tree-lined street here Monday morning to pick up the mail and the newspaper when he saw a package of fliers lying in the driveway.
Many others going about their morning routines found the same packages, which they assumed were coupons from local businesses.
But the fliers, placed on the lawns of more than 100 people, were anti-Semitic and anti-black leaflets apparently distributed by white supremacists.


4 Indicted in Chinese Immigrant Extortion
Four members of the Fuk Ching gang were indicted yesterday on kidnapping, robbery and extortion charges for holding 41 Chinese immigrants against their will in three safe houses in Queens, District Attorney Richard A. Brown said.
Mr.
Brown described as inhuman the conditions in which the undocumented immigrants were kept when they were discovered by the police late last month.


Books of The Times; What Is Real, and Does It Really Matter?
There Is No Borges  By Gerhard Kopf
196 pages.
Translated by Leslie Willson.
George Braziller. $18.50.
Cast a Spell  By Bette Pesetsky 195 pages.
Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $21.95.
"There was a smell of snow in the air, my love life was a mess, my work had become a mockery, my parents had died, my friends had turned away from me," complains the narrator of "There Is No Borges," a new novel by the German writer Gerhard Kopf and his first book to be translated into English.


INSIDE
ABC Deal on Cable Fee
ABC broke with the two other big television networks, permitting a cable operator to carry ABC-owned stations without paying a fee.
Page D1.
Elusive Goal in Somalia
With Mogadishu smoldering, the U.N. effort in Somalia is finding that its mission to restore order is elusive.
News analysis, Page A10.
Japan's Politics of Fear
Japan's ruling party is warning voters that they could face chaos typical of the third world if the opposition wins in Sunday's voting.
Page A12.
Consumer Prices Flat
Consumer inflation disappeared in June, providing evidence that prices are likely to remain stable.
Page D1.
Probation for Train Hijacker
The teen-ager who commandeered a subway train for three and a half hours was put on probation.
Page B1.


Economic Scene; The Everglades Pact Could Be a Model for Environmental Accord.
"THE river of grass has been given a new lease on life," Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt exulted, announcing a pact on Tuesday in which Florida's sugar and vegetable farmers are joining with a host of government agencies to defend the Everglades from the ravages of civilization.
The pact may not, in fact, assure the survival of this uniquely fragile marsh, for no one knows for certain why it is deteriorating into a garden-variety swamp.
But Mr.
Babbitt should be excused a touch of hyperbole.
For the deal does promise a relatively happy ending to a bitter war between farmers and environmentalists that might otherwise have been fought into the next century.


No. 1 Cuba Rolls Over U.S. by 7-2
Throughout the week, the Cubans insisted that losing two baseball players who defected would not matter, that it would only unite the team.
Apparently they were right.
Cuba continued its winning ways at the World University Games today, beating the United States, 7-2, on an appropriately rainy, cloudy day at Pilot Field.


Don't Finagle Social Security to Reduce Deficit; The Tax Man Cometh
To the Editor:
Re "Raise Social Security Taxes" by Robert M. Ball (Op-Ed, July 2): One look at Form 1040 tells you that when you calculate your income for Social Security taxes, you must include money withdrawn from before-tax savings, such as from an individual retirement account or 401-k.


Mexico's Position on Aliens Contradicted by Past Deeds
Despite its recent declarations that Mexico will never act as an agent of American immigration policy, the Mexican Government has for years been quietly deporting undocumented aliens heading to the United States.
For at least the last three years, Congress has appropriated $350,000 a year to pay Mexico for its costs in deporting residents of third countries passing through Mexico on the way to the United States.


Second-Guessing Dam Control
Des Moines officials are frustrated with the Army Corps of Engineers' delay in closing the floodgates on the Saylorville Dam.
Page B11.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Dooley Goal Gives U.S.
Victory Over Panama  Thomas Dooley's goal in the 73d minute completed a second-half comeback last night in Dallas as the United States national team edged Panama, 2-1, in a Group A Gold Cup match.
Dooley, set up near the right goal post, took a crossing pass from Roy Wegerle in the air and directed the ball past Panamanian goalie Ricardo James.
Dooley also assisted on the tying goal five minutes earlier.
After trailing for most of the game, the United States drew even in the 68th minute on Eric Wynalda's goal.
Wynalda took a pass from Dooley and right-footed a 15-yard shot past James. (AP) TENNIS  17-Year-Old Austrian Topples Maleeva  Barbara Schett of Austria overpowered third-seeded Katerina Maleeva by 4-6, 7-5, 7-6 (7-4) yesterday in the Austrian Open in Kitzbuhel.
Schett, a 17-year-old from Tyrol, stuck mainly to the baseline and used aggressive ground strokes to take advantage of repeated mistakes by Maleeva, who apparently was suffering from back problems. (AP)


Bad News For Dell Computer
Even as its sales continue to surge, the Dell Computer Corporation provided more evidence today that it was having a terrible year, saying it expected to report its first quarterly loss ever.
Dell, which rose from obscurity to become the fourth-largest personal computer maker in America, said it ould have a loss of $1.65 to $1.85 a share for the second fiscal quarter.
Analysts had been estimating that Dell would earn an average of 29 cents a share, and the company's announcement sent its stock price skidding.


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
ALBERTA ENERGY CORP., and the Canadian unit of Amoco Corp., Chicago, announced a swap of properties yesterday in northern Alberta.
Alberta Energy will give Amoco its rights to heavy oil properties in the Burnt Lake area of Primrose, Alberta, along with $20.6 million, in exchange for Amoco's 3.75 percent interest in the Syncrude synthetic oil project in Fort McMurray, Alberta.
CONFEDERATION LIFE INSURANCE CO., Toronto, plans to acquire a 25 percent stake in Equinox Financial Group Inc., a unit of Aetna Canada Holdings.


Dodgers Extend Lasorda's Pact
Tom Lasorda, who has been the Los Angeles Dodgers' manager for 17 years, had his contract extended today through next season.
"Tommy is our manager, period," Dodgers President Peter O'Malley said.
"I admire his commitment and dedication to bringing a championship back to the city of Los Angeles."


U.S. Formally Rejects 'Star Wars' in ABM Treaty
The Clinton Administration today formally renounced an eight-year-old Republican policy of interpretating the Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty as permitting development of space-based "Star Wars" defenses against a nuclear attack.
In a letter to Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat who is head of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Administration for the first time formally laid out its position on the issue, saying it supports the "narrow or traditional" view that the ABM treaty prohibits the development and deployment of the exotic space-based anti-missile systems envisaged in the Strategic Defense Initiative.


Troubles at Empire Blue Cross Reflect a Failure of Management
To the Editor:
You apply an unfairly broad brush when you paint a picture of blame for the dismal financial performance of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield in "The Failure to Police Empire" (editorial, July 2).
Arthur Andersen &amp; Company was retained by the New York State Insurance Department to perform a broad management and financial review of Empire's performance, not an audit in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
Another independent public accounting firm has for many years audited Empire's financial statements to comply with statutory reporting requirements.


A $600 Million Georgia Refunding
Georgia yesterday priced a $600 million offering of refunding general obligation bonds yesterday through various underwriters.
Yields on the tax-exempt bonds ranged from 2.40 percent for a bond due in 1994 to 4.05 percent in 1998, 4.65 percent in 2003, and 5 percent for a bond due in 2007.


Gusti Huber, Stage and Film Star And an Anne Frank Lecturer, 78
Gusti Huber, a leading Viennese actress before World War II who continued her successful stage and film career in this country, died on Monday at her home in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 78.
The family said the cause was heart failure.


Japan Sees Little Drop In Surplus
Only five days after President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa announced a broad framework for trade talks, Japan's top trade official said today that the United States should not expect his country's trade surpluses to go down in the next two years.
The official, Sozaburo Okamatsu, said that while the agreement called for "a highly significant decrease" in Japan's surpluses over the "medium term," the sluggishness of the Japanese economy would keep imports here low for quite some time.


An Inquiry Into a Lloyd's Underwriter
Inquiries into huge losses suffered by Lloyd's of London took a new turn today when officials said that prosecutors had opened a criminal investigation into the activities of insurance-market underwriters.
Lloyd's said it had been informed by Britain's Serious Fraud Office that prosecutors were investigating Gooda Walker Ltd., an operation now bankrupt, which managed underwriting syndicates that have run up some of the worst losses in the insurer's history.


Correction
Yesterday's editorial on anti-Arab prejudice contained the assertion that the ayatollahs of Iran don't represent all Arabs, or all Muslims.
The people of Iran are predominantly Muslim but are not Arabs.


A Wall of Water Traveling at the Speed of a Jet Plane
They can travel as fast as jet planes.
They can carry off entire houses.
They can inundate coastal communities with violent flooding.
Some English speakers call them tidal waves, but they have nothing to do with tides; much of the world recognizes them by their Japanese name, tsunami.
Huge tsunamis inundated northern Japan Monday night, minutes after a powerful earthquake struck the Sea of Japan west of the northern island of Hokkaido.
A tsunami contributed heavily to damage along the coast and to the virtual demolition of the Aonae district on Okushiri, a small island known for fishing and resorts.


3 Slavic Ex-Soviet Lands to Press Economic Union
The three main Slavic states that dominated the old Soviet Union and effectively dissolved it in December 1991 have decided to press ahead with an economics and customs union, including coordinated economic policies.
Last weekend, after secretive meetings in a rest house outside Moscow, the Prime Ministers of Russia, Belarus and Ukraine announced agreement on the principles of economic integration and a "single economic space," with a draft treaty embodying that agreement to be ready by Sept. 1.


Debating the Role of Secrecy In Search for New Chancellor
As the Board of Education met yesterday to ponder how to move ahead in its stalled search for New York City's next schools chancellor, parents, school advocates and educators debated the competing roles of confidentiality and accountability in the search proceedings.
Some argued that the board should follow the hiring practices of private industry, protecting the candidates by keeping their identities and discussion of their qualifications secret.
Others called for a more open process that would allow the public to form opinions about the leading candidates and their views on education.


Physicist Nominated to Lead Science Agency
President Clinton has nominated Dr.
Neal F. Lane, the provost of Rice University in Houston, as the next director of the National Science Foundation.
The appointment of Dr.
Lane, a theoretical physicist who has served in the No. 2 position at Rice since 1986, would require confirmation by the Senate, but no hearings have yet been scheduled, officials said today.


Duran May Fight in Garden
Roberto Duran, the 42-year-old who held four titles in his prime, could be the main event in a possible return to Madison Square Garden.
"We're just taking steps right now, just steps," said Ron Stevens yesterday.
Stevens is the only full-time promoter left in New York with the Garden's decision to eliminate its boxing department.
The Garden staged its final promotion last Thursday.


U.N. Finds Peace Elusive With Somali Leader at Large
With Mogadishu smoldering in anger and violence, the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia is finding that its fundamental mission to restore order is proving increasingly elusive.
But it is premature to say that the United Nations effort has bogged down in the quagmire of a protracted guerrilla war.


A Cabaret Survives A la Carte
It's 45 minutes to show time at the Downtown Cabaret Theater here, and much of the Saturday evening crowd is arriving early with picnic baskets of fried chicken, meat loaf and cartons of Chinese takeout.
The eclectic a la carte is standard fare at the Downtown Cabaret.
Connecticut's only professional year-round theater might also be the only one in the country that encourages people to bring their own food and drink so that they can watch "Fiddler on the Roof" and have a picnic at the same time.
Food and Footlights
The unusual combination of food and entertainment seems to be why it has survived so far in the middle of a declining city.
But as its debts mounted and attendance fell in the last few years, the cabaret found itself far from immune from bad times.


When the Urge to Pick a Pickle Calls
IF you're the kind of person who gets excited about a can opener, a vegetable peeler or even a thingamagig called a pickle picker, you'll probably be elated about the opening today of another Lechters housewares store.
This one, the 19th in New York City, is at 60 East 42d Street.
The biggest of more than 500 Lechters shops in the country, it has 10,900 square feet and about 4,000 items -- items that some think of as essential, others as dust catchers.
Among the gadgets are garlic presses -- there are 11, from $3.99 to $19.99 each -- egg slicers, grapefruit spoons, whisks, coupon organizers, mops and ingenious items like the $2.99 Adjust-a-Spoon (below), a device that could replace the traditional ring of measuring spoons.


Italian General Who Refused Order in Somalia Is Removed
The head of the United Nation's peacekeeping operations said today that an Italian commander who had refused to carry out orders in southern Mogadishu was being sent back to Rome and that the 2,400-member Italian contingent would be deployed elsewhere in Somalia.
The official, Kofi Annan, said the Italian, Gen.
Bruno Loi, had subjected the troops of other nations to danger when he insisted on waiting for instructions from Rome rather than immediately performing specific tasks ordered by the United Nations command in Somalia.
Mr.
Annan refused to specify what task the Italian contingent had failed to perform.


Darcy Cohen, 68, Dies; Was a Boutique Owner
Darcy M. Cohen, the former owner of the Vernissage decorative arts boutique at the Henri Bendel store in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at her home in London.
She was 68.
She had had a long illness, her family said.


Ginsburg Gets Set for Her Most Public Law Exam
Each day this week, Ruth Bader Ginsburg has sat at a table in Room 108 of the Old Executive Office Building, fielding questions from a panel of lawyers on a variety of legal issues.
How would she respond, they have asked her, to questions from the Senate Judiciary Committee on the separation of church and state?
On affirmative action?
And what did she mean in a 1985 law review article when she said that the Supreme Court could have struck down as unconstitutional a law against the use of public money for abortion?


Gardeners Without Gardens Plant Their Versailles Pot by Pot
IF there's room enough to step outside and turn around, there's room enough for a potted landscape to brag about.
After all, container gardening has been around since ancient Egypt and was all the rage in Greece.
And while fans of Louis XIV may argue that Versailles was the first container garden of note, his 3,000 tubbed trees are a mere ho hum compared to what we now jam onto windowsills, rooftops, balconies, terraces, doorsteps and poolside decks.


Refugee Aide Urges 'Tough Decisions' on Sarajevo
As Sarajevo struggled through another day without electricity, natural gas and diesel fuel, the United Nations' top relief official called today for "tough decisions" by Western political leaders to relieve what United Nations officials have described as the worst crisis yet in the 15-month-old siege.
But in remarks that appeared to be directed at President Clinton, Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, cautioned against "impatience or impulsiveness" in ordering military moves against the Serbian nationalist forces besieging the city.


A Regular From Cult Movies of Old Re-emerges as a Primary Attraction
Any number of actors can point to an Oscar on the shelf.
Only Conrad Brooks can stand up and say that he appeared in virtually every film by Edward Wood Jr., often acclaimed as the worst director in the history of the cinema, the anti-genius behind "Plan 9 From Outer Space," a film that must be seen several times for full comprehension of its absolute ineptitude in every category of the film-making art.
Mr.
Brooks was present at the creation.
In "Plan 9" (1959), he was Jamie, a Los Angeles policeman.
Earlier, he had appeared in two roles, a banker and a newspaper reporter, in Wood's first feature, "Glen or Glenda?," a very peculiar 1953 film about a man struggling with his transvestism.
Undeterred, Mr.
Brooks also showed up for "Bride of the Monster," "Jail Bait" and "Hellborn," which was never completed for lack of money.


On the Cheap, and Yet Flying High
Its routes lack the range of American, United and Delta.
And the best in-flight meal it serves -- a bag of peanuts -- pales next to the Champagne and shrimp served in first and business class by carriers following grander airline traditions.
But Southwest Airlines, by many measures, has emerged as the nation's pre-eminent airline, in large part because of its enthusiastic flouting of conventional industry thinking.


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
COMPANY REPORTS ** Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N)
Qtr to June 30
1993
1992
Revenue
264,600,000
219,100,000
Net inc
31,600,000
18,500,000
Share earns
.53
.31
Shares outst
59,300,000
59,100,000
6mo rev
534,600,000
484,100,000
Net inc
67,000,000
48,200,000
Share earns
1.13
.81
Share earnings and shares outstanding reflect a 3-for-2 common stock split declared March 25.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Overview; CLINTON REQUESTS $2.5 BILLION IN AID FOR FLOOD REGION
President Clinton, arriving here to tour a region saturated with rain and river water, asked Congress today to appropriate $2.5 billion in Federal disaster assistance to rebuild businesses, compensate farmers for crop losses and provide other flood relief.
Mr.
Clinton flew overnight from Hawaii, where he vacationed for three days on his way back from Japan and South Korea, to view the damage by helicopter before visiting a water-distribution site and participating in a television and radio call-in program.
Clutching Gallon Jugs
"It was awful," Mr.
Clinton said as he alighted from the Marine Corps helicopter with Gov.
Terry E. Branstad after the 40-minute flight.


El Paso Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; A Kelley Oil Test Well Doesn't Live Up to Investor Expectations.
INVESTORS in the Kelley Oil Corporation who had been speculating for months on hot news from the oil patch were hit instead yesterday with a cold dose of reality.
Kelley shares collapsed yesterday after the company disclosed preliminary results from a test well in Louisiana's Ouiski Bayou field, showing it would not likely produce more than 20 million cubic feet of natural gas each day.


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Save the Hatch Act
It's greed time in the nation's capital.
Congressional Democrats, grateful for years of generous campaign giving by Federal and postal union political action committees -- and eager for more help in the future -- are about to relax Hatch Act restrictions on "active" partisan political activity by Federal employees.
From the public's standpoint and that of Federal workers who would face pressures to give money and time to partisan causes, it's a bad idea.
But the House approved a bill in March, and President Clinton says he will sign any Hatch Act revision that Congress serves up.
Thus, some weakening of the 1939 act seems inevitable this year.


Opera Festival Chiefs Who Can Sing, Too
Mostly, these days, opera houses are administered by administrators.
They're too big and too costly and too important, it's felt, for mere artists to handle.
Or at least most politicians and patrons, who make the appointments, seem to feel that way.
In the Nordic countries, however, there is a different attitude: the thinking here appears to be that important artistic institutions, just because they are artistically important, should be run by artists.
Right now, the two most renowned opera festivals in the five Nordic countries -- the Drottningholm Court Theater near Stockholm and the Savonlinna Opera Festival in the eastern Finnish lake district -- are run by well-known opera singers.


Indurain Is Strong, Smart and Staking a Claim
In case anybody missed the message two days ago when he easily won a time trial, Miguel Indurain sent it again today: he will be hard to beat in the Tour de France.
The message might even read that, barring accident or sickness, he will be impossible to beat.


Partner Resigns From Miami Agency
Charles Crispin, president and chief executive at Crispin &amp; Porter of Miami, said yesterday that he would immediately resign and sell his shares of the $30 million agency.
His father, Sam Crispin, formed the agency in 1965.
"My goal had been to position the agency for growth, with the intention to sell," Charles Crispin, 35, said.
He said that a need to spend time with his family was the main reason for his decision.


Bomb Informer Active in 1991, Authorities Say
A new Federal indictment revealed yesterday that the Government informant who broke up a bombing plot last month had infiltrated a conspiracy to blow up targets in the New York City area in November 1991, more than a year earlier than has previously been disclosed.
The new charges also link Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, a cousin of the man tried in the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, to the plot to bomb the United Nations, the Holland and Lincoln tunnels and 26 Federal Plaza.
He was named as the 11th suspect in the case.


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Theater; An Office Works Late at Settling Accounts
Amid an outpouring of Chianti and around a buffet table heaped high with food, in a swirl of sexual tension, professional angst, personal problems and economic woes, it's the nod of acquaintance rather than the shudder of recognition that undermines "The Office Party."
The comedy by John Godber, running through Saturday at the Staller Center at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., as a production of the Hull Truck Theater Company of England, unfolds in the offices of a marketing and public-relations firm called Chapman &amp; Howard.


Broadway Fries Eggs to Avoid Laying Them
Broadway threw a party yesterday, and a lot of people came.
The amiable crowd, estimated by the police at 44,000, waited patiently in the shimmering heat from 43d Street to 48th Street to see "Broadway on Broadway," the second annual outdoor concert in Times Square.
And if not everyone had a front-row seat, at least the show was free.
What they saw and heard were stars from 16 Broadway productions, many of whom performed numbers from their shows to the accompaniment of a 28-piece orchestra.
Among them were Jodi Benson and Harry Groener ("Crazy for You"), Brent Carver, Anthony Crivello and Chita Rivera ("Kiss of the Spider Woman"), Bill Irwin and David Shiner ("Fool Moon"), Michael Cerveris ("Tommy"), Larry Gatlin and Mickey Rooney ("The Will Rogers Follies"), Robert Goulet ("Camelot") and Phylicia Rashad and Ben Vereen ("Jelly's Last Jam").


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Free Agency Inflates Salaries
The National Football League's grand introduction to unrestricted free agency will end today with a result that seems to please management and players.
More than one-third of the totally unrestricted free agents have signed with new teams.
Of the 298 unrestricted free agents whose contracts had expired, 108 have joined new teams, 84 have signed with their old teams and 106 are unsigned.
Of the 140 restricted free agents, all with three or four years in pro football, 54 have signed with their old teams and 8 have moved.


All-Star Rating Up
Tuesday night's All-Star Game in Baltimore produced a 15.6 Nielsen rating with a 28 share for CBS, up 4.6 percent from last year.
It was the second lowest, after last year, of all the All-Star Games broadcast at night.
Each rating point equals 931,000 TV households.
A share is the percentage of televisions in use at any given time.


Pipeline Owner to Pay $98 Million in Valdez Spill
The owners of the Trans-Alaska oil pipeline have agreed to pay $98 million to native villages, fishermen and thousands of other Alaskans harmed by the grounding of the Exxon Valdez, which spilled over 11 million gallons of oil into Prince William Sound in 1989.
If the settlement is approved, it will be the first time plaintiffs other than the state and Federal Government have been awarded damages arising from the disaster.
The settlement, signed Tuesday night in Anchorage, is meant to remove the pipeline's owner, the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company, from more than 300 lawsuits against it and the Exxon Corporation.
If the settlement is approved by state and Federal judges, Exxon and its shipping subsidiary will be the only remaining defendants in the lawsuits, which seek $2.5 billion in damages for thousands of Alaskans.


PNC Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Good Summer Memories
To The Home Section:


Don't Finagle Social Security to Reduce Deficit
To the Editor:
Robert M. Ball suggests we raise the Social Security tax on some beneficiaries (Op-Ed, July 2).
This is the wrong solution for dealing with the deficit.
If a larger proportion of benefits is taxed, the root causes of the deficit will still be ignored.
Meanwhile, 4.5 million middle-income older Americans will experience an income decline, and support for Social Security could decline, not increase.
Mr.
Ball advocates taxing Social Security benefits as we tax pensions.
However, there are fundamental differences between the two.
Social Security provides benefits that are intended as the base of retirement income.
Less than half of those who receive Social Security also receive an employer-provided pension.
For most of the middle-income elderly who would be taxed under the President's proposal, Social Security is the largest income source.


Review/Art; Paying Homage To Irreverance
NOT all art movements are destined for museum captivity, least of all Fluxus, the anarchic, irreverent association of poets, composers, film makers and artists that coalesced in New York City and Germany in the early 1960's and is now, 30 years later, having its day at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Whatever Fluxus artists did -- and they did many, many different things -- they were bent on subverting the very notions that are central to a museum's identity: permanence, posterity, quality, authorship.
They were fairly successful; while a few went on to different kinds of prominence -- Joseph Beuys, Daniel Spoerri, Yoko Ono and the video artist Nam June Paik -- the names of most Fluxus artists are not familiar even to art-world insiders, and the movement itself is rarely mentioned in histories of postwar art.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Tables in the "Your Money" pages on Saturday about the performance of mutual funds misstated the returns for two funds because of calculation errors by Morningstar Inc., which supplied the data.
The Scudder California Tax-Free Fund had a return of 3.6 percent in the second quarter and 13.9 percent for the 12 months ended June 30.
Its average annual return was 10.8 percent over the last five years.
The Scudder New York Tax-Free Fund had a second-quarter return of 3.8 percent and a 12-month return of 13.4 percent.
Its five-year average return was 10.5 percent.
As a result, neither fund should have appeared on the list of poorest-performing municipal bond funds.


Poll Says Conservatives Dominate Talk Radio
The talk radio and call-in programs that have become a potent force in national politics distort public opinion because people heard on those shows are far more conservative than the general population, a poll released today concludes.
The survey, by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press, found that talk shows, like telephone calls and letters to elected officials, are dominated by a "vocal minority" composed largely of Republicans who are more critical of President Clinton's overall job performance and economic program, and are more hostile to him personally than most people.


Critic's Choice/Film; The Revival Of a Revival House
A little piece of New York's cultural history will be restored this weekend with the reopening of the Thalia Theater, the quintessential New York City art-film revival house at 95th Street, just west of Broadway.
Until it was closed in 1987, the Thalia was a mecca for cineastes who wanted to bone up on their Cocteau, Kurosawa and Welles.
Built in 1931, the 292-seat theater was architecturally novel for its times.
Its Art Moderne design, by Raymond Irrera and Ben Schlanger, incorporated such innovations as indirect lighting and a sloping floor.
Beginning in 1938, under the direction of Martin Lewis, it offered a steady stream of foreign films.
After he died in 1955, the repertory expanded to include classic Hollywood movies.
From 1977 to 1987, under the direction of Richard Schwarz, the programming became more offbeat and esoteric.
During its peak years, the Thalia was famous for its inky darkness, its tiny screen and the intense concentration of its audiences.


Congress Has a Clear Responsibility to Courts
To the Editor:
From June 18 until July 5 an out-of-business sign was hanging on courtroom doors throughout the United States in cases involving Federal civil jury trials.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the purchase of CAMI Video by Sony Music Entertainment misstated the role of Peter Gelb, the president of CAMI, in the production of a sequel to "Fantasia" for Walt Disney Studios.
He is the executive music producer, not the producer.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Continuing Struggle; Digging Out in Face of a New Threat
The weather forecast today scared Jill Downing like a nightmare: Rain is expected this weekend and it could bring more flooding.
On Saturday, high water forced 3,500 people here from their homes.
Ms.
Downing is the manager of special events in the Valley Junction section of this town, a district of antique, craft and art shops and family restaurants built on faith and life savings.
On Saturday, the district was consumed by flood water and is only now beginning to clean up its buildings and raise people's spirits.


Rising Incomes Suggest Economic Recovery
Suggesting that a recovery is finally underway in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, economists at Rutgers University said yesterday that last year personal incomes in all three states rose as fast as in the nation or faster, following three years when they had lagged far behind.
The analysis found that one distinction for the region had not changed -- its workers make more money than their counterparts in most other states.
In a ranking of states by per capita incomes for 1992, Connecticut ranked first at $26,979, New Jersey ranked second at $26,457 and New York ranked fourth at $23,534, behind Massachusetts.
Nationally incomes averaged $19,841 last year.


Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cracks in the Cuban Permafrost
President Clinton would risk little, and could gain a good deal, by removing America's Cuba policy from its cold war freezer.
For three decades, Washington's chief weapon against Communist Cuba has been a punishing economic embargo.
But even as Fidel Castro changed from security threat to political curiosity, Congress tightened that embargo last year to make life still harder for Cubans trapped in a subsistence economy.
And the new Congressional measure, the Cuban Democracy Act, has since backfired -- even in Miami, the heart of anti-Castro country.


Hope for the 'River of Grass'
Among the most painful of America's environmental tragedies has been the slow asphyxiation of the world's largest fresh-water marsh, the Florida Everglades.
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's plan to defend the Everglades from the further ravages of commerce gives the expiring patient its first ray of hope in years.
But it is only a ray.
A lot more hard bargaining lies ahead before anyone can declare victory.
The plan results from a month of furious negotiations among state and Federal officials and leaders of Florida's powerful agricultural interests, mainly the sugar growers.
It seeks to give the vast "river of grass" what it needs most: a timely, reliable supply of fresh water.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Testimony in '82 on Salvador Criticized
A State Department report today sharply criticized the department's handling of the largest massacre of the Salvadoran civil war, when hundreds were killed at El Mozote in 1981, but it rejected accusations that officials regularly lied to Congress about human rights violations in El Salvador to maintain the flow of military aid.
The investigatory panel -- two former ambassadors and an academic adviser -- also questioned statements by former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. after four American churchwomen were killed by Salvadoran security forces.


Founder of Hal Computer Resigns to Be Fujitsu Consultant
The respected and controversial computer designer who is credited with having pushed I.B.M. into the work-station business has resigned from the Silicon Valley company he started with backing from Fujitsu Ltd. three years ago.
R.
Andrew Heller said in a telephone interview yesterday that he had left Hal Computer Systems Inc., a Campbell, Calif., computer maker that is designing a 64-bit microprocessor work station, to serve as a consultant for Fujitsu.


Mediplex Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diner's Journal
One Museum Goes Italian
Italian has become the culinary lingua franca at the Museum of Modern Art.
The new operators of the garden cafeteria are Nino Esposito, Gennaro Bertucci and Oriente Mania, the owners of Sette Mezzo (or Seven and a Half, a card game) at 969 Lexington Avenue, at 69th Street.
In early September, they plan to re-open the former members' dining room on the second floor of the museum as a public restaurant called Sette Moma.
Mr.
Esposito and Mr.
Bertucci are also partners in Vico, 1302 Madison Avenue, at 92d Street. (Vico Express, in the original location of Vico, at 1603 Second Avenue, at 83d Street, has closed and is for sale.)


United Air Unions Ask Big Stake
United Airlines' unions indicated their willingness yesterday to make sizable wage concessions in return for a majority stake in the nation's second-largest carrier -- a move that underscored a significant shift toward a more collaborative relationship between airline labor and management.
With the industry awash in losses, top executives like Stephen M. Wolf, chairman of the UAL Corporation, United's parent, have said that lower labor costs are necessary for big carriers' survival.
The overture yesterday suggested that employees at some carriers are agreeing, and are seeking a hefty price for cooperation.


Japanese Islanders Seek Bodies Buried by Quake
Araya and Keiko Tadashi wiped away tears as the bulldozer plowed through the debris that had been their home for 30 years.
Each time the bulldozer picked up a chunk of rubble and carried it away, the Tadashis would approach the remaining pile, looking for anything they might salvage.
"I would at least like to find a change of clothes," Mr.
Tadashi said.
"I'm borrowing the clothes I'm wearing now."


Plan Cleared for Olympia &amp; York's U.S. Unit
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday approved a plan establishing a nine-member board to control the assets of the United States branch of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the distressed Canadian real estate empire.
The plan was negotiated by Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State who was brought in on May 28 to mediate a dispute between creditors of the bankrupt Canadian parent and managers of the American unit.


U.S. Delegation Fails to Revive Arab-Israeli Talks
A senior American delegation has returned home empty-handed after trying to close the gap between Israel and the Palestinians in the stalled Middle East peace talks.
Despite the lack of progress, Secretary of State Warren Christopher is said by aides to be leaning toward making a trip to Middle East capitals next week to attempt to rescue the talks himself before heading to Singapore and Australia for a long-scheduled meeting with Asian foreign ministers.


'Blading' Bodies in Motion in Advertising


Review/Film; Boy And Orca Meet Cute
"Free Willy" is a sweet-natured boy-and-his-orca tale for the very young and possibly for their parents or, at least, for those graying fans of "Flipper" who are ready to graduate from dolphins to cuddly 7,000-pound killer whales.
The setting is a city in the Pacific Northwest where chance brings together two of society's outcasts: 12-year-old Jesse (Jason James Richter), an abandoned street kid, and Willy, a handsome young black-and-white orca, the morose star attraction at something called the Northwest Adventure Park.


Restaurants
Dinosaurs are no more extinct in the restaurant business than they are at the movies or in cartoons.
Anyone who doubts this need only visit Ben Benson's, a midtown steakhouse that caters to tyrannosaur-size appetites while treating its customers with the cuddly warmth of Barney, the purple television dinosaur that seems to be every child's best friend.
In fact, this 11-year-old steakhouse looks as if it had been preserved from the Mesozoic Era of dining, serving cuts of meat that are to free-range chicken what three martinis are to a bottle of Perrier.
Near the entrance is a bustling bar where the lively lunch and after-work hubbub is punctuated with barks of male laughter.
A narrow aisle opens onto a rectangular 150-seat dining room that seems smaller because of the press of tables and the low ceiling.
When the room is crowded, the din echoes from one end to the other.
Wood chairs and tables are simple and functional, and the worn wood floors are bare even of sawdust.
Carved eagles, bronze buffaloes and lions, deer antlers and other objets de testosterone are scattered about.


Review/Architecture; Vinoly's Vision for Tokyo, and for the Identity of Japan
Those who have forgiven the Japanese for buying a big chunk of Rockefeller Center may find it more difficult to excuse them for snapping up Rafael Vinoly to design the Tokyo International Forum, a colossal performing-arts and convention center now going up in the heart of the Japanese capital.
Rockefeller Center, after all, isn't leaving New York.
But why must we travel to Japan to see major public buildings as fine as the one Mr.
Vinoly has designed for Tokyo?
This prodigiously gifted architect lives right here.
At least we get to see the models.
Mr.
Vinoly's plans for the Tokyo International Forum are on view now in the architecture and design galleries at the Museum of Modern Art, as part of the museum's continuing series of shows devoted to important public works.
This is the first show in the series to feature a single project by one firm, and the honor is richly deserved.
The $1 billion project, which will be completed in 1996, is one of the largest under construction in the world today.
It is also among the most sublime.
Mr.
Vinoly's design goes far toward dispelling disillusionment with the bloated scale of recent civic projects.
And it revives faith in architecture as an instrument of intellectual clarity.


R. Arnold Kramer, 74, Ex-Executive at Alcoa
R.
Arnold Kramer, managing partner of a Knoxville law firm and former general counsel to the Aluminum Company of America, died Wednesday at the University of Tennessee Hospital in Knoxville.
He was 74 and lived in Knoxville.
His son, Reed Kramer, said the cause was complications from a stroke.


Books of The Times; Girls Who Hate Men and Treat Them Accordingly
Foxfire
Confessions of a Girl Gang
By Joyce Carol Oates
328 pages. Dutton/A William Abrahams Book. $21
Norman Mailer once observed that most writers have a handful of ideas, and that they spend their careers reinventing these same ideas over and over again.
Certainly this has been true of Joyce Carol Oates and her ever-expanding oeuvre.


A Report Sees Legislative Perils to S.&amp; L.'s
Legislation intended to complete the cleanup of the savings-and-loan industry might instead drive the remaining institutions out of business, according to a new report to Congress.
The report, written by an industry advisory committee and endorsed by top officials of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, said the savings and loan industry would be unable to compete with banks if, as legislation pending in the House required, insurance premiums paid by the industry were made the main source of financing for a Federal fund that would insure deposits in the surviving S.&amp; L.'s.


No Headline
"We have a healthy, growing business, a strong balance sheet, positive cash flow, state-of-the-art products and a well-stocked technology pipeline with plenty of opportunities for growth. However, we must slim down to stay competitive." -- EDWIN L. ARTZT, the chairman of Procter &amp; Gamble.  [ D2:1. ]


The Spoken Word
"HAPPY HOUR," Biblio's Bookstore and Cafe, 317 Church Street, south of Canal Street, Tribeca.
Fourteen poets and fiction writers read from their work.
Tonight at 4.
Free.
Information: (212) 334-6990.
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Alvin Eng, Cliff Fyman, Jim Feast, Elinor Nauen, Clayton Brooks, Mike Tyler and Edwin Torres read from their work.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


Report on Earnings Trims Storage Technology Shares
Shares of the Storage Technology Corporation plunged $7.875 each yesterday, a day after the company reported sharply lower second-quarter earnings that fell below analysts' projections.
The announcement, released after the stock market closed Wednesday, pushed Storage Technology's stock down to $33.25 a share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Trading was heavy, with almost 3.2 million shares changing hands.


ITALY, IN U.N. RIFT, THREATENS RECALL OF SOMALIA TROOPS
Deepening a rift with the United States and the United Nations, Italy threatened today to withdraw its 2,600-member contingent from Somalia out of concern that what was originally a relief mission has turned into a combat operation that is taking sides in a civil war.
After days of an increasingly bitter dispute, culminating in the United Nations announcement on Wednesday that the Italian commander in Mogadishu would be sent home, Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi called for the United Nations to define the role of the troops, saying such a clarification was "essential for our presence in Somalia."


TV Violence Is the Thing That Never Dies; Warning Label
To the Editor:
The proposed warning about violent television programs -- "Due to some violent content, parental discretion advised" -- does violence to the English language.
"Due to" is an adjective phrase meaning "capable of being attributed." It is not synonymous with "because of."


Warriors Trade Hill
The Golden State Warriors yesterday traded forward TYRONE HILL to Cleveland for the Cavaliers' first-round pick in the 1994 National Basketball Association draft.
The Warriors will receive the Cavaliers' first-round selection in next year's draft, unless that pick is in the top seven.
The trade is also contingent on Hill's passing a physical examination.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Overview; Eyes on the Sky, Midwesterners Hold Their Own
The swollen Mississippi and Missouri Rivers continued their rampage through the Midwest today, and disaster officials said any hope for a break in the monthlong flooding would depend on whether the skies cleared and rain eased over the weekend.
The weather forecast called for a chance of showers throughout much of the region through Monday.


Teledyne to Cut 1,200 Jobs; Earnings Up, Sales Down
Teledyne Inc., a leading producer of military electronics, said today that it was consolidating its 65 divisions into 21, a move that would eliminate 1,200 management jobs.
To account for the cost of the restructuring, Teledyne took a $5 million after-tax charge against its second-quarter earnings.


Seagate Technology Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Day of Bombast Before Budget Talks
The Congressional conference on the budget got under way today with senators and representatives doing what they do best: meeting, making political speeches and having their pictures taken.
Then they adjourned until next week, when they will start on something they may not be so good at: figuring out how to lower the Federal deficit by raising taxes and cutting spending in a way that can win the support of President Clinton and a majority of senators and representatives.


L.I. Man Linked to 18 Deaths Pleads Not Guilty to Murder
As relatives of two murder victims linked to Joel Rifkin watched from a packed courtroom today, the unemployed landscaper pleaded not guilty to killing a 22-year-old Manhattan woman whose body was found last month in the back of his pickup truck.
"I am not guilty," Mr.
Rifkin said slowly and deliberately at his arraignment here before Judge Ira H. Wexner of Nassau County Court.


Sounds Around Town
Briton With Nuance
David Cale and the Nuyorican Poets, Central Park Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, (212) 360-2777.
Among his generation of thirty-something solo performance artists, Mr.
Cale, a Briton transplanted to New York City, has the tenderest, most poetic sensibility.
At once surreal, romantic and funny, his best solo monologues explore relationships and varieties of sexuality with a finely-tuned ear to the nuances of erotic dialogue and a penetrating psychological awareness.
The Nuyorican Poets are literary rappers whose style falls somewhere between Gil Scott-Heron and L. L. Cool J. Showtime is tonight at 8:30 and admission is free.
Fusing Two Talents
K.
T.
Sullivan, the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
With a sly comic sensibility reminiscent of Judy Holliday and a theatrical soprano that echoes Barbara Cook, Ms.
Sullivan fuses her two talents seamlessly in "By Myself: The Words and Music of Howard Dietz and Arthur Schwartz," one of two shows she is performing at the Oak Room.
Wittily phrased renditions of such comic delicacies as "Rhode Island Is Famous for You" blend beautifully with ballads like "Something to Remember You By." The Dietz-Schwartz tribute plays at 9:30 tonight and tomorrow night.
In her other show, "For the Record," at 11:30 P.M. both nights, she sings selections from her new album, "Crazy World" (DRG).
For each show there is a $25 music charge and a $10 food and drink minimum.
Busch Is Back
Charles Busch Revue, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
Mr.
Busch's delightful if messy cabaret revue, which returns to the Ballroom after a hiatus of several weeks, is a genial spoof of the old Carol Burnett variety show, with more than a nodding reference to Judy Garland's television show.
This drag performer, who appears in several amusing get-ups, welcomes assorted guests, including Julie Halston.
The musical fare ranges from "Town Without Pity" done as a campy hoods-and-bad-girl production number, to Kurt Weill's and Langston Hughes's "Lonely House," done straight.
Show time is at 9 tonight and tomorrow night, with an extra show this evening at 11:15 P.M. to benefit Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.
Tickets are $20 and $25, and there is a two-drink minimum.


Judiciary Panel Tries to Avoid New Missteps on Nominees
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said today that he would hold a closed session of the committee for each Supreme Court nominee, beginning with Ruth Bader Ginsburg, to consider any personal accusations that could be damaging.
He did not suggest that any such questions had been raised about Judge Ginsburg.
But in a floor speech to outline this and other new procedures, he said that even if the "Lord Almighty" were nominated to the Supreme Court, there would be people who would come forward with accusations.


Lottery Account Stays at Needham
As expected, DDB Needham New York successfully defended its estimated $25 million New York State Lottery account after a mandatory review.


CHRONICLE
Here comes the bride -- from Idaho to Transylvania.
When JOHN FLORESCU, chief executive and executive producer for David Frost's television company and scion of a distinguished Rumanian family, became engaged in October to GINA CHRISTENSEN, a political consultant, he could think of only two places for their wedding.
"I explained to my in-laws, who are from Idaho, that it should be in either Sun Valley or Transylvania," Mr.
Florescu said yesterday.
"They were intrigued by the idea." So Transylvania it was.


TV Violence Is the Thing That Never Dies; Children's Hours
To the Editor:
The moves by the major television networks to restrict children's access to violent programs ("Mild Slap at TV Violence," news analysis, July 1) is much welcomed.
But the burden, rather than being placed entirely on parents, should be shared, with the networks taking more responsibility for control of children's access to violence than they assume with parental advisories.


SHENYANG EARNINGS EXPECTED TO RISE 60%
Brilliance China Automotive Holdings Ltd., which controls Shenyang Automotive, a mini-van maker in China, said yesterday that 1993 net earnings for Shenyang would rise about 60 percent and that sales would double.
Last year, Shenyang earned $11.3 million, or 84 cents a share, on sales of $205.6 million, based on the exchange rate for the yuan on Dec. 31.


At the Bar; In Honoring His Parents, the Rosenbergs' Younger Son Finds a Mission for Himself.
When he goes on the road these days, Robert Meeropol has two stock speeches.
The first, entitled "Crime of the Century: The Trial and Execution of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg and the End of the Cold War," is pretty much the one he has given the past 20 years, ever since disclosing that he was the younger of the two sons the Rosenbergs left behind.


Sounds Around Town
Accordion Man
Steve Jordan, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Also known as Esteban, Mr.
Jordan is one of the Southwest's greatest accordionists, someone who slides easily between rock and conjunto-style Tex-Mex music.
He's elusive, and would rather be fishing, so this is a rare chance to hear a Texas legend.
Shows tomorrow night are at 8:30 and 11:30 and tickets are, astoundingly, free.
Haitian Dance Music
Coupe Cloue, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
He's one of the founding fathers of compas, the Haitian dance music that glides by on records, but rocks in concert.
He helped introduce a driving, arpeggiated guitar style to compas, and his name, which means all sorts of things in Creole, is an indication of the sort of Rabelasian word play he likes.
The show tonight is at 1, and there is a $16 cover charge.
Saxman Jackson
Javon Jackson, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Jackson, a talented tenor saxophonist best known for his association with Art Blakey, will be performing with the pianist George Cables, and the young and swinging bassist Chris Thomas.
Expect interplay and wit.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 10, 12 and 2.
There is a $12 cover charge and an $8 minimum.
P.
W.


It's About Strategy, Not About Fun


Complete: Young Gets 5-Year Deal
On a day when two former 49ers -- safety Ronnie Lott and quarterback Joe Montana -- were talking about their past glories and their new beginnings with different teams, a present 49er, quarterback Steve Young, was cementing his future in San Francisco by agreeing to a five-year, $26.5 million contract.
The contract makes Young the highest paid player in the National Football League.
Young will earn an average of $5.3 million a year, surpassing Denver quarterback John Elway, who signed a four-year deal this spring that will pay him an average of $4.8 million a year.
Young agreed to terms on Wednesday, signed the contract yesterday and then took the field for the afternoon practice at the 49ers' training camp in Rocklin, Calif.


Dinkins Fires Sharp Jabs At Giuliani
Mayor David N. Dinkins, his re-election campaign stalled in the polls, abandoned an incumbent's customary reserve and sharply stepped up his attack on his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, yesterday -- even as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo effusively praised the Mayor as a man who "can show us how to live together as one city going forward."
The offensives by Mr.
Dinkins and the state's top Democrat came on the legal deadline for the start of the race as the candidates filed petitions for the ballot and reported raising millions of dollars more for their campaigns.
Mr.
Dinkins took in $2.4 million in the six months ended last Sunday, while Mr.
Giuliani raised $1.8 million.
Each now has just under $1.5 million on hand.
A Joint Appearance in Brooklyn
Aides to the Mayor and Governor said their remarks had not been coordinated.
But a number of pressures -- from Mr.
Giuliani's standing in the polls to the impending release of a Cuomo administration report on the handling of the Crown Heights disturbances -- have combined to keep Mr.
Dinkins on the defensive.
Meanwhile, some of the Mayor's prominent black and Jewish supporters recently wrote the Governor to say they hoped the Crown Heights report would not become politicized or inflame racial tensions.


U.S. Aides Say Compromise Near On Russia Arms Technology Sale
American and Russian negotiators are close to a compromise in a bitter rift over the Russian sale of missile technology to India in violation of international export controls, senior State Department officials said today.
The two sides remained locked in intense discussions tonight in an effort to avoid the automatic imposition of American sanctions against Russian and Indian companies involved in the deal.
The sanctions were scheduled to go into effect at midnight, but senior officials said that they were close to a settlement and that discussions would likely continue on Friday.


Knicks Secure Williams With One-Year Contract
If Herb Williams plays in the front court as well as he negotiates in the front office, the 35-year-old backup center should be a powerful auxiliary force in the Knicks' renewed quest for a championship.
Williams, a free agent who provided crucial support for the foul-prone Patrick Ewing last season, signed a one-year contract yesterday that will reportedly bring him close to $1.5 million, or some three times his previous salary of $430,000.
His salary is far more than the Knicks had hoped to pay in his second season as a key reserve.


METRO DIGEST
EGYPTIANS OUTLINE BOMB CONFESSION
The chief foreign policy adviser to President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt has outlined the contents of a confession given to Egyptian authorities by a trade center bombing suspect.
A1.
An informer critical to breaking up a second bombing plot went through long testing.
B2.


Washington at Work; For Him, Mideast Peace Is Simply an Obsession
All his adult life, Dennis B. Ross has been obsessed by the Middle East.
He has studied it, he has written speeches about it and he has helped develop United States policy toward it.
Friends even say his favorite movies are "Lawrence of Arabia" and "The Ten Commandments."


At Home Abroad; The Last Governor
"What's made Hong Kong what it is," Chris Patten said, "is the magic combination of Chinese entrepreneurialism and the rule of law. And the rule of law is not just about judges in court. It's about a free press and an independent legislature."
Mr.
Patten is the British Governor of Hong Kong: the last, as intended, before the territory reverts to Chinese sovereignty on June 30, 1997.
And the reason he talks a lot about the rule of law these days is that the idea is central to the argument he is having with the Chinese Government about the future of Hong Kong.


Excel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Serbs Permit Restoration of Gas And Diesel Supplies to Sarajevo
Serbian forces besieging Sarajevo permitted the restoration of natural gas flows into the city today, allowing thousands of families to resume cooking with gas stoves before technical problems cropped up that dropped the gas pressure for the remainder of the day.
Simultaneously, Serbian forces allowed three diesel tanker trucks that had been blockaded at Sarajevo airport for two weeks to move past a Serbian checkpoint and into the city.


Report Criticizes System For Grants to Homeless
New York City often fails to provide single adults with welfare benefits that would help them stay housed, and frequently cuts them off when they do get the grants, says a report released yesterday by a homeless advocacy group.
The report, by the Legal Action Center for the Homeless, concluded that about half the homeless individuals who apply for welfare benefits actually obtain them.
And three-quarters of those who did qualify for assistance were dropped from the rolls in less than a year.


Mattel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


8 Held in Plots To Kill Blacks In Los Angeles
The Federal authorities said today that they had arrested eight white supremacists who were preparing to blow up one of the largest black churches here and kill Rodney G. King in an effort to incite a spasm of racial violence around the country.
Federal prosecutors said the supremacists had plotted to destroy the 8,500-member First African Methodist Episcopal Church in South-Central Los Angeles.
According to an affidavit filed in Federal District Court, one of the men arrested planned to burst into the church during services and "start popping people" with a machine gun.


For an Artist in SoHo, the Subject is Appropriation


Life Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hot and Grumpy
Dog days are upon us, but the dance of folly has been proceeding in Washington with reassuring briskness.
Herewith several prime items:
The Central Intelligence Agency says one of its guys, while posing as a consular official in Khartoum, signed Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman's request to enter the U.S.
But, says the C.I.A., he did it by accident and only after getting some bad advice from a Sudanese employee in the embassy.


Survey Cites Warning Signs on Drug Use
A decline in drug use among college students and other young adults that began more than a decade ago has virtually halted amid signs that some of the most popular drugs from the 1960's may be making a comeback, researchers said today.
The researchers, who are from the University of Michigan and have been tracking patterns of drug use among young people for nearly 20 years, said that marijuana appeared to be gaining new followers on campuses and that the use of LSD also seemed to be on the rise.


The Mets Take An Extra Day Off
It has become a routine.
The Mets arrive at the ball park.
They get dressed.
They lose.
They get undressed.
They leave.
Few players seem to get upset anymore.
Fewer still throw tantrums, or yell at themselves or their teammates.


ALLTEL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congress Asked to Avoid Debate on Olympic Site
Congress should not be allowed to interfere with Beijing's bid to play host to the 2000 Olympic Games because that would interfere with the International Olympic Committee's freedom to vote, officials of the I.O.C. and United States Olympic Committee told Congress today.
The growing human rights debate on whether to allow Beijing to be host to the Games was discussed today at a hearing before the Senate Commerce Committee.
The two-hour debate focused on whether Senate resolutions 117 and 124, opposing the Beijing bid, would represent a political stance against the Chinese government's treatment of its citizens or become an unintended punishment Olympic athletes would suffer, perhaps inspiring a boycott of the 1996 Atlanta Games.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Conner Finishes First  Dennis Conner, skipper of the 60-foot sailboat Winston, beat the 70-foot South African yacht Broomstick to the finish of the Gold Cup Transatlantic Race by reaching Southampton, England, first yesterday in the fleet of nine ocean racers that left New York City on July 3.
His time of passage was 12 days 8 hours.
The 3,200-mile competition was organized as a feeder voyage to take competitors to Southampton for the start Sept. 25 of the Whitbread Round the World Race.


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Citius, Altius, Fortius For Some $400 Million
In 11 days, ABC, NBC and CBS will bid for the 1996 Summer Olympics, which will be in Atlanta.
One year will have passed since NBC, with its cable ally Cablevision, lost $100 million on a $401 million payment for the Summer Olympics in Barcelona.
The bidding in New York on July 27-28 will not be a donnybrook to prove which network can lose the most money -- unless someone is very dumb.
Nobody needs the Olympics if it's a guaranteed money loser, regardless of the facts that Atlanta is in the favorable Eastern time zone and a live Olympics will get enormous promotion.


TV Violence Is the Thing That Never Dies; Keep It on Big Screen
To the Editor:
Bravo to Russell Baker for "Busby Goes Berserk" (column, July 3), on television violence.
He makes an important point, discriminating between violence as entertainment and violence as real-life pain.
But he leaves out other important points.


COMPANY NEWS
ELF SANOFI S.A., increased its stake in Hungary's Chinoin Pharmaceutical and Chemical Works to 51 percent from 40 percent.


David Ofner, 63, Dies; Advertising Executive
David Ofner, former president of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Advertising who headed the company's main domestic operations, died Tuesday at his home in Highland Park, Ill.
He was 63.
The cause was a brain tumor, said Owen Dougherty, a vice president at the parent company, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications in Chicago.


Harold Shane, Indiana Professor Who Wrote Widely, Is Dead at 78
Harold Gray Shane, a professor at Indiana University who reached an audience of millions with articles, pamphlets, books and film narratives, died Monday at Bloomington Hospital.
He was 78 and lived in Bloomington.
The cause was a heart attack, the university said.


Ratings Raised On Citicorp Debt
Moody's Investors Service raised Citicorp's senior long-term debt rating yesterday to Baa-1, from Baa-2, and the subordinated debt to Baa-2, from Baa-3.
The short-term commercial paper rating was also raised, to Prime-2 from Prime-3.
About $28 billion in debt securities is affected by the adjustment.
A big factor in the upward revision, Moody's said, was the expectation that Citicorp would be able to continue to improve earnings.
Citicorp has been reducing its loan losses and loan- loss provisions, enabling it to build its capital levels, analysts have said.


A's Break Into Pen in Seventh and Steal Game
The night seemed to hold such promise for the Yankees.
There was a revised lineup for the fans to argue over, with Wade Boggs replacing Bernie Williams as the leadoff hitter.
There was a baseball team in the Bronx that could legitimately dream about challenging for a division title.
There was another rowdy crowd at Yankee Stadium.
There was even a 3-2 lead over the A's in the seventh inning.
But then the bullpen door opened and Steve Howe trotted into the game to replace Melido Perez.


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Hope Against Heart Failure Is Seen in Experimental Drug
Promising results from a study of an experimental drug reported yesterday raise the possibility that scientists could be on the verge of finding a new and more effective way to treat congestive heart failure, a common cause of death in the United States.
But experts cautioned that the drug, vesnarinone, could be lethal if just a little more than the effective dose was given and that larger studies would be needed before the drug could be marketed in the United States.
The experts said they did not know how the drug worked, and if they could solve that mystery they might identify a fundamental biological defect related to heart failure that scientists had never detected.


Dow Gains 8.38 Points; Other Indicators Off
Weakness among oil, drug and technology stocks yesterday drained the momentum from Wednesday's stock market rally, causing most leading indicators to slip slightly.
Only the Dow Jones industrial average posted a gain.
After sagging for most of the day, it rose 8.38 to close at 3,550.93, about four points shy of its record high.
Nasdaq Falls 3.80 Points
The Nasdaq composite fell back 3.80 from Wednesday's record closing high, ending at 708.69.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Index of 500 stocks fell 0.86, to 449.22, and the American Stock Exchange composite was off 0.69 at 437.98.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE CHARLES and DIANA, THE PRINCESS OF WALES made a rare public appearance as a couple yesterday at the funeral of the Dowager Lady Fermoy, the Princess's maternal grandmother.
The estranged pair sat side by side during the service at St.
Margaret's Church in King's Lynn, Norfolk, England, and chatted afterward while the Prince held an umbrella over them against the rain, The Associated Press reported.


Harsh Sentences
To the Editor:
Maximum prison sentences of 25 years to life were meted out to two black youths whose crossfire at a Brooklyn housing project killed Patrick Daly, a Red Hook elementary school principal (news article, July 7).
A third teen-ager, who had no criminal record, was sentenced to 20 years to life.
These sentences were egregiously excessive.
Should unintentional murders be punished as intentional ones?
Should all three youths be held equally responsible?


Rangers Sign Choice
The Rangers yesterday announced the signing of defenseman ERIC CAIRNS, who played the last two seasons with Detroit of the Ontario Hockey League.
Cairns, 19, was the Rangers' third choice -- the 72d over all -- in the 1992 National Hockey League entry draft.


Clinton Delays Senate Hearing On Health Post
The White House bowed today to Republican pressure and postponed confirmation hearings for President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, to give her supporters and opponents more time to examine ethical questions uncovered in background checks.
The most serious issue is a lawsuit filed against the National Bank of Arkansas over events that occurred when Dr.
Elders was serving on its board.
The bank was the subject of a successful hostile takeover, and some new directors sued the previous directors, including Dr.
Elders, for shoddy lending practices that they said violated Federal banking laws.


A. Garth Hamby, 55, Executive at Coca-Cola
A.
Garth Hamby, retired executive vice president of the Coca-Cola Company, died on Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 55 and lived in Atlanta.
The cause was emphysema and lung cancer, said a company spokesman.


Traffic Alert
SUNDAY LA GRAN PARADA DOMINICANA: Grand Concourse will be closed between 184th Street and 158th Street from 2:00 P.M. until completion.


Sports of The Times; The Wild Goings-On In the Bronx
IN what many have been led to believe is one of the few safe places in the South Bronx, the Yankee clubhouse, pitcher Jim Abbott said he was looking forward to the second half of the baseball season here.
"We're only one game out of first place and we haven't even played up to our capabilities yet," Abbott said yesterday.
"And the fans are into it -- screaming and shouting and hollering at the other players. I think things are really going to be exciting around here come September and October. It could be wild."


Exporting Shareholder Activism
The tightknit business community in Geneva was shocked last May when one of the city's leading institutional shareholders had the audacity to challenge Nestle S.A., Switzerland's largest corporation, at the company's annual meeting.
Introducing himself in calm and respectful tones, Jean-Francois Vielliard, chairman of the Caterpillar Overseas Company, the pension fund for the Swiss employees of Caterpillar Inc., criticized Nestle's dividends as too low and questioned the penchant of the company for diversifying away from its core food and beverage businesses.


Egyptian Says Confession Links Iran to Bombing of Trade Center
The chief foreign policy adviser to President Hosni Mu barak today offered the first outline of a confession given to the Egyptian authorities by a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing.
The adviser, Dr.
Osama al-Baz, said the suspect, Mahmud Abouhalima, had told Egyptian officials that the bombing plan was hatched in Afghanistan among Arab veterans of the war, and that it was approved by men describing themselves as Iranian intelligence agents and by Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman.


Vice Chairman Resigns As Liz Claiborne Falters
Jay Margolis, the personable, highly regarded vice chairman of Liz Claiborne Inc., resigned suddenly yesterday, leaving the apparel manufacturer at a time when its sales have slipped and its vision for the future seems to have dimmed.
"My stay at Liz Claiborne has been wonderful," Mr.
Margolis said in a telephone interview.
"It's been an adventure and an opportunity. It changed me."


Corrections
A chart on July 5 with an article analyzing Hispanic voting patterns reversed the percentage of Hispanic voters in Texas who identified themselves as Republicans with those who identified themselves as independents.
The share of Hispanic voters there who identified themselves as Republican was 9 percent in 1988, 9 percent in 1990 and 7 percent in 1992.
Those who identified themselves as independent were 15 percent in 1988, 12 percent in 1990 and 27 percent in 1992.


TV Listings
On Fridays, television and radio news, listings and advertising now appear at the end of section D, with Home Video.
Today, pages D28-29.


Review/Film; Father, Daughter And Murder
"Benefit of the Doubt" is an over-produced, under-achieving suspense melodrama about a father who, after serving 22 years in prison for the murder of his wife, returns home to bond with the daughter whose testimony as a little girl helped send him away.
Donald Sutherland plays the dad, who loudly proclaims his innocence and keeps talking about the importance of the family unit.
Amy Irving is the daughter, grown up to be a waitress in a topless bar and a single mother of an 11-year-old boy.
Her father is so persuasive that she begins to suspect that the prosecuting attorney brainwashed her as a little girl.
The audience is in doubt for perhaps three minutes.


Home Video
At its convention in Las Vegas this week, the video business spent much time reassuring itself that contrary to some articles in the press, it bears no resemblance to the dodo.
Electronic superhighways carrying so-called video on demand (any title at any time called up at home) may be a threat years hence, but people in the industry assert that electronic delivery doesn't mean the extinction of the video store.
In the future, they say, people will still want to browse in stores, which will necessitate new generations of packaged goods.
For example, dealers talk about using fiber optics and computers to duplicate tapes in the store while you wait.


People
*
Joseph Caponigro, Mark Stanley, and Lee Wilson were named to the new positions of senior vice presidents and directors of planning at Pentacom, a BBDO North America subsidiary in Southfield, Mich., that handles media services for the Chrysler Corporation.
Mr.
Caponigro, who will oversee media operations for the Dodge division, was previously an executive vice president and director of media services at BBDO Detroit, Southfield.
Mr.
Stanley, who will direct media for Chrysler-Plymouth, was previously a vice president and media director at Bozell Detroit, Southfield.
And Mr.
Wilson, who will have the post for Jeep-Eagle, was previously media director at Vic Olesen &amp; Partners, Los Angeles. *
Michael Feld was named senior vice president and general manager at FCB/Direct West, San Francisco and Los Angeles, succeeding Robert Solomon, who left to become executive vice president and general manager of the direct-marketing group at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York.
Mr.
Feld was previously director of integrated marketing at J. Walter Thompson San Francisco.


Moore's Sentencing Set
He's expected at training camp next week and should be in shape for the Giants' opener against the Bears on Sept. 5, but offensive lineman ERIC MOORE may have to take some time off after that.
He has a date in Federal court in Atlanta on Sept. 9 for sentencing on a conviction for possession of steroids.


Serendipity And Schlock Out on the Road
I AM a sucker for roadside attractions.
My idea of glorious slumming is to drive through stretches of country new to me and stop along the way to look at the biggest chair in the world or performances by diving pigs.
So there I was happily driving west through the Green Mountain National Forest in Vermont, twisting through stands of proud old trees and catching glimpses of valleys offering themselves in the distance.
On the radio, a highbrow disk jockey was introducing Renaissance lute music.


Corrections
An article yesterday about other countries' repatriation of aliens bound for the United States misstated the circumstances of the fatal shooting of a Chinese alien in Honduras in some editions.
According to a former American official, he was killed at a detention center, not while boarding a plane for repatriation.


Sabatini Backs Out
GABRIELA SABATINI, who was top-seeded in next week's Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J., withdrew from the tournament yesterday because of tendinitis in her right shoulder.
"Her doctor told her not to pick up a racquet for the next three weeks," JOHN KORFF, the tournament director, said, confirming the withdrawal of Sabatini.
Korff said MARY JOE FERNANDEZ would move up to the No. 1 spot, with JENNIFER CAPRIATI No. 2.


Attipat K. Ramanujan, 64, Poet And Scholar of Indian Literature
Attipat Krishnaswami Ramanujan, a poet, translator and scholar of southern Indian literature, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Chicago.
He was 64 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was a heart disturbance during minor surgery, said the University of Chicago, where he was a professor.


Gay Ban Decision Near
Officials said President Clinton had decided to accept in large measure Defense Secretary Les Aspin's plan for relaxing restrictions on homosexuals in the military.
But work continued on meeting legal questions raised by Attorney General Janet Reno.
Article, page A10


Hospital Says It Barred Doctor in Abortion Death
The Queens doctor who apparently performed an abortion that led to the death of a 33-year-old woman last week had been barred from surgery at a hospital because of incompetence, an administrator said yesterday.
"He didn't even meet what I would consider the bare minimum standard of care," Dr.
Anthony N. Dardano, former chief and now vice chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Utica, N.Y., said of Dr.
David Benjamin, who was then known as Elyas Bonrouhi.
"We got rid of him."


Empire Blue Cross Dismisses 3, Citing Destruction of Documents
The chief financial officer of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield and two of his subordinates were dismissed yesterday for their roles in destroying documents and filing false data with the New York State Insurance Department, Empire's chairman said.
The dismissals of Jerry Weissman and two actuaries who worked for him were an attempt to restore public confidence following months of disclosures about management failures and financial discrepancies at Empire, the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer.


Legislation On Lending
The Clinton Administration, proposing legislation today to subsidize specialized lenders who provide credit in distressed communities, also ordered regulatory agencies to toughen existing rules requiring conventional banks to participate in community development loans.
The two-pronged initiative was welcomed by community activists, who said it was an example of how to encourage both conventional and unconventional lenders to invest more deeply in community development.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: Where to Get Help; List of Major Programs That Help Flood Victims
Federal, state and voluntary agencies offer a wide and varied assortment of aid programs to flood victims, both individuals and businesses.
The processing time can vary from a couple of hours to a couple of days or a number of weeks, depending how pressing the need and how much documentation is required.
Here are the major programs, most of which are offered at disaster assistance centers:
BASIC EMERGENCY NEEDS The Red Cross, Salvation Army and other voluntary agencies offer immediate gifts of food, shelter, clothing, bedding and medicine to help flood victims while they await approval of government aid or work out their own arrangements.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Businessman Is Accused of Arson in Freeport Fire
A wealthy Glen Head businessman, who Federal officials say is a member of the Gambino crime family, became so concerned, they say, about an F.B.I. surveillance post across the street from his restaurant in Freeport that he ordered his workers to burn it down.
As a result, the businessman, Thomas Masotto, is facing a 16-count indictment on a slew of charges, including racketeering and arson, that carry combined maximum sentences totaling 220 years in prison and fines of $4 million.


New Orleans to Remove Obelisk Revered by White Supremacists
The New Orleans City Council voted today to banish from city streets a gray granite obelisk commemorating an 1874 uprising of whites against Louisiana's biracial Reconstruction government.
In recent years the monument has been used as a rallying point by David Duke and the Ku Klux Klan, making it a symbol of white supremacy and an embarrassment to the city.


On Stage, and Off
A Ruling
No theatrical rule dictates that a sultry summer must be a boring summer.
Indeed, there is the shimmer of news in the July heat.
For example: Actors Equity has ruled against permitting the English actor Michael Pennington to play the male lead in "The Gift of the Gorgon," the Peter Shaffer play to open on Broadway on March 3 as a co-production of the Shubert Organization.
The Shuberts asked that Mr.
Pennington be permitted to perform under rule No. 3B of the producers' contract with the union, which permits non-American stars to perform.
"Mr. Pennington did not qualify under our criteria for widespread acclaim, international recognition and exceptional ability," said Alan Eisenberg, Equity's executive secretary; i.e., he's not enough of a star.
"Our hope is to provide employment for American actors, and this could give one of our performers a breakthrough," he said of the union's decision.


In Year 7 of Game 6, Buckner Retaliates
The season of heroes and clowns has begun.
The bleachers tremble with anticipation, the radio rattles with opinion, the dog days pant with the possibilities of a pennant.
Someone has to win and someone has to lose, and so long as we remember who they were, we won't let them forget either.
"I'm tired of it," said Bill Buckner. "I don't want to hear about it anymore."


Art in Review
'Snap!'
Tomoko Liguori Gallery  93 Grand Street  SoHo  Through July 24
An ominous tone runs through much of the work in this group show, which focuses on the relationship between personal identity and the body.
In Bill Jacobson's out-of-focus black-and-white images, a man's head becomes featureless and generic; in Joe Ziolkowski's studio pictures, crisply lighted and sharply focused, nude males balance precariously on a tightrope or hang upside down.
The fleshly theme is continued in Cindy Sherman's dress-up picture of herself as pregnant (with a plastic belly) and wearing white eye shadow and wild hair; one of John Coplans's nude self-portraits, as a heroic if hairy figure, is included as well.
The dissolution of the body is suggested by Ilyse Soutine's flatfooted color photograph of what looks like a homemade electric chair, and by Jeff Wall's coolly dispassionate aerial view of a cemetery.


Reuben Johnson, 79, Former Dean at UConn
Reuben Botsford Johnson, former dean of men and director of alumni relations at the University of Connecticut, died on Tuesday at Lawrence and Memorial Hospital in New London.
He was 79 and lived in Storrs and Black Point, Conn.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Report Suggests Homosexuality Is Linked to Genes
Ushering the politically explosive study of the origins of sexual orientation into a new and perhaps more scientifically rigorous phase, researchers report that they have linked male homosexuality to a small region of one human chromosome.
The results have yet to be confirmed by other laboratories, and the chromosomal region implicated, if it holds up under further scrutiny, is almost surely just a single chapter in the intricate story of sexual orientation and behavior.
Nevertheless, scientists said the work suggests that one or several genes located on the bottom half of the sausage-shaped X chromosome may play a role in predisposing some men toward homosexuality. (The researchers have begun a similar study looking at the chromosomes of lesbians.)


TIME WARNER INC. (N)
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose by 10 percent, to $673 million, before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
Sales jumped to $3.3 billion, from $3.1 billion in the comparable period a year ago.
Still, the company, which is based in New York, reported a loss of $80 million for the quarter ended June 30, a figure that included an extraordinary charge from the retirement of debt of $35 million.
The total net loss for the quarter, applicable to common shares, was $83 million because of $3 million in preferred dividend requirements.
In the comparable quarter a year ago, the company had a net loss applicable to common shares of $147 million.


Procter &amp; Gamble in 12% Job Cut As Brand Names Lose Attraction
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the nation's leading maker of household and personal products, said yesterday that it would reduce its work force by 12 percent within four years as it seeks to cope with consumers' rising preference for less expensive products.
The announcement of cuts in Procter &amp; Gamble's work force, which far exceed Wall Street's expectations, come as the economy has been generating new jobs only grudgingly and companies have been cutting back employment.
But while many corporate layoffs have occurred in troubled industries -- from airlines to arms producers -- Procter &amp; Gamble is a healthy company in a profitable industry.


Review/Art; A Florentine Sculptor's Masterpiece
Almost surreptitiously, considering the fanfare you might expect, one of the greatest of all Italian Renaissance sculptures has come to spend the summer at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Andrea del Verrocchio's bronze "Christ and St. Thomas" should be familiar to anyone who has taken Art History 101, even after a dramatic cleaning by Florentine restorers who removed 500 years of accumulated grime.
If it were by Michelangelo, there would no doubt be lines stretching all the way from the museum's lobby to the Lehman wing, where "Christ and St. Thomas" is on view.


Market Place; Circa Pharmaceuticals, Scarred By Scandal, Is Drawing Investors.
IT'S a safe bet that few brokers are pounding the table these days about the Bolar Pharmaceutical Corporation.
And small wonder.
Bolar was a central figure in the recent generic drug scandals.
It changed its name to Circa Pharmaceuticals earlier this year to distance itself from the past, but cannot seem to escape.
Its profit-and-loss statement bleeds red ink.
It takes seven pages of its public filings to list all the lawsuits against the company.
Analysts have fled the stock.
Even the company's auditors question its ability to survive.


Review/Film; Bette Midler, Queen Witch in Heavy Makeup
Apparently too much eye of newt got into the formula for "Hocus Pocus," transforming a potentially wicked Bette Midler vehicle into an unholy mess.
That's too bad, since Ms.
Midler's appearance in a role like the one she has here could have been pure witchcraft.
As the foremost of three sisters from 17th-century Salem who are magically transported forward three centuries to bedevil modern trick or treaters, Ms.
Midler flounces in high comic style.
Not for her the cackling and hobbling of ordinary screen witches; Ms.
Midler grandly plays this harpy as if she were Norma Desmond tackling the opening of "Macbeth."
Ms.
Midler's performance is such a crazy amalgam of great-lady mannerisms and withering sneers that it deserves to have been shown off more clearly.
Instead, the star is buried beneath a mountain of makeup, while the combined effects of prosthetic buck teeth and affected Britishisms make her hard to hear.
More problematic, the movie that has been built around Ms.
Midler's feisty Winifred is badly cluttered, as the witches mix with zombies, parents and teen-agers on Halloween.
Entirely too diverting is the spectacle of an entire cast elaborately overdressed for a costume party.


Review/Dance; Acting Serious in the Face of Mirth
Comedy became a serious business and lighthearted entertainment proved far from empty-headed on Wednesday night at Alice Tully Hall.
The annual summer Serious Fun festival offered "Megadance: Serious Wit," a program of merriment in motion arranged by Sally Banes.
One reason why virtually all the pieces on the bill were funny was the fact that the characters in them acted as if the situations in which they found themselves were of the utmost importance.
Yet to the audience, everything looked totally absurd.


Inside Art
Small Museums, Big Plans
Two small, but well-known art institutions have just announced ambitious expansion plans.
In Long Island City, Queens, the nonprofit P.S. 1 Museum has begun a two-year, $5.7 million renovation of its building, a Romanesque Revival schoolhouse dating from 1892.
In Houston, the Menil Collection has begun construction on a 9,000-square-foot building designed by the Italian architect Renzo Piano, whose adjacent Menil Collection building opened six years ago.
The new $3.5 million museum will house works by Cy Twombly and was organized in collaboration with the Dia Center for the Arts in Manhattan (initially established with de Menil money as the Dia Art Foundation), which will also open a space devoted to Mr.
Twombly.
At P.S. 1, the renovation is, in large part, a necessity.
"The structural integrity of the building has been in question," said Anthony Vasconcellos, the deputy director of P.S. 1.
"This is not a luxury. Ceilings have been crumbling around us. There's asbestos that is being removed."


RUSSIA MAY CURB FOREIGN RELIGIONS
At the urging of the Russian Orthodox Church, the Russian Parliament passed a measure on Wednesday restricting the activities of foreign religious groups here.
The measure was apparently aimed at controlling the activities of foreign evangelical preachers and of sects like the Hare Krishna.
They regularly hold mass meetings in stadiums or appear on television, to the growing irritation and consternation of the established Orthodox Church.


Official Recalls Delay in Using Informer
Emad A. Salem, the Government informer whose information helped break up a bombing conspiracy last month, first emerged as a contact of a New York City police detective during the 1991 trial of the man accused of killing Rabbi Meir Kahane.
But he went through a long period of testing and talks before authorities on the Joint Terrorist Task Force felt he could be relied on as an informer, a law enforcement official said yesterday.
As questions arose yesterday over whether Federal agents -- given their long contact with Mr.
Salem -- should have known about plans to bomb the World Trade Center last February, the official said there was a process of testing that occurs before the police and Federal agents trust an informer, particularly one like Mr.
Salem, who authorities say is given to braggadocio.


Cuba's Ills Encroach On Health
To enter the carefully manicured grounds of the sprawling sanitarium here, a dozen miles south of Havana, is to be reminded of a prerevolutionary world of oligarchs and rolling ranches.
All the splendor of the estate that once stood here has been preserved, but put to a different use: treatment of people infected with the virus that causes AIDS.


Big Loss and Big Revamping at Apple
The extent of Apple Computer's troubles became more fully evident today.
The company announced a much bigger quarterly loss than had been expected and a big restructuring, even as it began laying off employees at its headquarters in Cupertino, Calif.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.97
3.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.98
3.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.10
3.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.33
5.32
6.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.56
6.56
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.30
7.29
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.69
5.69
6.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


At Factory For Art, Freelancing Is Charged
A controversial artist who employs other artists to conceive and execute paintings sold under his signature has himself been the subject of an appropriation, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
The prosecutors accuse two employees of Mark Kostabi's art-production house, a painter and a sales representative, of creating and selling additional works without Mr.
Kostabi's knowledge, forging his signature and pocketing the proceeds.


Clinton Is Said to Accept Parts of Plan on Gay Ban
President Clinton has decided to accept in large measure Defense Secretary Les Aspin's proposal for a limited lifting of restrictions on homosexuals in the military, but last-minute work is continuing to answer legal questions raised by Attorney General Janet Reno, Administration officials said tonight.
Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Aspin met for more than two hours tonight as the Defense Secretary formally submitted his recommendation for a policy that would drop the military's current ban on homosexuals but limit how open they could be about their sexuality, the officials said.


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nullifying a Dangerous Doctrine
In its zeal to build Star Wars defenses, the Reagan Administration advanced the pernicious doctrine that a President can tear up a treaty -- in this case the 1972 ABM treaty limiting Soviet and American missile defenses -- simply by reinterpreting it.
No need to obtain agreement from the Russians.
No need to get the consent of the Senate.
Just read the treaty in a way that would allow development of space-based defenses.
Now the Clinton Administration has taken a welcome step toward repudiating that doctrine.
It has reaffirmed the original, narrow interpretation of the ABM treaty.
That interpretation assures that all work on missile defenses, including the remnants of the Star Wars program, will comply with the letter of the law.
It also ends a shameful episode of lawlessness.





Corrections
An article on the Business Technology page in Business Day on June 30, about the restoration of the animated film "Snow White" by a subsidiary of the Eastman Kodak Company, misstated the amount of computer data required for recording and restoring the Walt Disney film.
It was more than 4.5 trillion bytes.


On My Mind; The U.S.-Iran Oil Scam
Now watch carefully, everybody.
This is big-time international three-card monte.
The stakes are survival for the world's top terrorist regime, and billions of trade dollars for the American oil business.
See how both clean the table.
The dealer is U.S. oil.
He hands himself three cards, open.
They are Presidential orders banning the import of Iranian oil.
He shuffles the three cards, collects bets and turns one over.


Former Election Commissioner Is Indicted on Bribery Charges
A former commissioner for New York City's Board of Elections who also served as a Democratic district leader in Queens was indicted yesterday on charges that he and another man tried to bribe a detective to drop assault charges against a reputed gangster more than three years ago.
The former commissioner, Anthony Sadowski, 80 years old, and Thomas Abruzzi, 64, of Roslyn, L.I., surrendered to the authorities yesterday morning at the Criminal Court Building in Queens, where they later pleaded not guilty to the charges.
They were released on their own recognizance and ordered to appear at a hearing on Aug. 8.


London Journal; Will Minicab Force the Mighty Taxi Off the Road?
Waiting for his next fare just off Victoria Street the other day, Robert McDonald reminisced about the good old days of driving a cab in London.
"I was proud of my badge," Mr.
McDonald said, referring to the license he was granted in 1959 after two grueling years bicycling around doing "the Knowledge," the intensive study of how best to get from point to point in London through a maze of more than 15,000 streets.


NYNEX Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Albany Must Do More For Higher Education
To the Editor:
I disagree with "CUNY Adjusts to the Times" (editorial, July 8).
It's not right that the City University "should try to rebuild a more integrated system." And a city public university that lacks parity with the state university is unacceptable.
You inadvertently support racism in backing Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds's plans.


Graf Expects to Return, But Pierce Withdraws
STEFFI GRAF said yesterday she hopes to play in the Federation Cup in Frankfurt next week but will not make her decision until after she practices tomorrow.
Meanwhile, MARY PIERCE suddenly quit the French team, citing personal reasons.
"I am not 100 percent sure of playing, but I am very confident," Graf said of the cup tournament, which is considered the Davis Cup of women's tennis.


3 Share The Lead At Windy Wykagyl
With narrow fairways, high rough and fast greens, the Wykagyl Country Club, the site of this week's tour stop, is providing the ideal preparation for next week's United States Women's Open.
The rough is particularly high around the fast greens, and errant shots out of the tree-lined fairways caused plenty of problems for the players on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour in today's opening round of the $600,000 JAL Big Apple Classic.


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bond Rally Shows Market Adapting to Weak Economy
Two truths about the continuing bond rally have been overlooked -- and may give its outlook a different shading.
Attention has been focused mainly on the positive news on inflation, which has been seen as the force driving down the yield on the closely watched 30-year bond.
Its yield was unchanged yesterday at 6.56 percent, its lowest level in 16 years.


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Cuban Defector's Strange New World
On Monday, Reilando Ordonez Perreira was a shortstop for the Cuban baseball team competing at the World University Games.
The next day, after a dramatic rendezvous outside the athletes village and two changes of planes, he was in Miami, eating lobster, drinking wine and exploring options that had been presented by dozens of agents who had been calling his sister-in-law since he announced his defection.
"It's driving me crazy," he said.
"Everybody wants me to do this, do that. All I'm doing is just listening and try to relax."


Indurain Is Fast; Rominger Is First
Luck, or whatever it was that he did not have earlier in the Tour de France, has begun to turn Tony Rominger's way, and today the Swiss rider won his second successive Alpine stage.
At first, it could have been scored as a victory with an asterisk because it was highly ambiguous.
Sprinting for the finish line after 112 miles over four severe climbs were Rominger and Miguel Indurain, with nobody else within 200 yards.
As the two entered the final stretch with Rominger leading, Indurain moved alongside on the right and accelerated.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; A Humorous Road Tour Of the U.S.
Roger Weisberg's documentary film "Road Scholar" is the antithesis of the typical American road movie.
Instead of a mystical journey into the unknown undertaken by restless youths pursuing an elusive personal transcendence, it is a cross-country tour by an Eastern European immigrant who has a smart apercu for every phenomenon he encounters.
Andrei Codrescu, the film's tour guide and screenwriter, is a poet, humorist and commentator on the National Public Radio program "All Things Considered." The film, which opens today at the Carnegie Hall Cinemas, follows him as as he drives across America in a bright red 1968 Cadillac convertible.
His journey begins in New Orleans and ends in San Francisco with numerous stops, including New York, Detroit, Chicago, Denver, Santa Fe, Tucson and Las Vegas.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
PILOBOLUS DANCE THEATER, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through Saturday.
Performances: Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
Closing Next Weekend  "THE DESIGN SHOW: EXHIBITION INVITATIONS IN THE U.S.A.," Exit Art/ The First World, 548 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Through July 23.
Free.
Hours: Weekdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed weekends.
Information: (212) 966-7745.


Fannie Mae Prices 5-Year Debentures
The Federal National Mortgage Association, also known as Fannie Mae, priced $500 million of five-year debentures yesterday through various securities dealers.


MORGAN (J. P.) &amp; CO. (N)
Success on the trading floor helped J. P. Morgan &amp; Company report a 33 percent increase in second-quarter profit yesterday.
Morgan's earnings of $2.12 a share were sharply higher than the $1.47 a share that analysts had expected.


In Japan, Fresh Labels but Familiar Faces
Japanese elections are usually about slogans, sound trucks blaring candidates' names and young women in white gloves waving to indifferent crowds.
But Tsutomu Hata, leader of a group of defectors from the governing Liberal Democratic Party and a would-be Prime Minister, stood before a hundred or so voters at the train station here on a gray morning and made sure the voters knew he was different.
He spoke about apologizing for World War II.


Woman May Face Retrial in Child-Center Sex Abuse
The Essex County Prosecutor said today that he intended to retry Margaret Kelly Michaels, the preschool teacher whose conviction on charges of sexually abusing 19 children at a Maplewood nursery in 1984 and 1985 was overturned on appeal early this year.
Clifford J. Minor, the Prosecutor, said he had talked with the alleged victims, who were 3 and 4 years old at the time of the trial and are now approaching their teens, as well as their families before his decision.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Bureaucratic Maze; At Flood Aid Centers, Advice, Help and an Armful of Forms
Living as she does at the confluence of the Missouri and the Mississippi, Yvonne Kinnard has always kept a wary eye on the two rivers, knowing, assuming, that periodically they will break free of their banks and levees and come licking at her front door.
Seven times in the last 20 years they have rampaged across their flood plains, including the great watery disaster of 1973, when they combined forces and crept into her three-bedroom ranch house in West Alton, ruining the rugs and some appliances.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stein Spending Hit $6.4 Million
Andrew J. Stein, the City Council President, spent a prodigious $6.4 million on his doomed quest for the mayor's office before dropping out of the race in late May, his campaign's final campaign finance filing shows.
In the last six months alone, Mr.
Stein -- who refused to abide by the voluntary contribution limits in the city's campaign finance law -- spent nearly $3.4 million, most of it for a television advertising campaign in April and May that in the end did not raise his popularity above 16 percent.
But Mr.
Stein also spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on voter registration drives, polling, and various high-priced political consultants, the records show.


C.I.A. FIGHTS PLAN TO CUT ITS BUDGET
The Director of Central Intelligence is lobbying aggressively to prevent Congress from freezing the nation's secret intelligence budget at about $28 billion, Government and intelligence officials said today.
The Director, R. James Woolsey, spent the day buttonholing and telephoning members of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, arguing that not a penny should be cut from what he considered a bare-bones budget request.


Miscellany
*
GCI Corporate and Financial, New York, changed its name to Principal Communications.
Also, Gordon Earle was named to the new position of managing director.
He was previously director of corporate services at the Los Angeles office of Hill &amp; Knowlton. *
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide and Alm &amp; Co., Stockholm, agreed for Alm to become Saatchi's exclusive Swedish representative.


For Blimp Pilot, Exits Are Quieter


Art in Review
'Memories, Facts and Lies'
Blum Helman Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through July 30
In "Memories, Facts and Lies," a group show of 10 artists organized by the painter Lawrence Gipe, deception is the theme and nothing is quite what it seems.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  ITALY MAY QUIT SOMALIA EFFORT  Italy threatened to withdraw its 2,600 troops from Somalia, saying the relief mission there has become a combat operation that is taking sides in a civil war.
A1  NEW PARTIES, OLD FACES IN JAPAN  Japan's new political parties all bear the same burden: they comprise mostly former Liberal Democrats, and their campaigns consist mostly of trying to distance themselves from policies they still support.
A1


Forecasts Unmet
Stock in the Scitex Corporation, a maker of computer imaging systems, had been trading in a narrow range for months, until yesterday, when the company said that second-quarter net income would not meet analysts' forecasts.
Shares plunged to a 52-week low of 28 during the day, and more than 4.1 million shares were traded .


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Federal Aid; Clinton Saying Flood Relief Will Cover Just Part of Loss
President Clinton sought today to quell any hopes that the Federal Government alone could bear the full cost of relief for all of the damage caused by the Midwestern floods.
As his Administration's own estimates of the damage swelled to $8 billion, Mr.
Clinton did say he might have to seek an increase in the $2.5 billion in immediate assistance he had requested from Congress on Wednesday.
But he made clear it that he was not contemplating aid on a wider scale.


PICTURETEL PLANS VIDEO-CONFERENCING SYSTEM
The Picturetel Corporation will introduce a desktop video-conferencing system that allows a personal computer user to conduct a face-to-face telephone conversation with another computer user or with a group using a larger Picturetel videoconference system.
The caller's image or other video information appears in a small window on the computer screen and allows both parties to continue to run software applications while the call is taking place.


TV Violence Is the Thing That Never Dies; Don't Own a Set
To the Editor:
The daunting project of controlling your kids' television watching is the subject of your July 1 lead editorial, "TV's Sickos, Shooters -- and Kids," and the same day's Parent &amp; Child column.
Nobody seems to entertain one obvious solution: Don't have a television in the house.


In Boston, the Wheels of Justice Now Have Spokes


INSIDE
U.S. May Admit Chinese
Some of the 658 Chinese immigrants off the coast of Mexico will get the chance to enter the United States and apply for political asylum.
Page A3. '85 Hijacker Seized by U.S.
In Nigeria, the F.B.I. seized a Palestinian involved in a 1985 hijacking in Malta in which 60 passengers died, including an American.
Page A6. 8 Held in Plot to Kill Blacks
Officials arrested eight people who they said planned to blow up a church in Los Angeles and kill Rodney King to incite racial violence.
Page A10.


To Give Products a Young and Restless Image, Advertisers Roll Out Campaigns on In-Line Skates.
AMONG the bodies in motion sharing roads through any major park these days -- joggers, cyclists and in-line skaters -- there may be no consensus about which group is considered most discourteous by the other two.
But there is little doubt about which has been most desirable in recent advertisements and commercials to convey a sense of youthful excitement.
For months, companies that make cars, beer, soda, cereal, deodorant, candy and other products have been using in-line skates or references to them to project an image of what the 20's generation might consider "phat," a contemporary word that is supposed to mean cool or hip.


Account
*
Nina Footwear Corp., New York, to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York, to handle its consumer and trade account, previously at Don Wise &amp; Co., New York.
Rosenfeld, Sirowitz's Modular/Direct Promo Group unit will manage the account, which has billings estimated at $2 million.


Robinson Is Freed
TONY ROBINSON, the quarterback who began Tennessee's drive to the Southeastern Conference championship in 1985, left prison in Tiptonville, Tenn., yesterday after completing sentences for drug and forgery convictions.
State officials released him a minute after midnight from the Lake County Regional Correctional Facility, ending his two-year confinement in the Tennessee prison system that satisfied a six-year sentence.


A Day at the Races: Lessons Come Fast and Furious
THE first race at Belmont on a sizzling hot day turned out to be almost too much for one bettor.
Standing near the finish line against the chain-link fence that runs along the home stretch, he stamped his right foot furiously, punched the air with one hand and, as five closely bunched horses pounded toward the wire, screamed nonstop, a study in the more brutish emotions.
"Come on, move it! Get the lead out and move it! Do it!"
This ridiculous figure was none other than myself.
I had never been to a race track before.
Except for the Triple Crown, thoroughbred racing had seemed pointless, a small footnote to the day's sports results on the local television news, marginally more interesting than curling or caber tossing.


For Children
Anne Frank Center U.S.A.
584 Broadway, at Prince Street  SoHo  (212) 431-7993  Recommended ages: 9 and up
In a temporary exhibition at the Anne Frank Center U.S.A.'s new gallery and office, Anne Frank is seen in black-and-white photographs on 12 large chronological wall panels providing excerpts (in English and Dutch) from the diary she kept while hiding from the Nazis with her family in Amsterdam in World War II.
This exhibition will be replaced in the fall with a permanent one.


Robert Hall Dies at 86; Yale Athletic Official
Robert Hall, a prominent college football figure and former athletic director at Yale, died Wednesday in North Palm Beach, Fla., where he lived.
He was 86.
The cause of death was Parkinson's disease and pneumonia, according to his son Robert Jr.


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Art in Review
David Driskell
Midtown Payson  745 Fifth Avenue, at 58th Street  Through next Friday
The gouaches, watercolors and small collages of David Driskell bring a wide range of references to a familiar semi-abstract modernist style.
"Ancestral Icon" incorporates Brazilian textile designs as well as African sculptural forms.
Specific political themes surface in the collages that resemble barred windows, or others in which the letter X is a central element.
Figures appear now and again, but the recurring subject, especially in the paintings, is nature.
Like Wifredo Lam, Mr.
Driskell envisions it as an all-over ornamental fabric, as in a gouache of pine trees seen from his Maine studio or a lovely watercolor of bare tree trunks against a soft sky.


Review/Music; Masur Takes His Orchestra Back Home
There were moments during the performance of Brahms's First Symphony in Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night when a hard-nosed critic began to feel something resembling civic pride -- a sentiment supposed to be reserved for the experience of watching marching bands or fireworks displays.
But the feeling was unavoidable; it was a pride in what Kurt Masur has made of this city's major municipal orchestra, the New York Philharmonic.
The achievements seemed to define, in these confused times, just what the mission and achievement of a city's orchestra can be.
For this was a performance, particularly in its framing movements, that was among the best this orchestra has offered in recent years and certainly the best I have heard from Mr.
Masur, no mean feat given that the piece in question is a warhorse that can barely be heard with fresh ears.


TV Weekend; A Disney Version Of a Children's Classic
Ready for another "Heidi"?
The Disney Channel has a new four-hour version of the German novel written by Johanna Spyri in 1881.
This one, to be shown at 7 P.M. on Sunday and Monday, has an international cast and some glorious Austrian Alps.
Obviously determined to be more authentic and less gooey than the 1937 black-and-white film adaptation, which starred Shirley Temple, this "Heidi" seeks to explore the characters in depth.
It does, but three hours might have done the trick just as well.
Even before the opening credits, we see Grandfather (Jason Robards) feuding with his only son, who then stalks off with his wife and infant daughter, Heidi.
The old man watches in horror as a tree struck by lightning falls on the young family.
Only the baby survives.
Grandfather retreats to his cabin.
People will later claim that he has not been "right in the head" since his son's death.
Heidi will be shunted from relative to relative until, eight years later and played by an utterly composed and charming Noley Thornton, she's returned to her still bitter grandfather by a cousin (Jane Hazlegrove) who is leaving for Frankfurt.


Buckeye Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Battling With Nature, At the Shoreline Front
IN his 30-odd years of tromping about the Jersey Shore, Prof.
Stewart Farrell has seen, by his estimate, 200 more or less ridiculous schemes to try to slow nature's inexorable clawing away of the shoreline.
Discarded Christmas trees were dumped in the water to make an erosion barrier.
Then there were junked cars, concrete crypts, plastic seaweed, you name it.
All of them failed, he said, the plastic seaweed most spectacularly, leaving fake flora strewn about the shore as though a tacky lounge had run aground and spilled its decor.


Pittston Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TV Violence Is the Thing That Never Dies
To the Editor:
As soon as the television networks announced they would begin labeling the violence content of their programs, media pundits began wondering if programmers might now use the warnings as moral absolution and include more graphic scenes in shows officially designated as violent.
Whether or not that proves true, it points to the problem posed by violence on television.
Like the devouring monster of the "Alien" movies, or the Terminator character who refuses to die, violence keeps on coming, apparently impervious to our disgust, anger and efforts to control it.


A Long Wait for a New Life Is Not Quite Over; For Haitian Refugees Released From Guantanamo, Housing Delay Prolongs Hardship
Etienne Edmont thought for sure that his odyssey from Haiti to the United States would soon be over after he was released four weeks ago from the Guantanamo Naval Base in Cuba.
After enduring 20 months of isolation from family and friends under the watchful eyes of armed soldiers, he had expected to move into an apartment in Brooklyn that New York City social workers had shown him two weeks after his arrival.


Ruling Party in Japan Turns to '3 Arrows'
They are called the Three Arrows, a team of sparkling, tough-talking younger politicians with a mission to give the governing Liberal Democratic Party a new image.
One is known as a favorite of Japan's right and a loose cannon.
Another defected from the party for a decade, and returned as its biggest defender.
The third is called the "the Prince," who is thought to be the party's biggest draw for women and young people.


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Times Co. To Buy Back More Stock
The New York Times Company, having already spent almost $100 million repurchasing its shares since it announced plans on June 11 to acquire Affiliated Publications Inc., the publisher of The Boston Globe, said yesterday that it would spend up to $150 million more during the next several weeks.
The Times Company said it had spent $99.96 million to repurchase shares since June 21.
During that period, the stock has traded in a range of $23.625 to $24.625 a share, mostly around $24.50.
The company did not disclose the number of shares it purchased, but calculations show it was about 4.1 million, or 57 percent of the shares traded during the period.


Peretz Miransky, 85, Yiddish Literary Figure
Peretz Miransky, a member of an influential young Yiddish literary group in Poland between World Wars I and II, died on Saturday in a hospital in Toronto, where he lived.
He was 85.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tokyo Quartet at Rutgers
The Tokyo String Quartet is to play Ravel's Quartet in F, Haydn's Quartet in G (Op. 76, No. 1), and -- with Ilana Vered -- Schumann's Quintet in E flat for Piano and Strings, tomorrow at 8 P.M. in the Nicholas Music Center of the Rutgers Arts Center, George Street at Route 18 in New Brunswick, N.J.
The program is part of the Rutgers Summerfest, which runs through August.
Tickets are $18.
Information: (908) 932-7511.


Art in Review
Rudy Burckhardt
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Aug. 13
This large exhibition includes paintings on paper of nighttime scenes by Richard Bosman and a painted wall sculpture of a mermaid by Rigoberto Torres, but the center of the show, both emotionally and esthetically, is a group of 42 black-and-white photographs by Rudy Burckhardt.
Mr.
Burckhardt, born in Switzerland in 1914, is best known for his photographs and films of New York City and the art world in the 1940's and 50's.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the annual conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People referred incorrectly to the law-school background of Lani Guinier, whose nomination as the Justice Department's civil rights chief was withdrawn by President Clinton.
She attended Yale Law School with Mr.
Clinton, but they were not classmates.


Hotel to Offer Better Access For Disabled
In the first formal settlement reached under new Federal guidelines requiring that hotels be accessible to people with disabilities, the Inter-Continental in Manhattan has agreed to undergo several renovations to accommodate the disabled.
The hotel, where Bill Clinton stayed during last year's Democratic National Convention, had been threatened with demonstrations during Mr.
Clinton's stay by advocates for the disabled, although the protests were never held.


Arab in Hijack Fatal to 62 Seized by F.B.I. in Nigeria
Springing a trap set by months of diplomatic pressure, F.B.I. agents today seized one of the most notorious airplane hijackers of the 1980's in an airport in Lagos, Nigeria, and bundled him aboard a flight for the United States, Administration officials said.
The man, Omar Mohammed Ali Rezaq, is to be arraigned Friday morning on charges stemming from the Nov. 23, 1985 hijacking of an Egypt Air flight from Athens to Cairo that ended in the deaths of 2 hijackers and 60 passengers, including an American.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Procter &amp; Gamble will cut its work force by 12 percent, eliminating 13,000 employees and closing 30 plants within four years.
The move is meant to strengthen the company's leading market position as cost-conscious consumers shift away from premium-priced brand-name products.  [ Page A1. ]
United Airlines' unions indicated a willingness to make sizable wage concessions in return for a majority stake in the carrier -- a move that underscored a shift toward a more collaborative relationship between airline labor and management.  [ D1. ]


Some Chinese Held on Ships Off Mexico May Be Admitted to U.S.
In yet another twist to an already confounding story, American officials now say that immigration officers aboard three ships crammed with smuggled Chinese off Mexico are preparing to take to the United States those who ask for political asylum.
But while the questioning continues, the plight of the 658 people aboard the three filthy vessels will drag on at least one day, and perhaps several days, longer.


Daly Pops In; Walters Doesn't
At the Nets' summer camp today, Rex Walters remained a no-show, Coach Chuck Daly peeked in for the first time and five players were handed their walking papers.
Assistant Coach Paul Silas, who is running the camp, trimmed the roster to 15 by releasing guards Vic Carstarphen (Temple), Billy Ross (Appalachian State), Sean Wightman (Western Michigan) and forwards Brian Clifford (Niagara) and Tyrone Powell (Howard).


Russians Defend Tajikistan Border


The Birdmen of Royal St. George's Ravage Par
With its flinty linksland softened into a verdant dartboard, Royal St.
George's fairways were plundered like so many aisles in a supermarket sweep today as players stocked up on birdies in the first round of the 122d British Open.
Leading the raid were two Australians, 1986 champion Greg Norman and Peter Senior, and two Americans, Mark Calcavecchia and Fuzzy Zoeller, all of whom shot four-under par 66's on the usually diabolical 6,860-yard par-70 layout.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 UKRAINE'S WOES OF INDEPENDENCE
After two years of independence, Ukraine is threatened by industrial protests, a steep decline in manufacturing output, hyperinflation and bitter quarrels with Russia.  1 RUSSIA TO HALT SALE TO INDIA
In a compromise with the U.S., Russia agreed to call off its planned sale of missile-related equipment and technology to India.  4 TALKS HINGE ON EAST JERUSALEM
The head of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks warned that negotiations would go nowhere unless Israel gives up the eastern half of Jerusalem.  2 Abraham D. Sofaer quit as an adviser to the Libyan Government.  2 ITALY RETREATS ON SOMALIA
Italy retreated from a threat to withdraw its 2,400 soldiers from Somalia, but insisted that it would not bow to U.N. pressure for the removal of its commander there.  3 Italian troops in Mogadishu came under fire from a Somali faction.  3 HOW ONE HIJACKER WAS SEIZED
One of the more notorious airplane hijackers of the 1980's was released from prison in Ghana and put aboard a flight for Nigeria, where he was arrested by F.B.I. agents.  3 U.S.-NORTH KOREA TALKS IN DOUBT
After signaling a possible breakthrough in talks over the inspection of nuclear sites in North Korea, a U.S. official said in Geneva that further meetings were uncertain.  4 PACT REACHED ON HAITI
Representatives of Haiti's political factions signed an agreement on a deal that paves the way for restoration of the deposed President.  4 NATO TAKES MILITARY STANCE
News analysis: If NATO increases its military role in protecting U.N. troops in Bosnia, it faces the possibility that its actions could backfire.  5 CHINESE MIGRANTS DUE IN MEXICO
The high-seas journey of 650 Chinese migrants neared its end as Mexico awaited the first of three rusty Chinese ships in Ensenada.  5 China apologizes for seizing Russian Ships.  4 Tokyo Journal: In the election, reputation is the issue.  4 National 6-8 SESSIONS DISMISSAL INDICATED
There were strong indications Friday that the Clinton Administration planned to dismiss the F.B.I.
Director, William S. Sessions, possibly as early as today.  1 AGREEMENT ON MILITARY GAY BAN
The White House said President Clinton had agreed with the Pentagon, the Justice Department and the Joint Chiefs on a plan to allow homosexuals to serve in the military.  1 Military rules have traditionally prohibited displays of affection.  7 BURIED WITH MILITARY HONORS
Army Lieut.
Lisa Bryant, a 21-year-old honors graduate of Princeton, was buried with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetary as military authorities held an enlisted man accused of killing her.  1 SOME FLOOD BARRIERS CRUMBLING
Cresting higher and higher because of new rains, the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, clawed at St.
Louis's strained flood defenses, causing some to crumble.  1 Southern Iowa struggled with the waters that crippled Des Moines.  8 From the flood's victims, words of exhaustion, sparks of ingenuity.  8 AWAITING GROWTH OF JOBS
Faster job growth will be hard to come by until the economy kicks into higher gear, experts say.
Until then, it will make little difference correcting other reasons that the nation cannot generate enough jobs.  1 ENERGY APPOINTMENT IN TROUBLE
Senate approval of Tara J. O'Toole as Assistant Secretary of Energy is in jeopardy because of her affiliation with a feminist group that once characterized itself as Marxist.  6 TRACING SUPREMACISTS' TIES
Eight white supremacists arrested Thursday in California on Federal weapons charges apparently did not know each other but shared ties to two violent groups that hoped to start a "racial holy war." 6 The Shuttle Discovery was on track for a launching this morning.  6 A Senate panel voted to cut the nation's intelligence budget.  7 Metro Digest 21 SMART WEAPONS FOR SPEED TRAPS
The New York State police are using lasers the same way Air Force pilots do, to identify targets, although the patrol cars do not follow up with bombs, only speeding tickets.
But the police are beginning to sound like Air Force generals as they talk about the arms race on the highways, where ever more sophisticated radar speed traps brought forth better and better radar detectors, until now.
Edmond J. Moran, led tugboat fleet on D-Day.
Jack Kleinoder, tool industry leader and philanthropist.
Paul W. Wright, ex-headmaster of the Groton School.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19 Editorials Freedom of Choice Act in peril.
Late qualms on the Khmer Rouge.
Speed search for deadbeat dads.
Judge Sand bends, but no retreat.
Letters Russell Baker: Geezers get a break.
Wendy Ewald: A child's view.
Chronicle 20 Bridge 15 Crossword 11


How Will Yanks Keep Them Down on Farm?
The more the Yankee starters stumble, the more the bullpen botches late-inning leads, the closer that Class AAA pitchers Mark Hutton and Domingo Jean move toward boarding the Columbus shuttle to New York.
At least one of these prized prospects, if not both, is expected to join the Yankees this summer.
While General Manager Gene Michael has been stymied in his attempts trade for pitching help, the two young right-handers -- one from Australia and the other from the Dominican Republic -- have been compiling stellar statistics as starters at Columbus.
If Michael does not complete a trade -- and one Yankee official said yesterday that the chances for a deal to occur soon seem remote -- then Hutton or Jean might get the call.


If Pollsters Had Been Around During the American Revolution; Brooklyn's Heroes
To the Editor:
The Society of Old Brooklynites, incorporated in 1880, objects to the sneering substance and tone of Garrison Keillor's "In Praise of Sunshine Patriots" (Op-Ed, July 4).


Cross and Giants Connect
The Giants announced the signing of tight end Howard Cross, previously an unrestricted free agent, to a new contract yesterday.
The signing leaves the Giants with only two key veterans -- offensive tackle Jumbo Elliott and running back Dave Meggett -- without contracts.
The terms of the deal were not announced, but according to figures provided by the National Football League Players Association, Cross made $450,000 last season.
It is believed he received a raise of at least $150,000.


Sports of The Times; Primo, Power And Amateur Athletics
PRIMO NEBIOLO was still on a high as he reflected on the celebration of his 70th birthday a day earlier.
He'd received an honorary degree in the morning, and in the evening received 200 guests at a reception honoring the occasion.
Today, he was a year older, still rich, still powerful and healthy enough to enjoy it.
Nebiolo is also the president -- some might say, emperor -- of the International Amateur Athletic Federation.


Lawyer Drops Libya as a Client
Stung by press and Government criticism, Abraham D. Sofaer, a former State Department legal adviser, announced today that he would no longer be representing the Libyan Government in civil and criminal cases stemming from the bombing of a Pan Am jetliner in 1988.
A statement issued by Mr.
Sofaer's law firm, Hughes, Hubbard &amp; Reed, said, "Regrettably, the public perception of this undertaking and the reaction of Government authorities has been so negative as to lead us to conclude that we could not effectively carry out this representation."


Dinkins Campaign Faulted on Filings Covering Finances
Mayor David N. Dinkins's latest campaign financial disclosure reports were rejected as incomplete yesterday by the New York City Campaign Finance Board -- along with those of several other candidates for municipal office -- because the required computer disks either could not be read or did not jibe with paper records also submitted.
A spokeswoman for the finance board, Mara Neville, said the reports filed by several candidates, including Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan; Mark Green, running for public advocate, and Herman Badillo, running for comptroller, had similar flaws.
This is the first year that the city has required candidates participating in the public finance program to file both computer and paper copies of their reports.


Converging Crests of Mighty Rivers Threaten the Defenses of St. Louis
The Mississippi and Missouri Rivers, cresting higher and higher because of new rains, clawed away today at this city's strained flood defenses, causing some to crumble.
All around the outer edges of the sodden metropolitan area, one of the most populous in the Midwest and now the focal point of the struggle against the great flood of 1993, there were reports of leaks and overflows.


A Boat Club Where the Boats Are Largely Irrelevant; At the Val-Ray, a Remnant on the Waterfront, the Main Activity Is Old Friends Telling Stories
Pasquale Mattioli and Bill Fraser are the guardians of the history of the Val-Ray Boat Club, a 119-year-old mini-marina on the western shore of the Harlem River in upper Manhattan.
Mr.
Fraser, a retired mechanic, was the first to join, 20 years ago.
But Mr.
Mattioli, a retired police officer, has passed him in rank: he is the commodore, or boss, which is only fair because Mr.
Fraser does not have a boat.
Neither do half the other 25 members of the Val-Ray, one of the city's oldest boat clubs and among a disappearing breed of such small working-class institutions along the waterfront.
What Val-Ray members do well is talk: about boats, about beer, about the day the actress Jayne Mansfield visited, about how the waterfront has changed from a place of industry and vitality to strips of barren lots and scattered parks.
There Was This Seal . . .
"Oh, here's another story -- the seal," Mr.
Mattioli, 62, announced the other day, as two fans blew hot river air through the trailer that serves as the club's headquarters.
"This fellow Danny Allen -- he would love to see his name in the paper -- he comes in and tells me there's a seal out there.


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Paul W. Wright, 87, Retired Headmaster Of the Groton School
Paul W. Wright, a mathematics teacher and retired headmaster of the Groton School, died on Wednesday at the Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital in Boston.
He was 87 and lived in Lexington, Mass.
The cause was cancer, a Groton spokesman said.


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Fujitsu Will Allow I.B.M. Deal to Lapse
Japan's leading computer manufacturer appears ready to gradually depart from its policy of trying to provide mainframe computers that are compatible with those made by the International Business Machines Corporation, the industry leader.
Fujitsu Ltd., which has been chasing I.B.M. for decades, has decided that it will not buy a license that would have enabled it to use information from the I.B.M. mainframe operating system software released this year, the American Arbitration Association said on Friday.


House Votes a Cut In Money For Arts
In a setback for the National Endowment for the Arts, a solid majority in the House of Representatives approved a motion on Thursday to cut the agency's proposed financing for next year by 5 percent, or $8.7 million.
The motion, introduced by Representative Cliff Stearns, Republican of Florida, during deliberations on appropriations for the Federal arts agency, the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Institute for Museum Services, passed by a vote of 240 to 184, as moderate and conservative Democrats joined the regular, mostly Republican opponents of the agency.


Don't Overload My Child's Immune System; Prevent Later Shingles
To the Editor:
Infection with varicella zoster virus is a lot more than chicken pox.
After a bout of chicken pox, the virus remains latent in nerve ganglia.
Later in life the virus can resurface in the form of shingles (herpes zoster).


Williams (W.W.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stubborn Forest Fires Hit Drought Areas
Like a bad idea borrowed from California, stubborn fires are burning above and below the forest floor in the drought-afflicted areas of New York and New Jersey, wearing out firefighters, forcing state police to close smoky roads and stinging the eyes and noses of people living miles away.
At West Point, where nearly 900 acres have burned, two Army Huey helicopters flew 150 missions yesterday to drop water on fires smoldering on inaccessible hillsides.
Across the Hudson River at Camp Smith in Peekskill, a National Guard base, scores of volunteer firefighters plan to converge today to seal off a fire that has consumed at least 100 acres.


Bomb-Plot Informer's Earlier Assertions Are Challenged
It was only a drunken-driving case, one of the thousands of misdemeanors that clog the city's criminal courts.
But it could now have repercussions for the prosecution of the plot to bomb the United Nations, a Federal building and commuter tunnels.
The case, prosecuted by the office of Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau, featured as its star witness Emad A. Salem, the Government informer who is also the linchpin of the bombing conspiracy case, having infiltrated the conspiracy for months, helping record and videotape the defendants.


Review/Theater; The Dead Try to Survive, and Fail
Survival in a world of annihilating violence is a tough challenge to the imagination in any case, but when the struggle to survive is undertaken by the dead, even trying to comprehend what is happening is a wit-twisting test of sanity.
In "No Me Toquen Ese Vals" ("Don't Play That Waltz for Me") by the Peruvian ensemble called Yuyachkani -- presented in Spanish at Repertorio Espanol as part of the Theater Festival '93 organized by the Pregones Theater -- two dead nightclub performers return to their favorite club in Lima, which has become a city of unrelieved destruction.
The performers, Abelardo and Amanda, try to recapture their act, their identities, their audience and a grip on life.


A Child's View
For 25 years, I've asked children in different parts of the world -- Appalachia, northern Canada, Mexico, Colombia, South Africa and India -- to photograph themselves, their families and their communities.
These young people are keen observers.
They watch the crops grow, seasons change, animals being born and dying, parents and friends negotiating the dangers of city streets.
The world they present is small and intimate, but their perception of it is detailed, complex and accepting.
As teacher and collaborator, I try to help the children make photographs that are both new and yet revealing of their culture's visual history.
I showed the Indian children in Mexico ancient Mayan pictograms to teach the idea of sequencing photographs and words.
In India, at first, the children wanted to photograph their gods and goddesses; they thought that they simply could imagine an image and the camera would produce it.
In a Colombian village where there are no windows in the mountain huts and no television sets, the children had never viewed their surroundings through anything; the idea of framing an object or landscape was utterly foreign to them.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW LA GRAN PARADA DOMINICANA Grand Concourse will be closed between 184th Street and 158th Street from 2:00 P.M. until completion.


Joseph Gould, 78, Dies; Movie Studio Publicist
Joseph Gould, a movie publicist who organized a clandestine American mission against Nazi Germany in World War II, died on Sunday at the Hospice of Washington, in Washington.
He was 78 years old and lived in Falls Church, Va.
The cause of death was lung cancer, his family said.


Speed the Search for Deadbeat Dads
The latest census data contain some surprising news.
Almost one-quarter of unmarried women now become mothers, an increase of nearly 60 percent during the last decade.
And the steepest rate of increase is among educated and professional women.
These findings recall Dan Quayle's attack on the sitcom anchorwoman Murphy Brown, whom Mr.
Quayle accused of glamorizing unwed motherhood.
Mr.
Quayle was interested more in demagoguery than in solutions, but unintentionally he got one thing right: Single motherhood is not just the province of the poor and uneducated.


Authorities Cite Links of Plotters To Hate Groups
The four small groups of white supremacists arrested in Southern California on Federal weapons charges on Thursday apparently did not know each other, but shared ties to two national racist and anti-Semitic organizations that hoped to start a "racial holy war," law-enforcement officials say.
The four groups were also linked, apparently, by undercover agents and informants for the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had gained their confidence during investigations that began in 1991.


Bridge
Very strong three-suited hands present problems in standard methods.
If you open two clubs, strong and artificial, it is difficult to describe the hand and find a desirable fit.
But if you open at the one-level the bidding may die when your partnership has an easy game.
But that is a relatively small risk, and one that experts will take.
An example is the diagramed deal from the June playoffs in Memphis that determined the 1993 American world championship teams.
The players, as usual at this level of competition, were behind diagonal table screens, and their partners and one of their opponents were hidden from view.


Late Qualms About the Khmer Rouge
It's understandable that the Clinton Administration would rather not see the Khmer Rouge play a role in Cambodia's newly elected Government.
The last time these fanatics wielded power in Phnom Penh, in the 1970's, they used it to massacre more than a million of their fellow Cambodians.
But that awesome record of killing never kept the Carter, Reagan or Bush Administrations from supporting a guerrilla coalition that included the Khmer Rouge for a decade after Vietnamese invaders chased Pol Pot and his evil friends from power in 1979.
Convoluted geopolitical arguments outweighed moral scruples.


NATO Air Strikes in Bosnia: A Catch-22
The deployment this week of United States allied combat aircraft to bases in Italy is intended to bring about direct military involvement by NATO to protect United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina as early as next week, NATO officials said today.
Criticized for failure to intervene on the ground to prevent Bosnia's dismemberment, the North Atlantic treaty Organization's foreign ministers decided in Athens last month to hasten the most direct involvement yet for the alliance's forces and to offer warplanes to defend United Nations troops trying to insure the provision of food and medicine to besieged mostly Muslim areas of the country.


Dolphins Sign Sims to 3-Year Deal
Miami Dolphins guard KEITH SIMS, a target of critics last season, became one of the National Football League's best-paid blockers yesterday.
Sims signed a three-year contract.
Terms weren't disclosed, but the Dolphins had offered him $1.4 million a season.
Coach DON SHULA has chastized the 310-pound Sims for not staying in shape.
And when Miami's offense scored just six touchdowns in last year's final six regular-season games, the line -- including Sims -- received considerable criticism.


Earnings Woes Sink Picturetel's Stock
Despite the introduction of impressive video-conferencing products, the stock of the Picturetel Corporation lost nearly 25 percent of its value today.
Financial analysts said they were concerned about the company's revenues and earnings for the fiscal second quarter, which were announced today along with the new products.


Report Says Bulls Will Finally Sign Kukoc
The European basketball star TONI KUKOC will sign with the Chicago Bulls on Monday, reportedly for seven years and a total of $14.63 million.
A spokeswoman for Benetton Sportsystem, CHERYL SILVER, said the Bulls would hold a news conference in Chicago on Monday to announce the signing.
The Chicago Sun-Times, quoting unidentified sources in Europe, had identified the length of the contract and the amount.
A Bulls spokeswoman, JOYCE SZYMANSKI, said that Kukoc hadn't been signed and that the club won't discuss details of the negotiations.


Helping the Homeless, And Times Square, Too
LARRY DOWDY, sleepy from the heat but steadfast in his duties, gave the man a lecture of sorts.
The man, homeless and hungry, had wandered into the open office of the Times Square Bag Exchange on Seventh Avenue between 42d and 43d Streets.
It was after midnight, just about the time the prostitutes come out and the street vendors selling incense and books pack up and go.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New York City mayoral campaign misstated the amount of public matching funds for which Mayor David N. Dinkins has qualified so far.
It is just over $1 million, about $100,000 more than his rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


SHUTTLE TO BEGIN 9-DAY TRIP TODAY
The space shuttle Discovery and its crew of five astronauts are set to blast off Saturday morning on a nine-day mission that features a space walk and the deployment of two satellites, including one built by NASA to test advanced types of satellite communications.
The launching window opens at 9:22 A.M. and closes at 10:24, with forecasters here saying there is a 90 percent chance of weather favorable enough to begin the shuttle's fiery ascent into orbit.


Any Place in the Sun Will Do


Tokyo Journal; Japan's New Generation Of Old Political Names
Asahiko Mihara and more than 900 other Japanese politicians have spent the last two weeks exhaustively crisscrossing their districts, but Mr.
Mihara admits he is one of those who enjoy an advantage that is all but unassailable.
It is not his policies, his charisma or even his money-raising abilities.
It is his father, who held the seat before him.


A Bright and Shining Future Is Laid to Rest at Arlington
Amid the clip-clopping of seven white horses, the beat of drums, the shuffle of mourners' shoes and the faint sound of a rolling caisson, Second Lieut.
Lisa N. Bryant took her last journey today, through the undulating hills of Arlington National Cemetery.
Then she was buried, a few paces from the tomb of John F. Kennedy and the tour buses nearby.
But unlike most of her new neighbors at Grant and Roosevelt Avenues, and the 15 others interred today in what was once Robert E. Lee's front lawn, Lieutenant Bryant was not cut down in battle, nor was she coming to Arlington after a biblically allotted lifetime.
She was a 21-year-old woman who only two months ago graduated with honors from Princeton.


No Russian Sale to India
In a compromise with the United States, Russia agreed to call off its planned sale of missile-related equipment and technology to India, the State Department announced.
The agreement also held out the prospect of potentially lucrative Russian-American space projects.
Article, page 4.


Communication Gap


Deputy Chosen as Head of New York Fed
William J. McDonough, executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, was named the bank's president yesterday, making him the most powerful official in the Federal Reserve system after the Fed's chairman.
Mr.
McDonough had long been rumored to be the first choice of the bank's board, and he had the backing of E. Gerald Corrigan, who will step down as president of the New York Fed on Monday.
The bank's board selected him on Thursday, and the Federal Reserve's board of governors in Washington gave its blessing yesterday.


Goodbye, Bermuda, I'm Off to Westchester
At this time last year, Greg Anthony was unhappy because the Knicks had made something clear to him: If he wanted to play more, he would have to participate in the Doral Arrowwood Rookie Summer League.
This year, Anthony cut short his honeymoon in Bermuda just to be here.


Don't Overload My Child's Immune System
To the Editor:
When are we going to stop compromising our children's immune systems?
"Doctors Weigh the Costs of a Chicken Pox Vaccine" (front page, July 7) discusses this vaccine's advantages in terms of time (of parents home from work) and money.


75 Homeless as Fire Burns 8 Brooklyn Buildings
A domestic dispute led to an arson attack that caused a five-alarm fire in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn last night, and eight buildings were destroyed or seriously damaged and 75 residents left homeless, Fire Department officials said.
The blaze was deliberately set by a resident of one of the buildings, a three-story wood-frame structure at 159 Manhattan Avenue near Scholes Street, about 7:30 P.M., the officials said.
They set the fire was set after the resident had a dispute with his common-law wife.


Key Again Rights Yankees, Who Wrong the Athletics
Always, there has been Jimmy Key this season.
Through losing streaks and bullpen disasters, through successful skeins and talk of a pennant, Key has been there for the Yankees.
Unchanged.
Unflappable.
Unemotional.
Almost unbeatable.
Key was there for the Yankees again last night in his usual unruffled form, and for a change, he did not have to be so precise on the mound.
That's because several teammates vented their frustration against the Oakland Athletics and helped boost the Yankees to a 10-3 victory at Yankee Stadium.
The offensive eruption allowed the Yankees to snap a four-game losing streak against the A's, and it partly obscured more marvelous pitching by Key.


Don't Overload My Child's Immune System; Herpes vs. Chicken Pox
To the Editor:
One article July 7 questions the value of preventing a common childhood infectious disease by immunization partly because of cost.
A second article reports on the benefit of treating another common infection by daily drug treatment with no reference to the cost (which would be infinitely more expensive because the treatment could go on for years).


Universal Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How to Donate To Flood Relief
A number of charities have established special funds and sent disaster teams to the region.
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations:
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256 (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


Stryker Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Industrial Output Off 0.2% in June
Production at the nation's factories, mines and utilities fell two-tenths of 1 percent in June and did not rise in May as previously thought, the Federal Reserve Board reported today.
The report reflected the doldrums into which much of industry has sunk this spring.
While industry represents less than one-third of the economy, activity in this sector, which tends to swing more widely than elsewere, is regarded as one of the best indicators of current conditions.


Georgia-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Latin American Leaders Call for End of Trade Embargo Against Cuba


DIRECTOR OF F.B.I. APPEARS ON BRINK OF LOSING HIS JOB
William S. Sessions, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, abruptly canceled a Chicago appearance and returned to the capital today amid strong indications that the Clinton Administration was preparing to dismiss him imminently, possibly as soon as Saturday.
White House officials said President Clinton, concluding that Mr.
Sessions should be replaced, met tonight with Louis Freeh, a New York Federal judge who has emerged as the leading candidate to succeed Mr.
Sessions.


U.S. Officials Remain Wary of Bomb Confession
American officials said today that they have been unable to corroborate much of what a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing told Egyptians under interrogation, including suggestions of Iranian involvement.
The officials stressed that there was no credible evidence of any foreign government's involvement in the attack.
They also expressed considerable skepticism about what they described as contradictory assertions made in Egypt by Mahmoud Abouhalima, a central suspect in the case.


New York City Can Have Its Discos and Restrict the Noise Too
To the Editor:
Re "Save Our Discos" by New York City Councilman Thomas K. Duane (Op-Ed, July 3):


A Clear Favorite in Pace
Presidential Ball, who won the $1 million North America Cup on June 26 at Greenwood Raceway in Toronto, has been made the overwhelming 2-5 favorite for the $1 million Meadowlands Pace tonight in East Rutherford, N.J.
He will leave from the second post position in the field of 10 3-year-old pacing colts.
Presidential Ball will be trying to become only the second horse to win both the North America Cup and Meadowlands Pace.
The first was Precious Bunny in 1991, who set a Meadowlands Pace record, tearing up the mile in 1:494/5 .
"Presidential Ball is a step ahead of Precious Bunny," said Bill Robinson, the trainer of both horses.
"He has the ability to win races from the middle of the pack or way back. Not many horses have that ability."


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT CLINTON survived a morning jog yesterday with three former Olympic athletes, including FLORENCE GRIFFITH JOYNER, winner of three gold and one silver Olympic medal in 1988, who was barely winded after a 35-minute workout.
The President appeared tired, The Associated Press reported, but at least he finished.
Ms.
Griffith Joyner's husband, AL JOYNER, a 1984 Olympic gold medalist in the triple jump, dropped out after 24 minutes.
The other Olympian in the group was TOM McMILLEN, a former Democratic representative from Maryland and professional basketball player and a member of the 1972 Olympic team.


Nets Sign Their Top Draft Pick
Rex Walters, the 6-foot-4-inch shooting guard from the University of Kansas who was the Nets' first draft choice, signed a multiyear contract with New Jersey yesterday.
Terms weren't given regarding years, but Walters, the 16th player chosen in the draft, received the $650,000 the Nets had available as a salary-cap exemption for rookies, plus what was estimated as a 30 percent increment thereafter.
In his two seasons at Kansas, Walters averaged 15.6 points, 4.1 assists and had a 41.8 percent field-goal percentage from 3-point range (151 of 361).


INSIDE
Italy Shifts on Somalia
Seeking to save face, Italy retreated from its threat to withdraw its soldiers from Somalia, but said its commander must remain there.
Page 3.
Energy Nominee in Trouble
Senate approval of Tara J. O'Toole as Assistant Secretary of Energy is in danger because of her affiliation with a formerly Marxist group.
Page 6.
Bomb Confession Wariness
American officials have been unable to confirm much of what a bombing suspect is said to have told Egyptian interrogators.
Page 21.
A French Enthusiasm
As the eternal rocker Johnny Hallyday turns 50, France remains true to a kind of pop idol that baffles the Anglo-American sensibility.
Page 9.


Ukraine's Miners Bemoan The Cost of Independence
The creaky iron elevators at the October Coal Mine clanked open at the end of the first shift, releasing hundreds of red-helmeted miners, their faces and chests blackened and damp from six hours of labor on deep and treacherous coal seams.
Last month these miners and hundreds of thousands of others were on strike, pushing an increasingly impoverished and unstable Ukraine toward what many here describe as economic and political chaos.


Rewards for Colleges Backing CUNY Reorganization
The Chancellor of the City University of New York, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, is going to divide up to $15 million in extra financing among colleges that acted in accord with a sweeping plan, since scaled back, to reorganize the 21-campus system.
At the same time, she will withhold money from the schools that did not do so.
A spokesman for the Chancellor, Jay Hershenson, said yesterday that the decision by Dr.
Reynolds was consistent with a resolution adopted last month by the university's trustees that called for the budgets of the individual colleges to be linked in the future with how well they performed in the "academic planning process."


HIJACKER'S ARREST LAID TO DIPLOMACY
Early Thursday, Omar Mohammed Ali Rezaq, one of the more notorious airplane hijackers of the 1980's, was released from prison in Ghana and put aboard a Ghana Air flight bound for Nigeria.
He likely breathed a sigh of relief.
Mr.
Rezaq had been in a Ghanaian jail since February, shortly after he sought safe haven in the West African nation after his early release from a 25-year prison sentence in Malta.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Faster job growth will be hard to come by until the economy kicks into higher gear, experts say.
Consumers have simply not purchased enough goods, meaning that fewer workers are needed to make products or provide services, they say.  [ 1. ]
Meat and poultry prices are expected to rise in the coming weeks because of damage to processing plants in Iowa caused by the Midwest flooding.  [ 35. ]  Demand for sandbags is so high that domestic manufacturers are working overtime and record numbers of bags are being imported.  [ 43. ]


Hate Writing Brings Arrest Of 2 Students
Two 18-year-old Commack High School classmates, one of them an Eagle Scout, were arraigned today on charges that they painted large swastikas and hate messages on the school's athletic field on graduation day last month.
The youths, Robert A. Rolston of East Northport and Philip Argiros of Commack, pleaded not guilty to charges of criminal mischief, a felony.
Both were released on $2,500 bail by a Suffolk County Judge, Patrick Barton.


Ziegler Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Newark, Criminals Face a New Challenge: Officers on Bikes
Three bicyclists cruised easily down the streets of Newark, drawing stares from motorists who slowed down to let them pass.
The reason for the stares could have been the bikers' attire, a bit unusual given the above-100-degree heat: black biking shorts under short black pants, black short-sleeved shirts, black wraparound sunglasses and black bulletproof vests.
If that wasn't enough to attract attention, there were the big neon-yellow words on the backs of their shirts: Newark Police Department.


George Is Missing From Colts' Camp
Indianapolis Colts quarterback JEFF GEORGE remained out of training camp yesterday without giving his teammates or his puzzled coach a clue to what's bothering him.
"I don't know that much," said Coach TED MARCHIBRODA, who was surprised when George failed to report to training camp Thursday night.
He had not shown up yesterday for the first workouts and faced another $4,000 daily fine.
"I anticipated he would be here," Marchibroda said.


Two Views on REIT's: Buy Them. Avoid Them.
MANY real estate investment trusts are providing the kind of returns that would catch any investor's attention.
But should every investor buy?
One expert who says yes is Gregory J. Whyte, first vice president at Dean Witter Reynolds, a leader in REIT's, which are a kind of mutual fund that buys real estate or mortgages, converts them into securities and passes any profit on to investors.


Freedom of Choice Act in Peril
In President Reagan, Americans who would deny a woman's constitutional right to abortion had a good friend.
In President Bush they had another.
When Bill Clinton entered the White House, however, their hearts presumably sank.
Mr.
Clinton had made clear his commitment to safeguarding that right.
If those hearts are higher today, it is partly because of Senator Carol Moseley Braun.
In withdrawing her support for the Freedom of Choice Act, she appears to have forgotten one of the cardinal facts of political life: that in union there is strength.


What's a Bollard? Police Call It Harbor Larceny
Bulbous.
Stumpy.
And definitely overweight.
Bollards would not seem to be a prime target of larceny.
But as stout emblems of New York's vanished waterborne primacy, these cast-iron mooring posts, with which Hudson River piers once bristled, have distinct value.


Vikings Sign Top Draft Pick
The Minnesota Vikings signed their top draft choice, ROBERT SMITH,a running back from Ohio State, and their third-round pick, GILBERT BROWN, a 330-pound defensive tackle from Kansas.
A Vikings vice president, JEFF DIAMOND, said both players signed multiyear deals.
Terms were not disclosed.


Trade Deficit Is Cut as Japan Imbalance Narrows
The nation's deficit in traded goods narrowed sharply in May, to $8.4 billion, mainly reflecting the biggest reduction in the imbalance with Japan in over six years, the Commerce Department reported today.
Exports resumed their rise despite lower aircraft sales, reaching the second-highest level on record, while imports of foreign goods tumbled.


Jack Kleinoder, 87, Tool Industry Leader And Philanthropist
Jack Kleinoder, a leader in the tool-and-die industry and a philanthropist, died on Wednesday at his home in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
He was 87.
He had been in frail health for some time and died in his sleep, his family said.


Judge Sand Bends, Without Retreating
A decision by Federal District Judge Leonard Sand to give officials in Yonkers, N.Y., more time to find hundreds of desegregated housing units may sound like surrender.
After all, Yonkers has adamantly defied attempts at racial integration for nearly a decade.
But Judge Sand's decision is an admirable effort to keep desegregation in Yonkers on track.
In 1985 the judge ruled that Yonkers had deliberately promoted segregation in housing and schools for close to 40 years.
That judgment was ultimately upheld by the U.S.
Supreme Court.
A voluntary desegregation plan was instituted in the schools, but the city bitterly resisted sensible remedies aimed at desegregating housing.


COMPANY NEWS: A Whistle-Blower's Redress; You Can't Run a Gift Shop At Taxpayers' Expense
The Rockwell International Corporation and the University of California have agreed to pay the United States $450,000 to settle a whistle-blower lawsuit involving illegal gifts made at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant, the Justice Department said today.
The Rocky Flats plant outside Denver, which produces plutonium triggers for nuclear weapons, is owned by the Energy Department and was operated by Rockwell International at the time the gifts were made from 1975 to 1985.


ACCORD IS REACHED ON MILITARY RULES FOR GAY SOLDIERS
The White House said today that President Clinton had agreed with the Pentagon, the Justice Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff on a plan to allow homosexuals to serve in the military as long as they do not aggressively display their homosexuality or engage in homosexual conduct.
Senior Pentagon and White House officials said the accord, which was denounced today by gay-rights advocates, came together in the past two days in a flurry of meetings between President Clinton, Defense Secretary Les Aspin, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a bevy of lawyers from the Justice Department and Pentagon.


Apple Stock Is Hammered For 23% Loss
Shaken investors wiped out nearly a quarter of the value of Apple Computer's shares yesterday, a day after the troubled personal computer maker announced its largest quarterly loss ever and an expensive restructuring plan.
Apple shares plummeted $8.25, or 23 percent, closing at $27.50 in Nasdaq trading on volume of almost 19 million shares.
Other technology stocks also fell, dragging down the stock markets.  [ Page 36. ]


A Recovery That's Too Weak Results in Too Few New Jobs
Americans are being bombarded with explanations of why the nation cannot generate enough jobs: a shortage of skilled workers, they are told, holds down hiring, along with higher taxes, global competition, expensive Government regulations, technology that automates work and cutbacks in military spending.
All of these play a role, many experts say, but the biggest problem is simply a lack of robust economic growth -- the most basic source of job creation.
Until the national economy kicks into higher gear, they say, faster job growth will be hard to come by.


Senate Panel Endorses Justice Dept. Nominee
The Senate Judiciary Committee today approved the nomination of Eleanor Dean Acheson to a senior position at the Justice Department after an acrimonious debate over her membership in a country club that has no black members and a history of discriminating against women.
The full Senate is expected to approve the nomination next week.
Ms.
Acheson, a granddaughter of President Harry S. Truman's Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, would be an Assistant Attorney General.
She would lead the Office of Policy Development, which handles all Federal judicial nominations and helps set policy for the department.
She belonged to the Country Club of Brookline, Mass., until March.
She resigned, she has said, when it became clear that she would be moving to Washington.


After Disabling Des Moines, River Threatens South Iowa
A week after the Raccoon and Des Moines rivers disabled Iowa's capital city, the Des Moines River is now bedeviling towns downstream in southeastern Iowa, pouring out of the Red Rock Dam fast enough to fill six 25-yard-long high school swimming pools every second.
The river was running at a rate of 103,700 cubic feet a second, exceeding the 1984 record of 40,000 cubic feet a second for the 23-year-old dam.


Classical Music in Review
Claudia Dumschat Organist St. Michael's Church Amsterdam Avenue at 99th Street


Prudential Says an S.E.C. Settlement Is Close
Prudential Securities is "extraordinarily close" to reaching a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission of charges of securities law violations, the chief executive of the firm told brokers yesterday.
In a firmwide announcement over the Prudential internal communications system, the chief executive, Hardwick Simmons, said he expected the firm would reach a settlement of the civil charges in as soon as a few weeks, people who heard the announcement said.
The charges stemmed from the firm's practices in selling limited partnerships during the 1980's.


Corrections
The national forecast in the Weather Report yesterday misstated the date on which the Mississippi River reached its previous record level.
It was April 28, 1973.


G.M. Says U.S. Joins Inquiry on Company Papers
The General Motors Corporation said today that the Justice Department was investigating "the possible theft of G.M. documents by certain of our former employees."
A spokesman for the United States Attorney's office in Detroit declined to comment.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of Prof.
Harold Gray Shane was published in error.
It showed Prof.
Harold David Shane of Baruch College, not Harold Gray Shane, who was professor emeritus at Indiana University.


LIZ CLAIBORNE INC. (N)
The stock of Liz Claiborne Inc., the giant apparel manufacturer, went into a nose dive yesterday when itannounced that its profits would probably shrink 30 percent this year.
Liz Claiborne's stock was the biggest percentage loser on the New York Stock Exchange, with the shares plunging $6.875, or 23.2 percent, to $22.75.
The company's second-quarter report and bleak outlook for the year came on the heels of an announcement that Jay Margolis, a vice chairman, was resigning to pursue other ventures.


Mutual Funds: A Correction
An explanation of the quarterly mutual fund tables in the Your Money pages last Saturday described the risk ratings of the funds incorrectly.
On the ratings' scale of 1 to 5, funds rated 1 have the lowest risk, based on historical results, not the highest; a 5 rating denotes high-risk funds.


Central Florida Hires Athletic Director
STEVE SLOAN, a former Alabama and North Texas athletic director, got the same job at Central Florida yesterday.
He will oversee a reorganization of the athletic program.
Central Florida, an independent, plans to switch from National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA to I-A in football in 1996. (AP)


Cards Fall Right for Convertible Securities
Convertible securities are stock-bond hybrids; they pay income but can be converted into shares of stock at a fixed rate at the holder's option.
They are traditionally the province of smaller companies because the value built into the conversion feature lets issuers pay less interest on the debt than they would otherwise.
Most convertible securities are rated below investment grade but many funds own high-quality junk securities.
Because of the conversion feature, investors get about two-thirds of the yield they would on comparable junk bonds.
The 24 convertible securities funds yielded 4 percent, on average, in the latest 12 months.


Admiral Crowe Chosen as Envoy to Britain
President Clinton plans to nominate William J. Crowe Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Presidents Reagan and Bush, to become Ambassador to Britain, the White House said today.
If confirmed by the Senate, Admiral Crowe will succeed Raymond G. H. Seitz, a career Foreign Service officer whose tour expires next spring.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Van Halen Jones Beach


Florence Bower, 94, Veteran Music Teacher
Florence Turitz Bower, a music teacher for more than 60 years, who headed the voice department at the American Musical and Dramatic Academy in Manhattan, died on Wednesday at home in Newton, Mass.
She was 94 and had moved to Newton from New York City recently.
The cause was heart failure, said her son, Joseph, a professor in the Harvard School of Business Administration.


Italian Forces Come Under Fire in Tense Somalia
Italian troops in Mogadishu, Somalia, came under fire overnight from forces supporting one of the two main clan rivals in the city, stirring fears that civil war between clans could spread unless the United Nations quickly resolves its differences with Italy and secures the area.
[ In Rome, Italy retreated from its threat to withdraw its soldiers from Somalia, but insisted that it would not bow to United Nations pressure for the removal of its commander there. ]


Doctor in Queens Abortion Death Was Facing Loss of License
Two weeks before a Queens doctor apparently performed an abortion that led to a woman's death, he was informed by the New York State Department of Health that his license would be revoked because of "negligence and incompetence," a Health Department official said yesterday.
The doctor, who first practiced as Elyas Bonrouhi but changed his name to Dr.
David Benjamin, appealed that decision, the official said.
State law allows a doctor to continue practicing during an appeal.


Birds Can So Smell
To the Editor:
Re "Luckily, Birds Don't Have Sense of Smell" (letter, July 2): Birds do have a sense of smell.
Birds use smell to find and cache food, perhaps to select mates and nesting materials and possibly to recognize others.
It is a mistake to assume, as Audubon did, that birds cannot recognize and use chemical cues just because they possess well-developed visual and auditory systems.
J.
RUSSELL MASON Philadelphia, July 6, 1993 The writer is adjunct associate professor of biology, U. of Pennsylvania.


Roundabout Theater Dispute Heats Up
The disagreement between the Roundabout Theater and its tenant, the American Jewish Theater, over occupancy of the Susan Bloch Theater in Chelsea escalated dramatically yesterday.
By the end of the day, both groups were locked out of the space.
The Roundabout's general manager, Ellen Richard, and several theater employees entered the 120-seat theater at 307 West 26th Street at 7 A.M. and took possession of the files, telephones, computers and financial records of the American Jewish Theater, which has rented the space for the last five years. (The Roundabout says it wants to use the space itself.) Keys Offered and Refused
The locks were changed and the files were moved to a storage locker in Manhattan.
The locker keys were offered to Stanley Brechner, the American Jewish Theater's artistic director, who refused to accept them and called the police.


Arrest in Conspiracy To Kill Mubarak
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested a New Jersey man yesterday and charged him with being part of a conspiracy to kill the President of Egypt, according to a spokeswoman for the Justice Department in Washington.
The man arrested was identified as Abdel Al-Rahman Haggag, but the spokeswoman, Julie Anbender, declined to disclose either his address or the place where he was apprehended late Friday afternoon.


Classical Music in Review
Dmitry Sitkovetsky and Alexis Weissenberg Violinist and Pianist Mostly Mozart Concert Avery Fisher Hall


Review/Opera; A Soggy Show Goes On. And On. And On
Opera shouldn't have to put up with what happened in Central Park on Wednesday night.
The human and natural indignities to which Verdi's "Stiffelio" was subjected at Summerstage's outdoor theater turned dignified effort into farce.
Vincent La Selva's New York Grand Opera had begun with a workable cast and a functioning pit orchestra.
It ended with a semi-workable cast and no orchestra at all.
Mr.
La Selva, moreover, is a good conductor and a determined field general.
On Wednesday he had to be both.
First was a sound system that at best sounded like a 1930's radio transmission magnified many times and at worst spewed dangerous claps of feedback: explosions so violent that the adjective "earsplitting" left the world of hyperbole and entered the category of fact.
Singers wore body microphones; their voices ranged from the barely audible mumble to painful electronic screeches, depending on the passing whim of dial-twisting sound engineers.


Illinois Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dow Off 22.64 as Plunge In Apple Starts Decline
After a plunge in Apple Computer shares, declining technology stocks dragged down all leading stock market indicators yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 22.64 points, to 3,528.29, while the Nasdaq composite dropped 8.96 points, to 699.73.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks lost 3.47 points to close at 445.75.


The Talk of Paris; France Shows Its Loyalty to a Not-for-Export Sort of Pop Idol
Johnny Hallyday, although never blessed with a hit single in those twin kingdoms of rock-and-roll, Britain and the United States, has managed to become a special target for Anglo-American scorn.
How tacky, how derivative, how downright silly of the French to lavish on this nonentity the devotion worthy of an Elvis.
He is a French idol, the eternal rocker beloved within the Francophonic world and reviled or ignored without.
Yet he has built an entire career out of unashamed, un-self-conscious translation of American pop culture into French.
He is the pop-music equivalent of dubbed American films and television sitcoms.
Had we cared, the recent 50th-birthday hoopla for Johnny in France would have only confirmed such prejudice.
The actual date was June 15, but that was preceded by a barrage of media attention (including his 51st cover of Paris Match) and followed by the actual public celebrations.
These were capped by three lavish concerts here at the outdoor Parc des Princes that accommodated nearly 200,000 worshipers.
In composite form, they became the centerpiece of an hours-long Johnny documentary telecast, and retelecast, in prime time on TF1, the most widely watched national channel.
The documentary not only gave us the whole concert, with backstage scenes to boot, but it also included film from every stage of the Hallyday career.


Haiti Factions Reach Accord on Crucial First Step
Representatives of Haiti's political factions took a crucial step early this morning toward restoring to office the deposed president, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, by agreeing to a six-month "political truce" during which they would work to restore constitutional government.
The agreement signaled success in reaching the first of several stages aimed at an eventual restoration of democracy in Haiti, the resignation of the military regime and the end of an international oil embargo imposed last month by the Security Council.


If Pollsters Had Been Around During the American Revolution
To the Editor:
In attempting to dispel the idea that all Americans supported independence, Garrison Keillor perpetrates the common error of attributing to John Adams the remark that Americans divided equally over independence: one-third in support, one-third loyal to King George and one-third indifferent ("In Praise of Sunshine Patriots," Op-Ed, July 4).


Paccar Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Religion Notes
People who live in the Northeastern quarter of the United States are less likely than most Americans to accept the biblical account of creation as truth or to get together with friends to study the Bible or meditate.
But as a group, they are hardly atheists.
Ninety-three percent believe in God, 49 percent believe that eternal life is gained only through Jesus Christ, and 40 percent go to church or synagogue every week.


China Backs Off Halting Ships Owned by Russia
The Government apologized today for two recent incidents in which Chinese patrol boats seized Russian vessels in international waters, and it pledged to take steps to avoid further such confrontations.
The authorities still have not explained the attack this week on a North Korean cargo ship that had left Hong Kong and was steaming toward its home port.
The North Korean ship was reportedly raked with machine-gun fire and boarded, but it is unclear whether those responsible were pirates or Chinese naval officials -- or if they were one and the same.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  LASER COMES TO THE HIGHWAYS
It worked well over Baghdad; now laser warfare is coming to the median strip of I-684.
The New York State Police are using lasers the same way Air Force pilots do, to identify targets, although the patrol cars do not follow up with bombs, only speeding tickets.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  AT CUNY, CARROTS AND STICKS
The Chancellor of the City University of New York, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, is going to divide up to $15 million in extra financing among colleges that have acted in accord with a sweeping plan, which has since been scaled back, to reorganize the 21-campus system.
At the same time, she will withhold money from the schools that did not do so.
Page 23.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Australia and Italy Tied in Davis Cup Play  Australia split its opening two singles matches with Italy in Florence yesterday as the Davis Cup quarterfinals began.
Richard Fromberg beat Italy's Renzo Furlan, 7-6, 7-6, 6-4, in a clay-court match that lasted nearly three and a half hours.
Furlan was replacing the injured Italian No. 1, Omar Camporese.
In the second match, Stefano Pescosolido beat Australian Mark Woodforde, 6-3, 7-5, 5-7, 6-4.
Doubles play is scheduled for today, with reverse singles on tap tomorrow. (AP) India and France Split: Leander Paes upset an ailing Henri Leconte, 6-1, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, as India and France split their opening singles in Frejus, France.
Paes, 20, is 208th in the world.
Arnaud Boetsch gave France its first point by beating Ramesh Krishnan, 6-3, 6-3, 6-1.
Georges Goven, the captain of the French team, said Leconte was in pain from back problems.
Leconte has had three back operations. (AP)


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Four Sunday Concerts At the Botanical Garden
"Sunday Supper Serenades," a series of four outdoor concerts on consecutive Sundays at the New York Botanical Garden, is to open tomorrow with a big-band concert.
The performance, called "Sounds of the Big-Band Era," is to feature a 16-piece jazz orchestra from the Manhattan School of Music, playing selections by Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Glenn Miller and others.
The series is to continue with "Chamber Music for a Summer's Eve" (July 25), "Jazz at Twilight" (Aug. 1) and "Summer Wind's Chamber Music" (Aug. 8).


CHRONICLE
The Hollywood connection continues: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON is to be in Los Angeles on Monday to address a luncheon to aid the Iris Cantor Center for Breast Imaging at the University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center.
Among those who have said they will attend the event at the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel are familiar Hollywood figures like Lili Fini Zanuck, Judy Ovitz, Lilly Tartikoff, Joanna Carson, Marilyn Bergman, Maria Shriver, Joanna Poitier and Patricia Medavoy as well as Richard Riordan, the new Mayor of Los Angeles; Gayle Wilson, the wife of Gov.
Pete Wilson, and Mrs.
Clinton's mother, Dorothy Rodham.


Wind and Wykagyl Can Ruin Weekend
The fast greens and unpredictable wind at Wykagyl Country Club had the players fighting for survival rather than looking for birdies today in the second round of the JAL Big Apple Classic.
As a result, only four players in the field of 144 are ahead of the tree-lined par-71, 6,095-yard course.


New York City Can Have Its Discos and Restrict the Noise Too; Give Us Our Peace
To the Editor:
I do not believe that Thomas K. Duane really understands the problem when he states that his alternative bill would require discos to undergo mandatory sound testing ("Save Our Discos," Op-Ed, July 3).


C.I.A. IS REBUFFED ON SPYING BUDGET
The Senate intelligence committee rebuffed the Director of Central Intelligence today and cut about $1.3 billion from President Clinton's $29 billion budget request for intelligence gathering, Government and intelligence officials said.
The bill would also grant the Federal Bureau of Investigation access to private credit reports without a search warrant or court order.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Virunga Summerstage Central Park


Richard Rosen, 75, Publisher of Books For Young Readers
Richard Rosen, founder of a Manhattan publishing house of books with social themes of concern to young people, died on Tuesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
A former resident of Manhattan, he was 75 years old and in recent years lived in Jupiter, Fla.
He had a brief illness and had gone to Boston for surgery, his son Roger said.


Ships With Chinese Refugees Limp Toward Port in Mexico
The high-seas journey of more than 650 Chinese refugees neared its end today as Mexican officials awaited the first of three rusty Chinese ships expected to limp into port here.
The officials stood ready to send most of the desperate refugees back to China immediately.
After a two-hour bus ride to the International Airport in Tijuana, most of the refugees will be sent home by plane.


Women Reach Settlement With Texas
The University of Texas and seven female students announced an out-of-court settlement yesterday of a lawsuit in which they accused the school of denying them an equal chance to play college athletics.
The settlement, which requires a judge's approval, would double the number of women participating in sports at Texas over the next several years, officials said.
The sides hailed the agreement as a landmark decision in the debate over Title IX that might affect how other colleges and universities equalize sports opportunities for women and men.
Title IX is a 21-year-old federal statute prohibiting sex discrimination in educational institutions that receive federal funds.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.13
2.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.00
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.12
3.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.32
5.33
6.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.56
7.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.30
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.69
5.69
6.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Investors Buy Condo
A 40-story Manhattan condominium that has been vacant since it was completed in 1991 has been sold to a group of investors who expect to begin leasing it this fall.
Le Grand Palais, a 179-apartment building at 250 East 54th Street at Second Avenue, was purchased by a group of investors who plan to auction off 15 percent of the units and put the rest back on the market as rentals.


Corrections
A picture caption last Saturday with an article about the identification of the remains of Czar Nicholas II and his family reversed the identities of the two eldest daughters in a family portrait.
Standing behind their parents, Olga was at left and Tatyana was at right.


Head of Europe Aid Bank Takes an Early Departure
The president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, who was appointed to promote capitalism in the former Soviet bloc, quit today after an internal report criticized him for spending too freely on a new headquarters and on himself.
The executive, Jacques Attali, who said last month that he would resign as soon as a successor could be chosen, abruptly moved up his departure after the bank's audit committee issued the report today.


Selecting Mutual Funds
Q: What should I take into account when selecting a mutual fund?
Is there a minimum cash requirement to open an account? -- KOREY WEISER, Denver  A: Determine your investment objective and how much risk you are willing to accept.
This will help you decide whether to invest in an aggressive growth stock fund, which might produce exceptional returns in a bull market but perform miserably in a bear market, or a more stable fund with lower returns but fewer risks.
The minimum investments vary widely and can be as high as $50,000.
Some funds have no minimum.
Geoff Bobroff, a senior vice president at Lipper Analytical, said many funds with no or very small minimums require the account holder to invest at least $1,000 within 12 months.
Real Estate as a Gift Q: What is the tax rate for a gift transfer of real estate?
Is the assessed value the basis of the tax? -- HARRY FURST, Glenwood Landing, L.I.
A: Tax on real estate, even as a gift, is progressive.
If the property is worth more than $10,000, it is subject to Federal estate taxes.
The value of the gift is based on the fair market value at the time of transfer, and only the donor is required to file a Federal tax form (Form 709).
Gift transfers can help minimize a donor's taxes.
Everyone qualifies for a "unified credit" of $192,800 from the Federal Government.
This means the first $600,000 of an estate worth less than $10 million is tax exempt.
Donors are allowed to give up to $10,000 each annually to as many people as they wish without incurring any gift tax.
Someone with an $800,000 estate, for example, could avoid paying taxes on $200,000 by giving away $10,000 in one year to 20 different people.
Recovering Passbook Money  Q: I have four bank books that date to 1971.
Each account has $10 in it.
Can I recover this money? -- ORLANDO F. IGNERI, Bellmore, L.I.
A: Check with the abandoned-property clerk of the New York State Comptroller's office.
Either the account was declared defunct or the money was turned over to the state, said Clare E. Sykes, a spokeswoman for the State Banking Department.
"If it were kept in there for quite a long time and the banks began assessing fees, then the fees would eventually wipe out any of the money," Ms.
Sykes said, and the account would be declared defunct.
If the money was earning interest, there was no other activity on the account and no bank fees were applied, then it is likely that the account has been turned over to the state.
People who think their accounts have suffered such a fate may call the unclaimed funds division of the Comptroller's office at (800) 221-9311.
Provide your name and address from the last time you used your passbook and the state can determine if the money was transferred.
If the money is found, a refund may be obtained by writing to the New York State Comptroller, Unclaimed Funds, Alfred E. Smith Building, Albany, N.Y. 12236.
Include proof of address at that time and passbook copies.


Classical Music in Review
The Canadian Brass Quintet Mostly Mozart Festival Avery Fisher Hall


Italy Backs Off Threat to Quit Somalia
Seeking to save face in an embarrassing row with the United Nations and the United States, Italy retreated today from its threat to withdraw its soldiers from Somalia, but insisted that it would not bow to United Nations pressure for the removal of its commander there.
The shift did nothing to resolve the fundamental disputes between the Italian contingent and the United Nations commanders in Mogadishu, most of whom are American, over both the United Nations mandate in Somalia and the way it should be carried out.


Clippers Consider Brown for Coach
Hubie Brown, the former Knicks coach who harangued any player who would not put defense first, is a candidate for the Los Angeles Clippers head coaching job.
A Clippers executive who declined to be identified said today that Brown, a basketball broadcaster this past season for TNT, is being considered along with Del Harris and Bobby Weiss.


Executive Changes
FOLIO CORP., Provo, Utah, a unit of Mead Data Central Inc., named Tracy W. Scott president and chief executive.
GE CAPITAL, Stamford, Conn., a unit of General Electric Co., named Nigel D. T. Andrews executive vice president.


RUSSIA IS HALTING ARMS-LINKED SALE
Under pressure from the United States, Russia agreed today to halt its planned sale of equipment and technology to India that American experts said could be used to make a ballistic missile, the State Department announced today.
In a compromise that ended a bitter year-long dispute, the United States won Russian approval for the halt of the sale in return for waiving economic sanctions that had been set to go into effect today against two Russian companies involved in the deal.


Energy Nominee Faces Battle on Feminist Group
In another trying twist for the confirmation of Administration appointees, Senate approval of Tara J. O'Toole as Assistant Secretary of Energy is in serious jeopardy because of her affiliation with a feminist group that formerly characterized itself as Marxist.
The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee has delayed scheduling confirmation hearings for Dr.
O'Toole indefinitely, and at least two powerful members of the panel have voiced concerns about her nomination for Assistant Secretary of Energy for Environment, Safety and Health.


New York Using Speed Trap of Future: Laser Gun
It worked well over Baghdad; now laser warfare is coming to the median strip of I-684.
The New York State Police are using lasers the same way Air Force pilots do: to identify targets, although the patrol cars do not follow up with bombs, only speeding tickets.
But the police are beginning to sound like Air Force generals as they talk about the arms race on the highways, where ever more sophisticated radar speed traps brought forth better and better radar detectors, until now.
Now, the police say, they've got The Big One.


No Headline
Once he's convicted, I'm going to look him in the eye and ask him for an answer.
It's my hope that he tell me what my daughter said or did to cause him to exhibit such a violent rage, and then snuff out her life. -- COL.
WILBERT BRYANT, referring to the suspect in his daughter's murder.  [ 7:2. ]


Midwest Copes With Splash of Humor and a Dash of Creativity
After two weeks of flooding across the Midwest, the days began to have a numbing sameness: lining up for showers, hauling away sodden debris, filling sandbags, watching anxiously for signs that the water would recede.
But flashes of ingenuity and enterprise could be found throughout the region.
The tracks across a huge hydroelectric dam between Iowa and Illinois were converted into a trolley line.
Horse fanciers from as far away as Colorado drove all night to save rare Arabians in Illinois.
A nursing home in Des Moines got its laundry done by sending it to people with running water.


Faldo Is Earl of Sandwich for One Historic Day
On the historic stage that he most lives to shine on, Nick Faldo was at his brilliant best today.
The Englishman sculpted a record 63 that gave him a narrow lead over a pack of renowned pursuers in the second round of the 122d British Open.
With a dramatic birdie 3 at the 468-yard 18th hole, which brought a rich roar from the packed grandstands surrounding the green, Faldo broke the Royal St.
George's competitive course record of 64, set by Christy O'Connor in the first round of the 1985 Open.
He also equaled the lowest round ever shot in the British Open, tying five other players.


CHRONICLE
Who better to judge the effectiveness of one orator than another?
Every year, Toastmasters International, an educational and public-speaking organization, asks its members to select the country's best speakers.
This year the winners are . . .
Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO; HARVEY MACKAY, author of "Swim With the Sharks Without Being Eaten Alive" and "Beware the Naked Man Who Offers You His Shirt"; NINA TOTENBERG, the National Public Radio legal affairs correspondent, and the Rev.
JESSE JACKSON.


Edmond J. Moran Is Dead at 96; Admiral Led Tug Fleet on D-Day
Retired Rear Adm.
Edmond J. Moran, a major figure in the shipping industry and commander of the tugboat fleet that enabled Allied forces to carry out the surprise D-Day invasion at Normandy on June 6, 1944, died at home on Thursday.
He was 96 and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
Admiral Moran served three terms as president and chairman of the Maritime Association of the Port of New York.
He was instrumental in local, national and international navigation issues, including labor negotiations, safety rules and waterfront crime.


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Extended the contract of Butch Hobson, manager, through the 1994 season.
CALILFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed John Orton, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jim Walewander, infielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Transferred Julio Valera, pitcher, from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARA SERVICES INC., Philadelphia, agreed to buy 80 percent of the contract food service unit of HUSA Group for an undisclosed amount.
BASF A.G., Berlin, signed a preliminary agreement with Gazprom, Russia, regarding the joint construction of large-scale plants in Siberia to make ethylene and polyethylene.
Terms of the investment were not disclosed.


More Monsoons Hamper Rescue Efforts in Indian Floods


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Palestinian Chief Raises Risky Issue of Jerusalem
The head of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks warned today that negotiations would go nowhere unless Israel gives up the eastern half of Jerusalem, which it captured in the 1967 war and has since annexed.
If Israel's position does not change, "it will kill the peace process," Dr.
Haidar Abdel-Shafi, a physician from Gaza, said at a conference in East Jerusalem.
"The important thing is that Israel should concede the Palestinian right in Jerusalem."


Two Youths Arraigned on Charge of Scrawling Hate Graffiti


Racism Isn't Part of Dartmouth Review
To the Editor:
In "Apartheid on Campus, Continued" (Editorial Notebook, July 4), Brent Staples accuses The Dartmouth Review of "race-baiting." Neither of the examples he cites comes close to supporting that allegation.


MacMillan Bloedel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


John H. Frazier Jr., 75, Trader in Commodities
John H. Frazier Jr., a commodities trader and past vice chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, died on July 8 at Northwestern Memorial Hospital.
He was 75 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was complications from leukemia, his family said.


Exit Ramp for Armstrong As the Tour Rolls On
Lance Armstrong, the American bicycling prodigy who took on this Tour de France at the tender age of 21 as "a learning experience," decided this morning that he had received enough lessons while giving a big one himself and that school was out.
"Lance is not here for the start today," announced Jim Ochowicz, the general manager of Armstrong's Motorola team.
"Lance is done; he's finished today. He's going by car to his home in Italy.


Copper Rooftop Office With a View


Critic's Notebook; After and Beyond 'Lughnasa'
When the theater critic of The Irish Times praised "Wonderful Tennessee," Brian Friel's first play since "Dancing at Lughnasa," angry letters to the editor followed, accusing the critic of "adjectivitis." Within days, another critic wrote a withering attack on "Wonderful Tennessee" in the same newspaper, and no doubt a new round of letter-writing will soon ensue.
The international superstars of Irish popular culture, from rock icons like U2 and Sinead O'Connor to the film directors Neil Jordan and Jim Sheridan to actors like Stephen Rea and Liam Neeson, are sources of endless fascination, pride and at times heated debate at home.
Who could have imagined that a playwright with a 30-year-long career, let alone one as quiet as Mr.
Friel, would get the same star treatment?
The reason is "Lughnasa," which has been seen and applauded nearly everywhere, from Broadway to New Delhi, since its premiere at the Abbey Theater in 1990.
"Lughnasa" was little different in form (Chekhovian) or setting (the mythical town of Ballybeg, County Donegal) from other fine Friel plays, like "Aristocrats," "Translations" and even "Philadelphia, Here I Come!," the work that put him on the international theatrical map (and Broadway) in the mid-1960's.
Yet the "Lughnasa" characters, poor, unhappy sisters of 1936 with an undying thirst for spiritual ecstasy, touched a mass audience as no Friel creations had before.
New Yorkers embraced them as if they were precursors of the sisters Rosensweig.


Crown Hts. And After: Making Plans
Against a backdrop of nervous anticipation, city and state officials are drawing up plans to limit negative reaction and avert racial and religious divisiveness next week when the state releases its report on the disturbances in Crown Heights two years ago.
Taking the lead, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo released an unusual letter yesterday that appeared aimed at calming the public, while aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins huddled in private to lay out a strategy for responding to the long-awaited report, expected to be released on Tuesday.


Observer; Geezers Get a Break
Sly Stallone, Arnie Schwarzenegger, Spielbergosaurus Rex with muscles as terrifying as Sly's pectorals and Arnie's biceps -- who needs them?
Not me.
Not as long as there's a lean, squinty old gent with wrinkles all over his face and eyes full of memory and pain and a smile that can charm the handcuffs and service revolver right off a beautiful lady cop.


Who's That Guy In Patriot Colors?
Bill Parcells is back to work and loving it.
After eight years of coaching the Giants and leading them to two Super Bowl titles, followed by two years of addressing a health problem and analyzing pro football for NBC, the coach is coaching again.


For the Military, Policing Sex Is Nothing New
As with most facets of military life, there are rules for heterosexual romance in the Armed Forces, some of them codified in the regulations of each branch of service and others part of an unwritten tradition passed down from commanding officer to raw recruit.
The Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines prohibit adultery, sodomy and sexual activity in the barracks.
The services also forbid fraternization between officers and enlisted personnel and between subordinates and supervisors in a command.


Russians Most Want Consumer Goods
To the Editor:
The aid flow to Russia described in "Keep the Aid Flowing to Russia" (editorial, July 5) can be used to the advantage of the United States.


Exercises in Futility: Pep Talks, Ball Games
The pre-game pep talk didn't make any difference.
Not that anyone expected it to.
Even Dallas Green, the talker, knew it was an exercise in futility, a vain attempt to bring some life to his dead ball club.
The Mets listened to the manager before the game tonight in San Francisco, listened to him plead for positive thought and hard work and commitment.
Then they took the field at Candlestick Park and lost.
Messily.
Again.


JULY 11-17: The 'Long Arm'; Convicted Hijacker Now Faces American Justice
Omar Mohammed Ali Rezaq was released from prison in Malta earlier this year after serving seven years for the 1985 hijacking of an Egypt Air flight that left 60 passengers dead.
Last week, he was hauled before an American court on air piracy charges in what was only the second use of American "long arm" statutes in the past six years.
Mr.
Rezaq had tried to find a safe haven in Ghana after his release from prison, but he was arrested there at Washington's request after months of talks between the two Governments.
In the Nov. 23, 1985, hijacking of the flight from Athens to Cairo, gunmen seized the plane and forced it to land in Malta.
When demands for fuel were rebuffed, they shot five passengers in the head.
Two women, an American and an Israeli, died.
The 58 other passengers were killed in an inept storming of the plane by Egyptian commandos.
Mr.
Rezak, who was on a long list of accused terrorists prosecutors would like to bring to trial, faces life in prison or the death penalty if convicted.


Remembrance of Thongs Past
ON the white-sand beach fringed with pampas grass, two women are walking to the water's edge.
One is wearing the archetypal St.-Tropez thong -- a bikini G-string revealing breasts, back and buttocks tanned nut brown from the sun.
The other is in a chaste black bathing suit with deep-cut bra and pants that swoop from waist to midthigh.
They are mother and daughter, and the minimal swimsuit for maximum exposure is on the 40-something mom.
Has the tide now turned on bare-it-all beach wear?
The latest swimwear fashions are all about covering up: for the mass market, aerodynamically designed suits with athletic torsos and streamlined legs; nostalgic Coney Island frivolity with underwired cups and flirty skirts from Norma Kamali; haute couture's re-creations of silver-screen glamour -- all padded bras and cantilevered curves.
In his latest cruise collection for Chanel, Karl Lagerfeld showed swimsuits layered with sweater sets.
From the avant-garde designers come black, long-legged suits not so far from those of the early bathing belles of the last century.


Lisa M. Burrell, Richard A. Baker
Alison Burrell of Water Mill, L.I., and Carmine Burrell of Southampton, L.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Marie Burrell, and Richard Alan Baker, a son of Betty Lou Baker of New York and Robert Baker of Greenwich, Conn.
Miss Burrell, 27, is a financial consultant at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the postmaster of Water Mill.
Her mother is the treasurer of Southampton and a painter there.


The Rich Are Luckier Than You and Me
A SHORT HISTORY OF FINANCIAL EUPHORIA By John Kenneth Galbraith.
Illustrated. 113 pp.
New York: Whittle Books/Viking. $16.


Action Taken in 216th Session of New York State Legislature
The New York State Legislature recessed its 216th session at 8:44 A.M. on July 8, 13 days after its scheduled closing.
Despite toiling through the Fourth of July weekend, lawmakers left much work undone.
They have to return to Albany for a special session later in the year to revamp the state's hospital payment regulations, which expire on Dec. 31, and may take up other unfinished business.
The session was notable for three weeks of paralysis caused by a deadlock between the Republican-controlled Senate and the majority-Democratic Assembly on the issue of rent regulation.
The Democrats eventually agreed to relax rent-stabilization laws on apartments for the wealthiest tenants in exchange for a four-year extension of rent laws.


Michele Fisher, Stuart Silberberg
Mr. and Mrs.
Mark I. Fisher of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michele Beth Fisher, to Stuart Evan Silberberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Silberberg of Needham, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Fisher, 24, graduated from Northwestern University and received a law degree last month from Yeshiva University.
She is to become an assistant district attorney in Manhattan next month.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
Her mother, Susan Fisher, is a teacher at the Jewish Community Center of Harrison.


EGYPT EXECUTES 5 MORE MILITANTS
The Egyptian Government hanged five more Islamic militants today as part of a sweeping crackdown that both officials and Islamic leaders say has inflicted the worst damage on the fundamentalist movement since it began its campaign of violent attacks 18 months ago.
The executions bring to 14 the number of militants hanged by the Government in the last five weeks, the largest number put to death for terrorist offenses here.
Seven other militants, still at large, have been condemned to death in absentia.


France Takes Over Team Leadership
FOR a long time, the distinction of having the world's strongest national club teams championship belonged to Germany, with its heavily bankrolled Bundesliga.
But no more.
France, with a flood of business and municipal sponsorship, staged a 12-team tournament that ended in Auxerre on May 31; it was stocked with 30 grandmasters and 30 international masters.
And, as is the case in Germany, so many were brought in from other countries that at least one reporter, Christophe Gueneau, referred to them, in Die Schachwoche, as "foreign legionnaires."


Summer Sickness -- It's Not the Heat, It's the Hostility
Congratulations!
If you are reading this, it means you have probably survived the heat wave with mind and body still intact.


Shootouts Not To Be Forgotten
To the Editor:
Jeff Silverman offered an impressive list of "Great Gun Moments in the Movies" with his article "Romancing the Gun"  [ June 20 ] .
But he appears to have missed the top three.
They are, in order of priority:


The 60's No More
To the Editor:
Re "Deconstructing Tommy" by Brent Staples (Editorial Notebook, July 6): Except for a few nostalgic counterculture types, the 1960's generation has grown up.
Believe it or not, we do not encourage our children to take drugs, have sex with strangers or drop out.
We realize that the hedonistic, parasitic life style advocated by the counterculture is destructive to individuals and society.


Julie Kennedy and Christopher O'Neill
Julie Haviland Kennedy, a daughter of Patricia R. Kennedy of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Robert A. Kennedy of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Craig O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. O'Neill of North Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Joseph Murray performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Church in Westhampton, L.I.
Mrs.
O'Neill, 27, graduated from Marymount Manhattan College.
She is an advertising sales representative at Institutional Investor magazine in New York.
Her father is a private financial consultant.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Case of the Hot Tub
HOW hot has it been in the Hamptons?
Somebody stole a bathtub.
It being the Hamptons, it was a very expensive bathtub.
"A Koehler, worth about $4,800," said George Kamper, the former owner of the tub.
The almond-colored tub had a Jacuzzi built in, as well as every other water-relaxing convenience.
"It took me eight weeks to get it," Mr.
Kamper said.
The tub was taken from a house under construction in Noyack.
Mr.
Kamper is a builder, and this is the first bathtub he ever had stolen.
"It shows how desperate they are out here," he said.
"It must have taken four guys to move it."


Deep-Sea Scavenging Gets Easier
SPITTOONS.
Fine china.
Three ship's whistles, each weighing 800 pounds.
Last month a salvage ship sailed into Norfolk, Va., heavy with hundreds of artifacts -- the first booty from the sunken luxury liner Titanic to reach American soil.
But whether the recovery of treasure from shipwrecks is a high-minded effort at preserving history or nothing more than modern piracy, it has turned into a rush to pick through the hulks that clutter the ocean floor.
The northeastern seaboard of the United States alone has some 10,000 major shipwrecks, only a tenth of which have been examined.
Worldwide, millions of ships have been lost over the centuries, some loaded with silver and gold.


A Sunday Auction By the Bay
The 7th annual AIDS benefit in Bellport, L.I., draws over 2,000 guests and raises $500,000 on a languid afternoon, July 11.


Informer, Not Sheik, Holds Key to Bomb Plot
To the Editor:
Re "Not So Fast on the Sheik" (editorial, July 8): More attention should be focused on Emad A. Salem, the Federal Bureau of Investigation provocateur who reported on Muslims he recruited, who were then arrested mixing explosives; and less on the blind, diabetic and now arrested Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who helped our authorities by recruiting Muslim fighters for Afghanistan.
Long before the bombing of the World Trade Center, Mr.
Salem, a former Egyptian army colonel, became an F.B.I. informer among New York area Muslims.
He won their trust by visiting, and writing in a local Arabic paper about, El Sayyid Nosair, the acquitted but jailed alleged assassin of Rabbi Meir Kahane.


Et Tu, Tommy?
DING.
After seeing the Broadway production of "Tommy" in the spring, a little first-mate's bell went off in the fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger's head.
Dong.
He decided to offer Pete Townshend (who wrote "Tommy" in 1969 when he was with The Who) corporate sponsorship of Mr.
Townshend's first solo tour of North America.
Done deal.
Many of the old rock-and-roll radicals and die-hards who were flocking into the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night under a marquee that boldly declared "Tommy Hilfiger Presents Pete Townshend" may not have been aware that they had walked smack into the middle of a promotional campaign for one of the first designers after Ralph Lauren to successfully push preppy, establishment dressing on the masses.
They may not have noticed the enormous Tommy Hilfiger banner, with its yacht-club-like logo, over the bar in the lobby or the sporty white shirts with the same logo that the theater's staff and crew were wearing.


More Places Are Off-Limits For Smokers
Traveling is getting ever tougher for smokers.
Authorities at Dallas-Fort Worth Airport recently declared the entire passenger terminal off-limits to smokers.
And starting July 26, it will be unlawful to smoke in restaurants in Los Angeles -- at least as long as patrons don't walk across the street into Beverly Hills, West Hollywood or Santa Monica.
But even those refuges may not last long.
In one of his last acts as Mayor, Tom Bradley signed a bill putting all 7,000 or so restaurants in Los Angeles, the nation's second largest city, off-limits to smoking.
There are some exceptions: bars, nightclubs, dance halls, rented banquet rooms and outdoor gardens and sidewalk eating areas of restaurants.
Violators face a $50 citation on the first offense, $100 on the second within a year and $250 each after that.
Restaurateurs who fail to enforce the ban face greater risks: six months in jail and fines of up to $1,000 per violation.


Q and A
Leasing With an Option Question: I am interested in learning more about leasing a house with the option to buy.
What are the pitfalls?


Pine-Tar Couture; WHAT'S A HIT WITH THOSE WHO HIT?
Ask a major league ballplayer what the perfect uniform is and it's doubtful you will get a uniform answer.
Frank Robinson, a Hall of Fame outfielder who is now an assistant general manager with the Baltimore Orioles, said he came close to the standard when he donned the Dodgers' white and blue.
But Robinson's No. 1, which he didn't get to wear, is the Yankees' pin stripes.
"The Dodgers' is second, the Cubs' third, probably the Tigers' next," Robinson said.
"But the Yankees had success and they had the mystique. The Gehrigs and the Ruths and those guys played for that club and they made that uniform what it was."


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on July 4 about Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor, misstated the circumstances in which Robert C. McFarlane, national security adviser to President Reagan, testified before a Congressional committee on the Iran-contra affair.
He was not given immunity and did not seek it.


Corrective Map On Gramercy Park


Dress Whites
The men's dress shirt -- from the Gibson Girl's to its present incarnations -- has enjoyed a century of popularity with women.
But the only thing this summer's white shirt has in common with previous versions is its chalk-white freshness.
The shapes range far and wide from the original.
There is the ankle-length shirt that resembles a grandfather's nightshirt (far left).
The other extreme is hardly a shirt at all: it consists only of long sleeves, a shoulder yoke and collar, and it must be worn with a vest (above left).


The Where of AIDS
THE SLOW PLAGUE A Geography of the AIDS Pandemic.
By Peter Gould.
Maps. 228 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.
Cloth, $44.95.
Paper, $19.95.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 18, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
77
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
52
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
3
22
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
66
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
5
29
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
6
3
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
7
6
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
8
4
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
9
2
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
10
4
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.50.) Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
11
2
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A television star encounters shades of her past on a visit to the Napa Valley.
12 *
13
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
13
3
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store.
14
2
MCNALLY'S LUCK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) The quest for a kidnapped cat leads to cases of ransom and homicide.
15
5
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
THE MAKING OF "JURASSIC PARK," by Don Shay and Jody Duncan. (Ballantine, $18.) An account of the production of the current hit film.
2
1
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
3
9
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President of the United States.
4
12
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5
506
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
6
92
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
7
22
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8
113
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
4
I, TINA, by Tina Turner with Kurt Loder. (Avon, $5.50.) The rock star tells her life story.
10
11
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
11
23
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
12 *
3
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
13
3
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
14
5
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
15
10
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
126
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
101
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
142
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
15
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More of the author's tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Against New Odds, The U.N. Insists on Helping in Somalia
THE obvious question last week was this: Is Somalia, where first the United States and then the United Nations entered with such good intentions and high hopes, turning into a quagmire?
Put more starkly: Are the ongoing fighting in southern Mogadishu, the hostility of the local population, the dissension among the international contingents of troops, the failure to capture the renegade warlord who is causing the trouble and the killing of four journalists by mobs, all signs that Somalia is turning out to be the U.N.'s Vietnam -- easy to get into, hard to get out of, very costly and, perhaps, unwinnable?


THIS YEAR'S PROPHET
I have attempted to penetrate Tikkun magazine numerous times, only to find that the writers, and the editor, in particular, have invented new uses for the term "empty rhetoric" ("This Year's Prophet," by Thomas Fields-Meyer, June 27).


Corrections
For some time, the heading on the Commodity and Financial Futures page in this section has incorrectly described the contracts for lumber on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Each contract is for 160,000 board feet and the price is in dollars per 1,000 board feet.


G.E. to Stop Flow of PCB's Into the Hudson River
The General Electric Company agreed late this week to stem a new flow of PCB's into the Hudson River from its plant in Hudson Falls, about 35 miles north of Albany, and said it would investigate methods to clean the river of the toxic pollutant.
The agreement, part of a consent order signed on Friday between the company and the State Department of Environmental Conservation, does not bind General Electric to clean the contaminated river.


Yo, Florio, Yo, Whitman; Foes Trade Ring Cliches
It is unclear just which of the New Jersey gubernatorial candidates -- the Democratic incumbent, Jim Florio, or the Republican challenger, Christine Todd Whitman -- threw the first boxing metaphor.
But six weeks into the general election race, the state's promised political fight of the century has shaped up as a lackluster affair with each side trying to pound the other purple with prose.
Polls show Mr.
Florio and Mrs.
Whitman even in the governor's race.
Behind the verbal sparring that has dominated the campaign is an attempt by Mr.
Florio to soften his opponent's standing by creating public doubt about her.
Mrs.
Whitman's strategy has been to fend off Mr.
Florio and to stress the record $2.8 billion tax increase the Governor pushed through in 1990 and the state's limp economy.


'Amongst Friends' Tops Off a Journey Of Self-Discovery
Through the years, Long Island has presented itself artistically in ways as varied as the dozens of communities that stretch its length, from the border of Queens to the tip of Montauk.
The Long Island of F. Scott Fitzgerald's "Great Gatsby" is a lost place of privilege and of intricately stratified classes in brutal social competition.
In the novels of Susan Isaacs, including "Compromising Positions," which became a movie starring Susan Sarandon, and the new "After All These Years," it is the backdrop for middle-aged, middle-class people engaged in such suburban pursuits as divorce, murder and revenge.
And while the island's less tony neighborhoods have never been as popular as, say, Queens or Brooklyn as movie locales, some have been memorably portrayed recently, most notably by Hal Hartley.
His subjects are a different breed altogether -- alienated working-class types who might be seen hanging out at the convenience store of an afternoon and whose inner lives are beyond imagining.


Outdoor Suite


U.S. IS TO STATION OFFICIALS IN HANOI
The United States will station diplomats in Vietnam for the first time since the Vietnam war under a plan disclosed today by senior American and Vietnamese officials.
The three diplomats would help the growing number of American families who visit Vietnam seeking information about missing soldiers.
There have been no United States diplomats stationed in Hanoi since the French colonial period, which ended in 1954; and United States diplomats left Saigon in the south in the closing days of the Vietnam War in 1975.


Maryanne Wysell, Michael Caldwell
Dr.
Maryanne Carol Wysell and Dr.
Michael Christopher Caldwell, who recently completed their residencies in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
The Rev.
Michael Brundell, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The bride and bridegroom, both 29, received their M.D. degrees from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bride is a daughter of Ruth and Bertram Wysell of Moriches, L.I.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
HELL'S FOUNDATIONS: A Social History of the Town of Bury in the Aftermath of the Gallipoli Campaign By Geoffrey Moorhouse.
Owl/Holt, $14.95.
This book explores the effect on a grim English mill town of the deaths of many of its young men during the World War I siege of Gallipoli, a loss the Government sought to assuage with hollow symbols of glory.
This is a "startling, luminous and humane study of how propaganda -- elegiac and mesmeric -- goes to work," Paul West said here last year.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column last Sunday misstated the name of the New York State agency responsible for redeveloping West 42d Street.
It is the 42d Street Development Project Inc.


F.B.I. Director Told to Resign Or Be Removed
Top Clinton Administration officials met today with William S. Sessions, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and gave him until Monday to resign or face immediate dismissal, White House aides said.
Mr.
Sessions would not comment on the discussion when he emerged from the meeting with Attorney General Janet Reno and other Administration officials this morning.
As he walked out of the Justice Department, Mr.
Sessions tripped on a curb and fell to the pavement.
F.B.I. security agents rushed him to a hospital, where doctors found that his elbow had been broken.


What Is So Valuable as a Good Iced Tea?
ONCE it was computers, then semiconductors.
A couple of years ago, the word "biotechnology" was enough to make normally sensible investors pay ever higher prices.
Now iced tea is, er, hot.
Perhaps it says something about the future of the economy that Wall Street these days is most eager to channel money to tea companies and casinos, rather than into companies in the forefront of technological change.
No doubt the Government would do a horrible job of allocating capital, but that does not prove the market is doing a very good one.


'HOPEFULLY' SPRINGS ETERNAL
I wonder why Cathleen Schine is so concerned about the word "hopefully" (On Language: " 'Hopefully' Springs Eternal," June 20).


Corrections
A Technology article last Sunday about advances in electric-car batteries misstated the weight of the gasoline needed by a conventional automobile to travel 500 miles.
A small car that gets good gas mileage might need approximately 85 pounds of gasoline -- about 13 gallons -- to travel that distance.


On Sunday; Finding Mercy for Conscripts In Drug War
EVEN the judge finally agreed with the pestering nun: The drug mule, a distraught mother reduced to hallucinating in her cell, had suffered enough, becoming "seriously mentally impaired" in ricocheting for the past three years among psychiatric wards, jail cells and court hearings on her fading fitness to stand trial.
So three weeks ago, Sonia Belazaire, a Haitian who said she was terrorized by thugs into strapping a pound of cocaine to her body, was freed from a Bedlam-like tangent of jail time that began in 1990.


Study of Sex Orientation Doesn't Neatly Fit Mold
In the sharp debate over the significance of recent work suggesting a biological basis for sexual orientation, all sides are struggling to reconcile the new findings with their political aims and personal convictions.
A report this week linking male homosexuality to a region of the X chromosome has reignited the question of how much a person's sexual predilections are inborn and how much a result of choices made, consciously or otherwise, from early childhood onward.


Family Pops Concert a Highlight of Festival Week
THE Summer Music festival continues its 10th anniversary season in New London this week.
On Thursday evening a Family Pops Concert begins at 7 in Harkness Memorial Park, with a program highlighting favorites from Disney films as well as Broadway standards, some classical favorites, solos by the banjo virtuoso Buddy Wachter and some fireworks.
On Saturday evening at 8 P.M.
Peter Sacco will conduct the Connecticut Orchestra in three works by Mozart: the Divertimento in D, plus two concertos featuring principal players of the New York Philharmonic, the concertmaster Glen Dicterow and the clarinetist Stanley Drucker.
For information about remaining events -- including performances by Canadian Brass, Jean-Pierre Rampal and Marvin Hamlisch -- call the Summer Music office at 442-9199 or 800-969-3400.


No Headline
No matter how they try to gift wrap this in politic language, it's not a compromise, it's a capitulation.
DAVID MIXNER, fund-raiser for gay causes, on the effort to end discrimination in the military.  [ 18:6. ]


Instrument Workshops Scheduled at Museum
ONE of the exhibitions at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers through Sept. 5 is called "Hit It!: Homemade Instruments by Katherine Teck." Visitors can stop by any time to see more than 40 percussion instruments made of such everyday items as flowerpots and twigs, and youngsters can also hear them and make some of their own, when Ms.
Teck, a White Plains resident, gives a pair of workshops for children at the museum Friday evening.
"Perhaps this had its beginnings when I was a child of 5 or so," Ms.
Teck said, "and my grandfather kept my brother and me occupied by setting us to sawing nails in his basement workshop." Children will learn to make simple instruments and to decorate them.
Then either before or after the 6:15 and 7:15 P.M. workshops, they might attend a new planetarium show called "Dinosaur Dreams." The shows start at 6, 7 and 8 P.M.
Since it is part of the museum's cycle of "Fantastic Fridays," everything is free.
For more details, the number to call is 963-4550.


Kristy Armstrong And Peter Clifton
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Michael Armstrong of Manhattan Beach, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristy Michelle Armstrong to Peter Folsom Clifton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Clifton of Bridgehampton, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Armstrong is a publicity manager at Dorling Kindersley, a publishing company, in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the GM Hughes Electronics Corporation in Los Angeles.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HARBOR FEST '93
Five Islands Park on Long Island Sound in New Rochelle will be the setting for a Harbor Fest on Friday from 2 P.M. to midnight, Saturday from 10 A.M. to midnight and Sunday from noon to 9 P.M.
An impressive line-up of talent has been assembled as well as continuous activities for children, which include juggling, amusement rides and facepainting.
The event is an alcohol-free music festival.


Kristin Slanina and Steven Schondorf
Kristin Marie Slanina, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Slanina of Bedford, Tex., was married last evening to Steven Yellin Schondorf, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Schondorf of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Harold Loss officiated at Fair Lane, the estate of the late Henry Ford in Dearborn, Mich.
Mr. and Mrs.
Schondorf, 24 and 26, respectively, are design engineers at the Ford Motor Company in Dearborn, she in the engine division and he in the electric vehicles division.
They graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from which they also received master's degrees in engineering.
Mr.
Schondorf also received a master's degree in technology and policy from M.I.T.


Built for Cold War, Bunker Shifts Its Weaponry to Drug Battle
In a bunker deep inside this granite peak, a small cadre of military analysts are fighting a threat that caused them to scramble a waiting fleet of jet fighters more than 100 times last year.
But the targets they trace in multi-hued flight paths on glowing consoles and computer screens here at the nerve center of the North American Aerospace Defense Command, better known as Norad, are not Soviet bombers or nuclear-tipped missiles.
They are pesky Cessnas and Beechcrafts ferrying cocaine from Latin America.


No Gentleman in Verona
JUGGLING THE STARS By Tim Parks. 218 pp. New York:  Grove Press.


In North Carolina, A Verdict Is In Yet the Case Isn't Closed
Treacherous though it is to second-guess a jury on the basis of television coverage of a trial, many viewers of "Innocence Lost: The Verdict" are bound to join me in the fear that a terrible miscarriage of justice is taking place in North Carolina.
Two people have received life sentences for sexual abuse of children at a day-care center in the town of Edenton, and five others face similar charges.
A compelling four-hour "Frontline" documentary (carried by PBS in two parts, this Tuesday and Wednesday) points to the likelihood that no crime was committed, unless convicting innocent people counts as a crime.
Even viewers who may be less persuaded than I that the documentary exposes a kind of madness in the land can admire this revealing investigation for going courageously against prevailing emotions about a sensitive matter.


Nicole Rose, Vincent Doria
Nicole Amy Rose, the daughter of David and Ria Rose of New York, was married yesterday to Vincent Paul Doria, a son of Vincent and Ruth Doria of Valhalla, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Johnson, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Anabel Taylor Chapel at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.


Avoiding Summer Problems On Cranky Air-Conditioners
DURING humid summers even window air-conditioners that have been cleaned and serviced at the start of the season can benefit from a tuneup before or during the dog days.
Most tuneups are easy, take less than a half-hour and can improve cooling.
Begin by making sure that the air-conditioner is unplugged.
Vacuum or dust the front grille and controls.
Remove the grille to clean or replace the air filter behind it.
Some grilles are fastened with screws.
Others pop free when pressed along the top or sides.
If you have difficulty, consult an owner's manual, if possible.
Otherwise, probe with a narrow putty knife around the outside edges for hidden tabs.


Sally MacCowatt, Josiah M. Black
Sally Pawling MacCowatt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Haskell P. MacCowatt of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Josiah Milton Black, the son of Timothy N. Black and Martha W. Black, both of Washington.
The Rev.
William R. Forbes performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Westfield (N.J.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Black, 25, is an assistant manager of marketing analysis for Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Duke University.
Her father, now retired, was the senior vice president of administration of CBS in New York.


Beth Ann Ferraro, Craig J. Malloy
Beth Ann Ferraro, a daughter of Robert and Nancy Ferraro of Westwood, Mass., was married there yesterday to Craig James Malloy, a son of Gerald and Sheila Malloy of Canton, Mass.
The Rev.
Frederick Murray performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Denis Church.
Mrs.
Ferraro-Malloy, 27, is a global fixed-income analyst for Fiduciary Trust Company International, an investment-management company in New York.
She graduated from Clark University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


England's Judges (and Hiring System) Under Fire
Even to a people accustomed to strange utterances from the bewigged figures who rule over British courtrooms, the remarks by Judge Starforth Hill last month at Winchester Crown Court gave pause.
Judge Hill was hearing the case of a young man who had admitted trying to have sex with a girl for whom he was baby-sitting when he was 18 and she was 8.
In letting the offender off lightly with two years' probation, he explained, "I have been provided with information which leads me to believe that she was not entirely an angel herself."


Three Sculptors Create a Vista In Tones of Wood and Metal
THE sculptor Philip Grausman, whose own work, come July 31, appears at Paris-New York-Kent Gallery, in Kent, has joined with the painter Barbara Grossman, in staging a group show at the Washington Art Association, in Washington Depot.
Between them, the curators have chosen Tom Doyle, Lawrence Fane and John Crawford -- sculptors all.
Mr.
Doyle, the eldest and most prominent of the trio, has been exhibiting steadily in Manhattan since the early 1960's and, in roughly the same period, has figured in countless groups mounted all over the United States and in Europe.
Mr.
Fane has been visible on the same scene for the last 24 years but his overseas appearances have been confined to Italy.
Mr.
Crawford is a relative newcomer, having made his bow in 1979 with a show in Italy.
Since then he has appeared in numerous groups in New York City as well as in Italy.


U.S.-Japan Currency Adjustments Work
To the Editor:
Karel van Wolferen makes two egregious errors in "Japan's Big Chance -- and Clinton's" (Op-Ed, July 6).


Egypt Hangs Militants
Five more Islamic militants were hanged by the Egyptian Government as part of a drive against groups that are seeking its overthrow, the authorities and militant leaders said.
Article, page 16.


Zen Question: Who Belongs?
To the Sports Editor:
After belittling Barbra Streisand for visiting Washington this spring, Maureen Dowd now joins the crowd in poking fun at Streisand for attending a Wimbledon match.
One can only wonder whether there's any place in Dowd's world where Streisand can go without being ridiculed.
Perhaps it's Dowd who should stay home.
CAROL A. JOHMAN Hamden, Conn.


Avoiding Summer Problems On Cranky Air-Conditioners
DURING humid summers even window air-conditioners that have been cleaned and serviced at the start of the season can benefit from a tuneup before or during the dog days.
Most tuneups are easy, take less than a half-hour and can improve cooling.
Begin by making sure that the air-conditioner is unplugged.
Vacuum or dust the front grille and controls.
Remove the grille to clean or replace the air filter behind it.
Some grilles are fastened with screws.
Others pop free when pressed along the top or sides.
If you have difficulty, consult an owner's manual, if possible.
Otherwise, probe with a narrow putty knife around the outside edges for hidden tabs.


Grand Teton
To the Editor: Some additional information may make Guy Garcia's description of climbing the Grand Teton more realistic ("A Greenhorn Takes On Grand Teton," June 6).
First, altitude sickness can be experienced in the form of nausea and headache.
Mr.
Garcia mentions neither, but does say of his high camp, "nobody slept."
Next, potential climbers should be in more than "fairly good physical shape." Excellent is more like it.
The pleasure of this climb will vary directly with one's physical condition.
Running 10 kilometers is a good measure.
Altitude and legs are not all.
The Grand Teton is a full-body climb.
Some higher mountains in the United States are walk-ups; not the Grand.
Another rule of thumb: can you do three or four pull-ups?


Ms. Heisenberg And Dr. Hager
Dorothee Heisenberg, the daughter of Jochen and Irene Heisenberg of Durham, N.H., was married there yesterday to Gregory Donald Hager, the son of Donald and Deloris Hager of Postville, Iowa.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Lynes, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at Durham Community Church.
Ms.
Heisenberg, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in political science at Yale University, from which she received a master's degree in international relations and where her husband is an assistant professor of computer science.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Iowa.
Her father is a physics professor at the University of New Hampshire in Durham.
Her mother is a clinical social worker in Dover, N.H.


A Diner-Builder Takes a New Tack
TO go from building diners in New Jersey to building embassies in Africa may seem a bit of a stretch, but Kullman Industries, in the Avenel section here, has bridged the gap.
Started in 1927 as the Kullman Dining Car Company and still run by the family of its founder, Samuel Kullman, the company has for three decades been applying the modular construction techniques used in diners to other projects.
The most recent one is a $5 million contract to build the American Embassy in Guinea-Bissau, a former Portuguese colony on the West African coast.


To Keep Cool, Just Duck Into the Subway
To the Editor:
There is nothing new about New York City's being hot in the summer, yet it still generates extensive coverage, like your July 8 front-page article and editorial on the heat.
What is new, and welcome, is that New Yorkers can find refuge from the heat on the subway.
Who would have thought 10 years ago that the best way to beat the summer heat in New York would be to ride the subway?
Throughout these oppressive conditions, relief can be found in air-conditioned subway cars, of which there appears to be no great shortage.
As one who commutes from an apartment without air-conditioning to an office without air-conditioning, I have found the ride on the IND the most refreshing part of my day.


Giants' New Coach Makes His Demands
One afternoon last week, while the heat was laying waste to much of the East Coast, Dan Reeves was in his Giants Stadium office unpacking boxes.
Lots of boxes.
"Ten, 11, 12, 13," he counted.
They stared at him and he stared back.
"You should see my house," he said, shaking his head.
No, thank you.
There has been little time for the new Giants coach to breath, let alone unpack boxes.
Most of his attention has been focused on the most important job at hand -- unpacking one of the National Football League's most vital franchises from its own private confinement, which, for the last several seasons, has almost suffocated the Giants.


Rebecca West's Judgment
To the Editor:
In his review of Henry Green's memoir, "Pack My Bag" (June 27), Hugh Kenner speaks of the high regard in which Green's work has been held by such eminent writers as John Updike, Anthony Burgess and Eudora Welty.
He quotes each of these with proper respect.
But he adds the name of yet another admirer of Green to his list, Rebecca West, and here he writes: "Rebecca West, admittedly a hysteric, called him 'the most original . . . the best writer of his time.' "


King Goes For Title But Thinks Of Hall
Betsy King is in a good position to earn one of the two victories she needs to be inducted into the L.P.G.A.
Hall of Fame.
She carved a three-under-par 68 on the tough Wykagyl Country Club course this afternoon to take a one-shot lead going into Sunday's finale of the JAL Big Apple Classic.
King has a three-day total of five-under 208 on the 6,095-yard Wykagyl course, which has played much harder than its par of 71 in the first three rounds because of extremely fast greens and swirling winds.


'Gilgamesh,' the Shocker
To the Editor:
I was shocked at Tom Sleigh's interpretation of the new "Gilgamesh" translation by David Ferry (May 23).


Fabulous Fabric From 7000 B.C.
Once people began settling down to farming in the Middle East more than 9,000 years ago, they shed their old hunting clothing of animal skins and learned to make lighter, cooler garments from the fibers of flax.
They became the first weavers of textiles, one of the earliest crafts -- well before ceramics -- associated with the beginnings of agriculture and the rise of human civilization.
Now archeologists digging at Cayonu, the site of a prehistoric agricultural village in southern Turkey, have found a small fragment of cloth from that time.
It is almost certainly a piece of linen made from domesticated flax.
Analysis dates the cloth at 7000 B. C., making it the earliest known example of woven fabric, and shows the weave to be an adaptation of the even earlier basket-weaving technology.


Profile/John Crawford; A Clear, Cool Voice in the Frenzied World of Chip Design
DESIGNING a modern computer chip is a highly structured team effort, and John Crawford has emerged as a model captain.
At the Intel Corporation, he has become a master at organizing the skilled crews necessary to arrange millions of transistors into an advanced microprocessor.
Indeed, in an industry that routinely burns out young engineering wizards after a single design stint -- three years or so of 90-hour weeks -- Mr.
Crawford has excelled at pacing himself.
Over the last 12 years, he has led his teams of designers in creating the world's two most popular microprocessors, the Intel 386 and 486, which power the bulk of the world's current personal computers, and what will almost certainly become the third in a remarkable dynasty, the recently introduced Pentium chip.


Catherine Gavigan And Michael Goff
Catherine Louise Gavigan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Gavigan of Harwich, Mass., was married there yesterday to Michael John Goff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Goff of Rockville, Md.
The Rev.
Charles T. Newberry officiated at the First Congregational Church.
The Rev.
James Nunes, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Montreal Museum for Laughs
Museums are not often funny places, but Montreal is aiming for belly laughs with Un Nouveau Musee . . . pour Rire, the city's new three-story, post-modern cathedral of comedy.
The inaugural show, "Laughing Matters," takes the visitor, supplied with headphones, on an imaginatively designed, two-and-one-half-hour trip through the history of humor.
The journey, which begins with the world's first laugh, takes travelers across a giant wisecracking chessboard in a medieval castle.
On a cobblestone square in Renaissance Venice, they'll meet commedia dell'arte's usual suspects -- Harlequin, Pantaloon and Columbine.
Other highlights include a trip through the airwaves of radio comedy and exhibits devoted to slapstick, cartoons, a 19th-century circus and sitcoms like "The Simpsons" and "The Honeymooners."


10 Floors Up, 2 Are Shot
A mother and her 4-year-old son were shot while attending a birthday party on the 10th-floor terrace of their apartment house in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, last night, apparently by gunfire from the street, the police said.
Both the woman and her child, whose names were not released, were reported in stable condition at the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center.
The mother was shot in the face; her son was grazed in the head.
The shooting occurred about 10:30 P.M. at 216 Rockaway Avenue, near Pacific Street, the police said.


Some Novel Ideas For Distinctive Mint
I WENT down to the garden recently and was confronted by a sea of mint.
As any gardener knows, this herb will take over the whole place if you are not careful.
But I love the smell, which reminds me of Morocco, were small boys wander the market selling huge bunches of mint for tea.
The leaves are infused into a green tea that is brewed in a metal pot and flavored with spoonfuls of sugar.
On a hot day, there is nothing more refreshing.
Oddly enough, mint is underused in our kitchens.
Sprigs decorate desserts or summer drinks, but you don't see this herb much with savory dishes.


'Accurate if Not Prophetic'
To the Editor:
I disagree with David Richards's reading of Samuel Beckett's plays, which are metaphorical displays of spiritual decay  [ "Counting Down to the Year 2000," June 27 ] .
As such, they are accurate if not prophetic.
Winnie's constant repetition that "this is going to be another happy day" has become the wild, extravagant visual noise of "Marisol" and "Angels in America," indeed of all our entertainments.


POSTINGS: 19th Precinct Station House; The Police 'Hot Box' On East 67th Street
Already longer and costlier than expected, the reconstruction of the 19th Precinct station house at 153 East 67th Street has turned out to be hotter than expected, too, since the new heating, ventilation and air-conditioning system has failed.
State Senator Roy M. Goodman, Republican of Manhattan, brought the problem to public attention last week.
In a letter to Kenneth J. Knuckles, Commissioner of the General Services Department, Mr.
Goodman wrote: "By law, no prisoners can be kept in the precinct's holding cells because there is insufficient ventilation. Yet ironically we require the police to work there. It is simply not fair to ask our police to function in an ill-ventilated hot box."


Partial Step On Gay Ban
Though it falls well short of his unqualified campaign pledge to lift the ban entirely, President Clinton's plan to allow homosexuals in the military gives gay men and women in uniform more protection than they now have and serves as a stepping stone toward broader relaxation of restrictions.
The proposal to allow homosexuals to serve as long as they do not aggressively declare their sexual orientation or engage in homosexual conduct angered and disappointed gay rights groups.
But many of those homosexuals in the armed services, who tend to be more conservative than civilian advocates for gay rights, believe the compromise is a move in the right direction.


The Dawn of a Democratic Japan
The Japanese, we've long been told, have no interest in politics in the American sense.
Money talks, bureaucrats plan and consensus rules.
We may have been told wrong.
Today's election represents the first serious challenge to one-party rule since the merger of conservative interests that formed the misleadingly named Liberal Democrats in 1955.
Real multiparty democracy is not yet at hand, but at last Japan's voters face real choices.
Whatever the outcome, many Japanese seem eager to see their politics become more responsive to their everyday needs.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Providence, R.I.; A Crackdown On Contractors
TWENTY people have been ordered to appear in courts around the state this summer on charges that they had violated an an order to register with the Building Contractors Registration Board, which was created by the state's General Assembly four years ago.
The seven-member board was formed in response to complaints of shoddy construction during the development boom of the 80's.


Lauren Jo Resnick, David Jay Coonin
Lauren Jo Resnick, the daughter of Arthur and Anita Resnick of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to David Jay Coonin, a son of Myron and Wendy Coonin of Washington.
Rabbi Deborah Zecher performed the ceremony at the Colonial Terrace, a catering establishment in Peekskill, N.Y.
Ms.
Resnick, 27, is keeping her name.
Next month she is to begin work as an assistant United States attorney, in Brooklyn, for the Eastern District of New York.
She and her husband graduated from Brown University, she magna cum laude.
The bride received a law degree from Harvard University; the bridegroom, a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.


Cunard Launches New Cruise Ship in New York


Business Diary/July 11-16
COMPANIES Will Employee-Owned Skies Be Any Friendlier?


Pasta, Pizza and New American Dishes
SHAWN'S, named after its owner, Shawn Reilly, has reopened in the same corner building in Hamden where it operated from 1976 to 1981.
The nonsmokers' dining room has the aura of a private club in its soft lighting and wood-paneled walls hung with framed prints of horses and hunting scenes.
A second, noisier room (for smokers) has a high, pressed-tin ceiling and faces a bustling bar.
Shawn's menu is different but it still reflects current tastes, which means pastas and pizzas along with dishes that suggest the New American influence and a few original ones as well.


Hey, Guys, He Meant It On Those Exercise Lists
Memo to the Rangers:
Remember those summer conditioning schedules you got from your new coach, Mike Keenan?
The ones listing the daily regimens of weight training, aerobics, flexibility exercises, nutrition and the like?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CLASSICAL STUDIES A SOCIAL HISTORY OF GREECE AND ROME By Michael Grant. Scribners, $20.


Miss Williamson, Mr. McCarthy
Whitney Lynne Williamson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Williamson of Bronxville, N.Y., and Shelter Island, L.I., was married yesterday to Edmond Dennis McCarthy 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
McCarthy 2d of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Peter MacLean performed the Episcopal ceremony in Shelter Island Heights, L.I., at the Union Chapel in the Grove.


Less Management, Please, and More Care
To the Editor:
"Betting the Farm" explained well how managed care works, and in so explaining, raised many questions.


Quarterbacks Wanted: Some Travel Is Required
Pro football's training camps opened last week, and players will soon complain that seven weeks of camp is too long.
Maybe so.
But for beleaguered fans trying to keep up with all the player movement under the new unrestricted free agency, seven weeks may not be long enough to figure out who has gone where and why.
The free-agency period ended Thursday, providing new homes for such non-quarterbacks as Reggie White, Ronnie Lott, Tim McDonald, Will Wolford, Pierce Holt and Gary Clark.


Saturday in the Park With George


World Markets; High Scores for Mutual Funds Abroad
ANYONE seeking proof of the axiom that investors look to the future -- and care little about the present -- can find it this year in the performance of foreign stock markets.
Even as Japan and much of Europe succumbed to or continued to flirt with recession, mutual funds investing there in anticipation of recovery have produced double-digit returns following a long period of lagging performance.


Taking On the Behemoths of Finance
WHEN Hugh L. McColl Jr. decided to build a new headquarters here for his company, the Nationsbank Corporation, he wanted not merely an office building, but a skyscraper.
So he hired the architect of the World Financial Center in New York and commissioned a 60-story, crown-topped tower.
Soaring above anything else within hundreds of miles like a pin stuck in a map, the building, completed last year, seems to assert that Nationsbank is as important a financial player as any in New York.
A pretentious notion?
Maybe once, but no longer.
Since taking over a medium-sized North Carolina bank in 1983, Mr.
McColl has built through a series of bold acquisitions a banking behemoth with 2,000 branches from Texas to Maryland.
The company is closing in on Chemical Banking to become the country's third-largest bank by total assets, behind only Citicorp and BankAmerica.


'The Persian Boy'
To the Editor:
Nigel Nicolson mistakenly described the circumstances surrounding Bagoas' castration in his review of "Mary Renault: A Biography" by David Sweetman (June 27).
Mr.
Nicolson writes that Bagoas was castrated by Darius, but readers of "The Persian Boy" will recall that the slave boy was kidnapped and castrated by the men who killed his father, Artembares.
After being gelded, Bagoas was sold to a jeweler.
Several years passed before Bagoas entered Darius' household.
CHARLES FUSS Port Chester, N.Y.


Pain, Politics and Crown Heights
On Tuesday, two years minus 24 days since racial violence erupted in the Crown Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn, a 600-page state report is to be released offering the most complete version to date of what went on and what went wrong during the most calamitous episode of the Dinkins administration.
But the chances that the two-volume effort will bring a sense of closure to the painful events seem slight.
And this is only in part because wounds still cut deep across racial and religious lines, and because no one has been prosecuted for the deaths that have fixed four days of turbulence in the public mind -- of a black child struck by a car and of a Hasidic scholar believed to have been slain in retribution.


Some Novel Ideas For Distinctive Mint
I WENT down to the garden recently and was confronted by a sea of mint.
As any gardener knows, this herb will take over the whole place if you are not careful.
But I love the smell, which reminds me of Morocco, were small boys wander the market selling huge bunches of mint for tea.
The leaves are infused into a green tea that is brewed in a metal pot and flavored with spoonfuls of sugar.
On a hot day, there is nothing more refreshing.
Oddly enough, mint is underused in our kitchens.
Sprigs decorate desserts or summer drinks, but you don't see this herb much with savory dishes.


Streetscape: Bickford's; The Flaying of a Midtown East Art Deco Oddity
IF a building with its cornice stripped off is called scalped, then the tiny, Art Deco Bickford's at the northeast corner of 45th Street and Lexington Avenue has been flayed alive.
It was a memorable midtown sight, a jazzy, polychrome terra-cotta facade built in 1930 for the food-outlet chain that sought to rival Horn &amp; Hardart.
Now the exterior has been stripped and there are conflicting accounts of how New York has lost one more of its little landmarks.


2 Finalists Battle for an Expanded Unicef
A FINAL decision is expected by early October in the long-running bid battle between New York City and New Rochelle over which city will become the host for the expansion of Unicef, the Manhattan-based United Nations relief organization for children.
Both cities have offered tantalizing packages of financial incentives.
New Rochelle is proposing to build a 20-story building -- which would also become the centerpiece of the city's downtown revitalization efforts -- for the agency.
New York City has proposed buying additional office space.
The competition is unusually intense because at least six other United Nations agencies are considering moving their headquarters from the East Side of Manhattan to New Rochelle, San Francisco and Bonn..


In America; Clinton Caves In
He didn't fight, he caved.
The details are still to come but the betrayal is a done deal.
President Clinton has O.K.'d the plan to keep the closet door closed on gays in the military.
Thus, another promise broken and another group of Clinton supporters deceived and disillusioned.


Curbing Fungus
Wondering what those six-inch black growths are on the branches of your plum or cherry tree?
It's black knot, caused by the fungus Dibotryon morbosum, according to the Cornell Cooperative Extension Service in Nassau County, L.I.
Prune all the growths out of the trees, three to four inches into good wood; otherwise, the spores of the fungus will keep spreading.
With each cut, clean the blades of your pruners with bleach, so as not to help spread the disease.
It's not a good idea to spray with fungicides now, because trees arefruiting.
If you must use a fungicide, call your local cooperative extension agent for advice.


HAITIANS ACHIEVE 'POLITICAL TRUCE'
By signing an agreement for a "political truce" early this morning, representatives of Haiti's political factions opened the way to the next step in the complicated process of solving the country's political crisis -- the selection and ratification of a prime minister.
The various parties agreed in effect to recognize the current Parliament as a legal entity authorized to approve a Government.


Measuring the Threat of Power Lines
THE looming presence of transmission power lines near a handful of Westchester schools has been an unremarkable fact of life for students and their parents for decades.
At worst, they were considered unattractive reminders of the realities of modern life in the suburbs.
But in more recent years, those same lines, many installed more than 20 years ago, are being viewed with suspicion and fear that the electromagnetic fields emanating from the lines may pose a threat to children's health.


Deborah Brightman, Egidio Farone
Deborah Elizabeth Brightman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Brightman of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Egidio A. Farone, a son of the late Dominick and Josephine Farone.
Cantor David Benedict and the Rev.
Charles Fink jointly officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Farone is the manager of client development and public relations at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton in New York.
A magna cum laude graduate of Boston University, she also teaches management at New York University's School of Continuing Education.


Politicians in Japan Finding Rewards in Talk Shows
Japan leads the world in the production of televisions and fax machines, but political campaigns here are far from high-tech and candidates are only beginning to explore the power of television.
Under laws to prevent "confusion," -- a favorite Japanese argument for restricting price competition as well -- candidates are limited in the types of pamphlets they may hand out and they may hang posters only on designated billboards.
The posters, all the same size, are restricted to what amounts to a glorified mug shot.


Miriam Kelliher, Robert Epstein
Miriam Julia Kelliher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Kelliher of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert William Epstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jacob Epstein of Atlanta.
Judge Philip S. Carchman of the Superior Court of New Jersey performed the ceremony at the Castle, a mansion, at Boston University.
Ms.
Kelliher is a staff counsel for the Massachusetts Office of the Inspector General in Boston.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and she received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is an editor of The Wall Street Journal in New York.
Her mother, Margaret Kelliher, is a buyer for Christopher's Books in Summit.


Sondra Slivon, Anthony Martinez
Sondra Esten Slivon, the daughter of Fred and Roberta Slivon of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Anthony Rubio Martinez, the son of Anthony G. Martinez of Huron, Calif., and Alicia Matthews of Pleasanton, Calif.
The Rev.
Ray Baskin performed the Episcopal ceremony at Domain Michel, a winery in Healdsburg, Calif.
Mrs.
Slivon Martinez, 29, graduated from Duke University and is a candidate for a master's degree in teaching at National-Louis University.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president at R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons in New York, a printing company.


Jesse Sepulveda Jr. Is Dead at 7; Spurred Debate on Medical Ethics
Jesse D. Sepulveda Jr., whose heart transplant in 1986 when he was 16 days old stirred a national debate over medical ethics and led to the creation of a new Federal organ donor system, died Friday after a second heart transplant.
He was 7 and lived in Los Angeles.
His death was announced by Loma Linda University Medical Center in Loma Linda, Calif., where he had received both transplants.


Collaborating With a 'Perfectionist and Visionary'
The partnership of Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis was one of the dance world's more enduring relationships.
Beginning tomorrow at the Joyce Theater, the Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company will present "Nikolais: Remarkable Retrospective," a two-week tribute to the choreographer, who died in May at age 82.
His companion for more than four decades, Murray Louis, reflects on their collaboration.
After so many years together, Nik and I somehow merged into a single identity.
We were known as Nik and Murray.
This held true in our private life, which was a long one, lasting 44 years.
But in our creative work we were very different individuals, a difference that was easily perceptible onstage.
Without that difference any collaboration between us would not have been possible.
He approached his work from the outside, painting the stage with light and color, while I worked from the interior, with much concern for choreographic details.


INSIDE
How Much Reform in Japan?
As Japanese vote in crucial parliamentary elections, many are wondering how much they want to change a system that made their nation the world's second-richest.
Page 8.
Goal of Croats and Serbs
Serbs and Croats, Serbian nationalists are looking beyond ethnic partitioning to extinguish Muslims as an independent political force.
Page 8.
Tribe Expects a Jackpot
The Oneida Indians of central New York State, once destitute, brace for a flood of gambling dollars.
Page 25.


'Merry Wives' Outdoors At Festival at Boscobel
WHEN things go badly with the outdoor Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival's "Merry Wives of Windsor," and they do, you might look to the accouterments of the night for deliverance.
For a time.
In the Windsor Park scene, as urchins, elves and fairies gang up on Falstaff to make a final fool of the abdominous lecher, the hobgoblins and their flashlights seem to materialize out of the trees and off the rocks -- phantoms of the Boscobel estate gardens or maybe even spirits from the Hudson River, to name the twin peaks of the festival tent's wondrous setting.


Kim Skraptis, Gordon Sweely
Kim T. Skraptis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Skraptis of Smithtown, L.I., was married yesterday to Gordon G. Sweely, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Sweely of Big Flats, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph Staudt performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Parish of St.
Patrick in Bayshore, L.I.


CRIME
If "any idiot can write a book," as someone claims in THE HORSE YOU CAME IN ON (Knopf, $21), then what's to stop an ambitious student from faking a story by Edgar Allan Poe?
And who's to say, as someone also does in Martha Grimes's waggish new mystery, that literary theft might not be a wickeder crime than murder?
The ethics of authorship come in for lively discussion in a clever, if shapeless, story that works these literary matters into a novel set in Baltimore and involving the apparently unrelated murders of a Poe scholar, a museum curator and a derelict.
Although it takes pages and pages for the American author to get her English sleuths packed for their field trip, once Superintendent Richard Jury of Scotland Yard and his aristocratic sidekick, Melrose Plant, are here, they have a jolly holiday.


Tuned to an Era Before Boom Boxes and Walkmen
After 15 years of collecting, Roger Handy, a secondhand dealer and harmonica player, says he has more transistor radios in his sock drawer than anything else.
And although space is tight in his Santa Monica, Calif., apartment, he can't resist buying examples of the world's first tiny radios.
"What gets me is the size -- they're not much bigger than a pack of cigarettes," explains Mr.
Handy, who was born in 1947, the year transistors were invented at Bell Laboratories.
"It's also the 50's colors -- turquoise, coral, pink and green -- and the Studebaker styling."


Debate Over Levees
As the Mississippi River continues to swamp cropland and force thousands of people from their homes, a debate is taking shape in Washington and the Midwest over whether to rebuild the levees that have been washed away or to dismantle some so that floodwaters in the future would be allowed to cover some low-lying areas, effectively turning them into temporary reservoirs, just as nature intended.
Article, page 23.


Karajan Faces Stiff Competition: Karajan
Among musicians there is a store of jokes about all the great conductors.
The ones about Herbert von Karajan are singular in that almost every punch line makes the same essential point.
Here's a sample: Karajan goes to the undertaker and wants to look at coffins -- something simple and economical, please.
The undertaker interprets this in his own way and shows various models of fine material and elegant design, each of which is rejected.
Finally the conductor insists on being shown simple wooden coffins and selects one.
Undertaker, pained: "But tell me, Herr von Karajan, why, for such an important occasion, should you economize?" Karajan, calm: "And why should I spend a fortune when I'm only staying three days?"
In fact Karajan was not so trusting about resurrection; he was more like the ancient pharaohs, providing elaborately for his posthumous comfort.
The central project of his last decade was to document on film, for eventual release on laser disk, the core repertory he had conducted and recorded so often during his remarkable career. (It was typical of his confidence that he conceived this series on such a grand scale before the commercial viability of the laser disk had even been tested.) An enormous first installment is now available from Sony Classical, dominating the orchestral video market by sheer quantity.
But the vagaries of the recording industry have provided the series with fierce competition: Karajan's own earlier videos, issued in roughly equivalent quantity by Deutsche Grammophon.


EXIT THE QUEEN
I read with interest A. N. Wilson's article "Exit the Queen. All Hail the Duke of Gloucester" (June 13).
Passing over Prince Charles reminds me of the serious consideration given to bypassing the Duke of York in favor of the Duke of Kent during the Edward VIII crisis, and that didn't fly, either.
It must be borne in mind that the whole upper tier of the British aristocracy fancies itself better bred than the royals themselves (foreigners) -- something the royals have nodded to in choosing wives (English roses) from the great old families, e.g., Diana Spencer.


Less Management, Please, and More Care
To the Editor:
Regarding "Betting the Farm on Managed Care" (June 27): It is precisely in farm country that no medical network like the Cigna Corporation's will ever enter.
As you point out, the Cignas of the world require densities of both population and medical personnel to prosper, and the Shenandoah Valley, among many other places, does not have that.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
There were no Senate votes last week.
House
1.
Stearns en bloc amendments: Will reduce the $175 million in appropriated funds for the National Endowment for the Arts by 5 percent.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
N
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
8. Klein (D) . . .
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Menendez (D) . . .
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . (A)
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
7. Manton (D) . . .
N
8. Nadler (D) . . .
N
9. Schumer (D) . . .
N
10. Towns (D) . . . (A)
11. Owens (D) . . .
N
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
N
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
N
15. Rangel (D) . . .
N
16. Serrano (D) . . .
N
17. Engel (D) . . .
N
18. Lowey (D) . . .
N
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
N
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
N
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


THIS YEAR'S PROPHET
I learned a lot about Michael Lerner from your article: he has a healthy ego and an overbearing personality, is opinionated and long-winded and likes to hear himself talk.
He had an out-of-wedlock child, is divorced and, according to "other reports," has moved to New York City to meet eligible Jewish women.
He speaks like a teen-ager.
He's disheveled and wears shapeless suits with scuffed shoes.
His writing is wordy and biased, etc., etc., etc.


Corrections
Because of a computer error, a table last Sunday listing the stocks on the American Stock Exchange that had the largest weekly price gains in percentage terms erroneously included the Samuel Goldwyn Company.
Goldwyn's actual gain for the week was not enough to put it on the list.


James T. Prendergast, Manhattan Lawyer, 62
James T. Prendergast, a lawyer who specialized in home health care legislation, died on Wednesday at the Jacob Perlow Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 62 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was brain cancer, his family said.


Silence Erupts Downtown, as Noise Patrol Strikes
Police officers and environmental inspectors armed with decibel meters swept through lower Manhattan on Friday night and early yesterday morning, confiscating 22 cars whose stereos were torturing weary residents with head-thumping music.
A month after they struck in Washington Heights, the city's anti-noise crusaders set up traps in Greenwich Village and the East Village to address what many politicians say is one of the most frequent complaints in New York City: an unbearable excess of sound, particularly at night.


Kerry Pollicino, Thomas Brady Jr.
Kerry Pollicino, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Pollicino of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Thomas Brady Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brady of Newton, Conn.
The Rev.
John Denniston performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Brady, 27, teaches the second grade at the Cantiague Elementary School in Jericho, L.I.
She and her husband graduated from Fairfield University, and she received a master's degree in early childhood education from Fordham University.
Her father is the vice chairman of the CIT Group Inc., the financial services company, in New York.


In the 90's, 'Tommy' Plays a Fancier Pinball
When The Who released its rock opera "Tommy" in 1969, people who didn't like it criticized the ambitious double album as bombastic, pretentious and obvious.
Who'd have thought that these are exactly the qualities that would make the Broadway version a smash in 1993?
While it was a huge commercial success, the original "Tommy" has always seemed overblown, its pencil-thin story -- of a deaf, dumb and blind boy who "sure plays a mean pinball" -- barely able to support its music.
On the Great White Way, however, this flaw becomes an asset, since elemental rock needs to be inflated -- expanded, arranged, orchestrated -- to fill a Broadway stage with sufficient drama, pacing and glitz.
The new cast album, entitled "The Who's 'Tommy' " (RCA, 09026-61874-2; 2 CD's and cassettes), documents the ways the director Des McAnuff's stage version has shrewdly reinterpreted Pete Townshend's creation.


Airline Smoking
To the Editor: I am a Latin teacher who recently escorted a group of 40 people on a trip to Italy.
A nightmare group check-in with T.W.A. a few years ago nearly caused some of us to miss the plane.
So this time my travel agent booked Alitalia.
Two weeks before the flight I received a manifest from Alitalia showing my group all in a nonsmoking section.


A la Carte; The Little Brother in a Greenport Storefront
ALDO'S is a tiny easy-to-miss storefront restaurant in Greenport.
It does not have as impressive a setting as its big brother on Shelter Island.
But the menu is much the same, the food is as good, and the prices are noticeably lower.
Furthermore, Aldo's at 103 Front Street (477-1699), has been there longer than its Dering Harbor counterpart.
Its antique furniture, pressed-tin ceiling, slate floors, wicker baskets and old-fashioned hanging-light globes also give it more character and more authenticity.
Dining at Aldo's in Dering Harbor means nautical vistas, trees and sunsets.
At the countrified French bistro in Greenport no-nonsense regulars sit down to eat at old wood tables, much as they would in their grandmothers' kitchens.


Fetus Parts Found in Abortion Clinic Trash
A dismembered fetus was discovered in a pile of garbage outside a Manhattan abortion clinic on Friday when a plastic bag being carried by private trash collectors broke open, the police said.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, said the body parts were discovered by workers from the Knickerbocker Recycling Company outside the Eastern Women's Clinic at 38 East 30th Street about 6 A.M.
Friday.
Officials of the clinic did not respond to telephone messages yesterday.


Craig Wasserman and Marla Weinstein
Mr. and Mrs.
Stan Weinstein of Hollywood, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marla J. Weinstein to Craig M. Wasserman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bert W. Wasserman of Old Westbury, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Weinstein, 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she received a law degree in May.
In the fall, she is to become a clerk for Judge Edward Cahn, the chief judge of the United States District Court for the eastern district of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia.
Her father is the editor and publisher of The Professional Tape Reader, a stock-market newsletter in Hollywood.


Pavin Ties Faldo at 8 Under as Pack Closes In
On a tense, cotton-mouth afternoon when Royal St.
George's was rigged to play at its bone-dry hardest, Nick Faldo switched modes from birdie-maker to par-producer today and clung to a share of the lead going into Sunday's final round of the 122d British Open.
Dogging Faldo's even-par 70 all the way was a ravenous pack, led by the terrier-like Corey Pavin, who rode two long birdie putts to a 68 that tied the Englishman at eight-under-par 202.


Perspectives: Albany's New Rent Law; For Almost All Tenants, Little Change
NEW rent laws from Albany are often filled with arcane details that affect thousands of tenants and owners.
The Rent Regulation Reform Act of 1993, enacted this month, is no exception.
Most public attention has focused on its impact on wealthy rent-regulated tenants, and in that respect it is clear that these privileged people have no cause to shake in their boots.
The dynamics of Albany politics worked to protect all but a handful of wealthy renters from the presumed horrors of deregulation.


Where a Farmer Named Verdi Occasionally Composed Music
The 18th-Century historian Edward Gibbon observed that there is perhaps no "more exquisite gratification than to revisit, in conspicuous dignity, the humble and laborious scenes of our youth." No great artist has ever felt a stronger attachment to his place of origin than Giuseppe Verdi.
In 1848, at 34, already internationally acclaimed, he returned to his native farmland near the country town of Busseto, midway between Parma and Cremona, not only to visit but to stay.
He made it his home for 53 years until his death, in 1901.
While temporarily lodging in Busseto, he acquired property in the neighboring hamlet of Sant'Agata -- "a hut in such poor condition," he wrote, "so humble . . . that I am ashamed to allow even my most intimate friends to see it" -- and set about the arduous task of rendering it habitable and establishing a farm.
The Villa Verdi, with its serene Parma-yellow facade and green shutters, stands today in solitary distinction in its farmlands, just as it did 100 years ago.


Jennifer Hough and Francis Conley
Jennifer Keyes Hough, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Hough of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Francis Joseph Conley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Conley of Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
David Eusden performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church of New Canaan.
Mrs.
Conley, 26, graduated from Sweet Briar College and received a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of Jack Hough Associates, a corporate communications firm in Norwalk, Conn.


Dialing Away Dollars in Hotels
THE hotel amenity that makes everyone mad these days is the telephone.
From the minute you pick it up, it seems to eat money, starting with surcharges for calls to "free" 800 numbers all the way down to charges for calls you try to make but go unanswered.
In many cases, letting a child into the minibar would be cheaper.
The worst situation appears to be dialing a long-distance call, with the toll to be charged to your room bill.
Even when you dial every digit yourself, it will probably be billed at the higher operator-assisted rate, and there will be a surcharge beyond that, which may be as high as 50 percent of the cost of the call.
Sometimes the surcharge is by the call, sometimes by the minute, sometimes a combination.
Using a credit card linked to your regular phone company, either to charge the call or to call collect, will get you around this.
But the hotel may not let you get away with it without dinging you for the call to reach your phone company: 75 cents is a typical charge.


The Chill of Extinction
SEPARATE ROOMS By Pier Vittorio Tondelli.
Translated by Simon Pleasance. 186 pp.
New York: Serpent's Tail.
Paper, $14.99.


Bosnia's Plight Divides the State Department
SECRETARY OF STATE Warren Christopher was not pleased when details from a classified State Department paper on options for easing the misery in Sarajevo surfaced in a news report last week.
The leak was the most recent in a stream involving classified State Department papers about Bosnia, and as one aide to Mr.
Christopher put it, "It looks bad with his colleagues that he can't keep his people quiet."
Mid-ranking foreign service officers who work on Bosnia policy were quickly ordered to draw up lists of colleagues who might have seen the memo.
But there was a problem.
The memo had started as a working paper in the computer system, and it could have been seen by dozens of State Department people.


Fish Feast
In Amagansett, L.I., a gourmet lunch benefits the Rainforest Alliance conservation programs.


Corrections
A movie listing in the Arts and Leisure guide today misstates the title of a program of short films opening on Wednesday at the Village East Cinemas.
The program is entitled "Boys' Shorts: The New Queer Cinema."


Famous, for Sure, but With a Future Unknown
He is 2 months old now, red-coated and frisky, weighing about twice the 134 pounds he scaled at birth, and he is eternally nosy about the people doting on him at the Three Chimneys farm, where he has become the most famous horse born in the United States this year because he was the first foal of Genuine Risk.
She was the filly who made racing history in 1980 by winning the Kentucky Derby, a feat achieved by only three fillies in 119 years.
Then she made medical history by enduring 12 years of miscarriages and misfortunes before delivering her first foal on May 15 at the age of 16.


The Lady-in-Waiting
Lihli wants to be the new name on the lips of the ladies who lunch.
Lihli, who, like her mentor, Adolfo, does not use her last name, owns the Long Island City factory that manufactured the knits for Adolfo's suits for 20 years.
So when he decided to close his East 57th Street salon last winter, Lihli decided she'd fill the void by producing Adolfo-like suits with a Lihli label.
But there may not be a huge demand for her clothes right away.
"Many of the customers ordered a lot right before Adolfo closed," she said.
"They thought they'd never be able to get these suits again. One lady ordered 17."


Rosemary Curran and Joseph Chapey
ALMOST every summer weekend, Rosemary Curran and Joseph Chapey sail to Point O'Woods, Fire Island, a gated community of which Mr.
Chapey is a member.
You need a key to open the gates and, once inside, you feel as if you've just stepped onto the set of the movie "Summer of '42."
Inside, everyone travels by rusty three-speed bicycles; the houses are sun-bleached the color of dried pine cones, and the ambiance, as recently described by one resident, is "very ladies and gentlemen."


Made in the U.S.A.? -- Hard Labor on a Pacific Island/A special report.; Saipan Sweatshops Are No American Dream
On this tiny, tropical outpost of the United States, many people describe what happens to foreign workers here as something close to servitude.
Every year, thousands of laborers from China, the Philippines and elsewhere in Asia are flown here.
The workers are often bused straight from the airport to squalid barracks where they live -- sometimes for years -- as many as a dozen to a room.


Linda Berrafati, Thomas Moran
Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald J. Berrafati of Irvington, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Linda Christine Berrafati to Thomas Paul Moran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Moran of Woburn, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Berrafati, 27, is an assistant corporation counsel in Brooklyn for the New York City Law Department.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from George Washington University.


Abigail Spizzirri And Eric Kamen
Abigail Adams Spizzirri, a daughter of Lucy Forkner Greene of Greenwich, Conn., and Richard D. Spizzirri of New York, was married yesterday to Eric Alexander Kamen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
George Kamen of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Randolpf W. Becker, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the weekend home of the bride's father in East Hampton, L.I.
The bride is a school psychologist at Junior High School 45 in Manhattan.
She graduated from Hamilton and Kirkland Colleges and received master's degrees in special education and in school psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Thomas A. Greene.


SURFACING
ACCESSORIES -- Color-tinted sunglasses: Once, they were "psychedelic." Now they're mainstreaming, with sales multiplying exponentially at eyewear boutiques this year.
Shades range from basic blues to outrageous oranges and yellows.
FOOD -- Merguez sausage: This hot Moroccan delicacy -- links of ground lamb accented with its namesake paprikalike spice -- is supplanting Italian sausages on many grills this summer ($5.99 a pound at Balducci's).
STATEMENTS -- Mike Tyson T-shirts: A hot seller for street vendors, they are worn mostly by African-American men.
The shirts feature a steely likeness of the jailed ex-champ and the words "I'll Be Back."


Informer, Not Sheik, Holds Key to Bomb Plot; Egypt of the West?
To the Editor:
"Not So Fast on the Sheik" (editorial, July 8) is most disturbing.
Just before Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman presented himself to the Immigration and Naturalization Service authorities at the firehouse in front of the mosque in Brooklyn, he asked me rhetorically, "Is America becoming another Egypt?" -- meaning a country where freedom of speech and the press is limited by the government.
You fail to note that in Egypt, Israel, Iraq and other backward countries, "administrative detention" for six months or a year or indefinitely is ordered without reference to the judicial process.
In more civilized lands, such detention is given for 48 hours or 72 hours or four days, at most five days, after which the government presents its case to a court of law.


Louise Kyriakis, Michael Kaufman
Louise Stanton Kyriakis, the daughter of Robin Little and William C. Kyriakis, both of New York, was married on Friday to Michael Philip Kaufman, a son of Caryl Kaufman of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Jack Kaufman.
The Rev.
Dr.
David R. Adamovich officiated at a nondenominational ceremony at Bridgewaters in New York.


JULY 11-17: In Last Week's Episode . . .; Coma Newspaper Sits Up And Resumes Publishing
After shutting down The New York Post for two days, Rupert Murdoch last week won what he said were the union concessions he needed to move into the final phase of what may be the most drawn-out purchase of a newspaper ever.
To buy The Post again, Mr.
Murdoch, who lost $150 million when he owned it from 1976 to 1988, must now deal with creditors of the newspaper when it was owned by Peter S. Kalikow.
Mr.
Kalikow, of course, bought The Post, which proclaims itself the country's oldest continuously published daily paper, from Mr.
Murdoch and then lost millions on it before giving up in January.


Montana Now a Part Of Show-Me Country
Joe Montana, his thin body tanned and his shaggy brown hair slightly tousled, strode off the bus early this morning, wearing blue shorts and a white T-shirt and looking less like a four-time Super Bowl champion quarterback and more like an aging surfer.
He walked through a phalanx of autograph seekers, never stopping, but signing for two people as he made the 20-yard dash to the door of Hunt Arena, which is serving as locker room for the Chiefs's practice facility at Ramer Field on the campus of Wisconsin-River Falls.


Green Thumbs At Work
To the Editor:
Thanks to Bob Morris ("The Night," June 27) for his lyrical and well-deserved tribute to the Liz Christy Bowery-Houston Community Garden, celebrating its 20th anniversary.


Manager's ProfileDavid K. Schafer
Fund: Schafer Value; $18.3 million in assets.
Manager since 1985 inception. (Sponsor: Schafer Capital, New York).
Born: April 16, 1939; Petersburg, Ind.


Custodian at TriBeCa Building Is Found Slain on Loading Dock
A 50-year-old TribeCa apartment building custodian was found shot to death yesterday morning in what was an apparent robbery, a police spokesman said.
The man, who was identified as Louis Santos of 328 E. 14th Street, was discovered at 9:20 A.M. by sanitation workers in the loading dock area in the rear of the building at 260 West Broadway, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a Police Department spokesman.
Mr.
Santos had been killed by two shots to the head, Sgt.
McCluskey said.


Iron Bird Pursues Iron Horse in Baseball's Durability Race
When the New York Yankees' Lou Gehrig prepared to suit up for his 2,000th consecutive game on May 31, 1938, his wife, Eleanor, tried to plead the case for him to halt at 1,999.
"Skip it against the Red Sox today," she implored.
"People will always remember the streak better at 1,999."


Some Novel Ideas For Distinctive Mint
I WENT down to the garden recently and was confronted by a sea of mint.
As any gardener knows, this herb will take over the whole place if you are not careful.
But I love the smell, which reminds me of Morocco, were small boys wander the market selling huge bunches of mint for tea.
The leaves are infused into a green tea that is brewed in a metal pot and flavored with spoonfuls of sugar.
On a hot day, there is nothing more refreshing.
Oddly enough, mint is underused in our kitchens.
Sprigs decorate desserts or summer drinks, but you don't see this herb much with savory dishes.


JULY 11-17: Family Values Has a Bad Day; Motherhood and Marriage Getting Further Apart
It turns out that there may be more Murphy Browns than many people thought.
Or so suggests a new Census Bureau study, which measured the number of well-educated, professional women who have children without getting married.
The Census Bureau, of course, did not mention the fictional Ms.
Brown, the unmarried television anchorwoman whose pregnancy drew a rebuke last year from Dan Quayle.


Exploring the Sorcery of the Theater
ON a recent Sunday the David Black gallery in Kent -- where Peoplescapes (24 paintings by David Black) and Landscapes (26 paintings by David Black) were on exhibit -- was hopping.
And displayed in the window of the town's bookstore was "The Magic of Theater" (18 conversations with 33 actors, conducted by David Black).
"I want to become a star," said a 9-year-old browser named Kirsten to Mr.
Black when he showed up for the book signing.
Mr.
Black may not be able to tell Kirsten, whose mother bought a signed copy, exactly how to become a star, but the ones quoted in the book might offer some inspiration along the way.
William Hurt, for one, talks of theater as a communal experience of strangers bravely solving their humanity together.


Cindy Richheimer, Scott Bloom
October wedding plans have been announced by H. Otto Richheimer and Grace G. Richheimer, both of Great Neck, L.I., for their daughter Cindy Jo Richheimer and Scott Michael Bloom, a son of Robert D. Bloom of New York and Deanna J. Bloom of Great Neck.


POSTINGS: 450,000 Sq. Ft. for Sublets; Union Carbide Seeking Tenants for Danbury
Finding tenants for 450,000 square feet of suburban office space in this glutted market is no small task.
Finding sublet tenants for that amount would be a herculean feat.
But that's what Union Carbide is trying to do with the space it has vacant at the 1.2 million square foot Danbury, Conn., complex it built for its own use in the late 70's.
In 1987, Carbide sold the complex, until now known as Carbide Center, to Sunbelt Investment, but immediately leased it back.


A Day So Beautiful That a Kiss in a Tree Made Perfect Sense


A Fitting Choice For Baltimore Sale
WITH the American Numismatic Association holding its World's Fair of Money on July 28-Aug. 1 in Baltimore, it seems fitting that the first coin to be sold at the Superior Galleries Baltimore '93 Auction on July 26 will be a 1658 Maryland Lord Baltimore sixpence in Very Fine condition.
Lord Baltimore coins are rare today, and Very Fine examples often go for $5,000 or more.
The three denominations of Lord Baltimore's silver coins are the groat, or fourpence, the sixpence and the shilling, and all have a portrait of Cecil Calvert on the obverse and the family crest of arms on the reverse surrounded by the inscription "crescite et multiplicamini" (increase and multiply).
A fourth type, a copper alloy penny, is extremely rare and is thought to have been only a pattern piece, a prototype of a coin that never reached production.


Skinhead Violence Grows, Experts Say
The arrest this week of eight white supremacists who officials said wanted to incite a race war in Southern California comes at a time of rising violence by skinheads who form the shock troops for the neo-Nazi movement in America, experts on hate groups say.
Skinheads in this country have not previously been tied to wholesale acts of terrorism, but the Federal Bureau of Investigation says some of those arrested in Los Angeles were members of a skinhead group that was plotting to bomb the First African Methodist Episcopal Church there and shoot worshipers.


Mutual Funds; The Knack for Timing a Stock Sale
FOR most people, buying stocks is easy, but selling them isn't.
Over time, however, locking in profits maximizes returns and minimizes volatility, as mutual fund managers can and do testify.
For most managers, timing a stock sale is more art than science, although strict disciplines are sometimes in evidence.
As many issues hover around all-time highs in today's hot stock market, the selling strategies of some top-flight money managers offer guidance.
*
William M. Dutton, who runs Skyline Special Equities, looks for cheap stocks among the small-capitalization issues.
He tries to buy stocks with price-earnings multiples of about 13 or 14 times trailing 12-month earnings.
"If I'm right," he said about the prospects of growth at a company, "the earnings will come in nicely and the multiple increases once the stock is discovered." That new multiple is his key figure: He sells when it matches the market multiple, now about 18 or 19 times trailing earnings.


Counting Stars
To the Editor:
The "puff piece" done on the Mirage in Las Vegas ("Fooling with Nature," July 11) was just that -- a puff piece.
While this was an article on the Mirage only, perhaps it should be pointed out to your readers that the Mobil Travel Guide, the most prestigious and looked-to source in the travel and leisure industry, rated the Mirage a three-star hotel, while rating all three of my Atlantic City properties, Trump Plaza, Trump's Castle and the Taj Mahal, four-star properties.
Only Caesars Palace in Las Vegas was rated 4 stars in 1992 and 1993; no other properties in Atlantic City rated that distinction.
DONALD J. TRUMP New York


Helping Disturbed Children
To the Editor:
Having interned for a year at a not-for-profit child guidance agency where disturbed children are treated, I must take issue with Louise Armstrong and her book "And They Call It Help" (June 20).


From 6-Year-Old's Heart, Aid for Fresh Air Fund
Every Friday for six weeks, 6-year-old Michael Klein slid a quarter into his Tzedakah jar before he and his family sat down to Sabbath dinner.
Tzedakah means charity in Hebrew, and Michael's fund of quarters to help those less fortunate came from the $1 his parents gave him each week for doing chores.


Big Duck
To the Editor:
Referring to your Posting on the Big Duck on May 23  [ "A 30's Relic Reopening on Long Island" ] , I would like to set the record straight.


The Assault on Children
OPERATION WANDERING SOUL By Richard Powers. 352 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


What Wasn't Said About Cotton
To the Editor:
Your June 20 article "The Cotton Brief" does a disservice to your readers and more than one million Americans who are involved in production and marketing of American cotton.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR GET YOUR TONGUE OUT OF MY MOUTH, I'M KISSING YOU GOOD-BYE By Cynthia Heimel.
Atlantic Monthly, $20.


Hope Stolley, R. H. Sugarman
Anne S. Stolley of Old Greenwich, Conn., and Richard B. Stolley of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Hope Stolley to Randall Howard Sugarman, a son of Penny F. Jacobs and Burton R. Sugarman, both of Los Angeles.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stolley, who is known as Hope, is a music coordinator at New Regency Productions, a film production company in Burbank, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her father, who retired as the editorial director of Time Inc. in New York, is the senior editorial adviser to Time Inc.


Youth Sought In Arson Fire That Left 75 Homeless
The police and fire investigators were searching for a 16-year-old youth yesterday in connection with an arson fire that destroyed six Brooklyn buildings Friday evening.
The five-alarm fire began behind 108 Scholes Street in Williamsburg about 7:30 P.M.
Friday and spread along Manhattan Avenue.
Fire investigators said it was arson, set in an alley behind the building.


Sarah Wendt, Rick Del Sontro
Mr. and Mrs.
Gary C. Wendt of Stamford, Conn., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Emily Wendt and Rick Nicholas Del Sontro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominick Del Sontro of Lakewood, N.J.
Miss Wendt, 24, is fund-raiser for the American Heart Association in Gaithersburg, Md.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the G. E. Capital Corporation in Stamford.


Some Novel Ideas For Distinctive Mint
I WENT down to the garden recently and was confronted by a sea of mint.
As any gardener knows, this herb will take over the whole place if you are not careful.
But I love the smell, which reminds me of Morocco, were small boys wander the market selling huge bunches of mint for tea.
The leaves are infused into a green tea that is brewed in a metal pot and flavored with spoonfuls of sugar.
On a hot day, there is nothing more refreshing.
Oddly enough, mint is underused in our kitchens.
Sprigs decorate desserts or summer drinks, but you don't see this herb much with savory dishes.


George Eldridge and Mary Reilly
Mary Ellen Reilly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Reilly of Wayland, Mass., was married yesterday to George A. Eldridge, the son of Mrs.
Carleton G. Eldridge Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Eldridge.
The Rev.
Augustus S. McGuire, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Our Lady of Victory Church in Centerville, Mass.
Mrs.
Eldridge and her husband, both 30, graduated from Dartmouth College, she cum laude.
She is a senior product manager at Welch Foods Inc., the consumer products company in Concord, Mass.
Her father is a partner at Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm, in Boston.


Shortcoming In the Curriculum?
To the Editor:
Your article profoundly depicted America's love affair with guns through cinematic images that millions of people pay to view.
That article, combined with another in the same edition of The Times, "New Jersey's Ban on Assault Guns Has Little Effect on Violence," may offer solid evidence that the National Rifle Association is right: The American blood type (of both men and women) includes AK 47, M-16 and M-870.


Circuit Problem Delays Shuttle Launching
A bad firing circuit on explosive bolts intended to free the 18-story space shuttle Discovery from its launch pad forced the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to cancel the launching planned for this morning and postpone the nine-day mission for a week or so.
Until the launching was scrubbed, a half hour before the planned 9:22 A.M. liftoff, the countdown had proceeded flawlessly under clear Florida skies.


Mr. Steinbrenner's Threats
Once again, George Steinbrenner threatens to abandon the Bronx, and once again politicians quake and start throwing dollar signs around, the kind followed by large numbers.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo (up for re-election next year) raises the prospect of building a new ballpark for the Yankees on Manhattan's West Side, at a cost of $500 million to $1 billion.
Mayor David Dinkins (up for re-election this year) talks softly, and instructs his advisers to divine what would make Mr.
Steinbrenner happy.
What goes on here?
It's obvious.
The Mayor and Governor don't want to be the politicians who lost the Yankees, even if it means abandoning the House that Ruth built.
But as they struggle to appease Mr.
Steinbrenner, they're acting on political survival instincts rather than on sober information.
The public needs facts and figures, not guesses and political obfuscation.


The Mississippi Reclaims Its True Domain
NO one alive has seen the Father of Rivers yawn this high or this wide.
No one imagined the Mississippi or its relatives would take such liberties, consuming so many hamlets whole, or that, if they did, technology would be nearly helpless to stop them.
There have been floods before.
People in Hannibal, Mo., or Keokuk, Iowa, or Quincy, Ill., can tell you about watching their fathers and uncles pack sandbags to protect the year's corn crop or the feed store.
For generations, some farmers figured floods and droughts into the cost of doing business.
But then the country's big plumbing system of levees and dams, made better after every flood, was supposed to keep the rivers in their place and maintain the comfortable paradox of living on a floodplain.


Tech Notes; Heavy Lifting, Quantified
In the workplace, the infant science of ergonomics has yet to have much of an impact.
In many cases, workers are expected to adapt to working conditions and take care not to injure themselves, a practice that in 1991 contributed to 1.7 million disabling work injuries, according to data from the National Safety Council.
Back injuries -- 370,000 of them -- were the single largest category.
And each year, on average, some 40 percent of worker's compensation claims stem from lower-back injuries.
The typical job site is laid out to be the same for everyone, said Ed Dunlay, a vice president at the Chattanooga Group, a maker of rehabilitation products.
"The variable is the worker," he said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Assigned Steve Lyons, infielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Activated Luis Rivera, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Acquired Cris Carpenter, pitcher, from the Florida Marlins for Kurt Miller, and Robb Nen, pitchers.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Bip Roberts, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
SAN FRANCSICO GIANTS -- Recalled Greg Brummett, pitcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Greg Jeffries, Alonzo Hampton and Kevin Miniefield, cornerbacks; Antonio London, linebacker, and Aubrey Matthews, wide receiver.
Placed Michael Cofer and Tracy Hayworth, linebackers, and Ed Tillison, running back, on the physically unable to perform list.
Waived Antoine Bennett, cornerback.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Waived Victor Hall, tight end.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Mark Duper, wide receiver, and Kerry Glenn, defensive back.
Signed Mike Williams, wide receiver.
Agreed to terms with O.J.
McDuffie, wide receiver.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Agreed to terms with Gilbert Brown, defensive tackle.
Signed John Gerak, guard, and Ashley Sheppard, linebacker.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Released Reggie Redding and Keith Ballard, tackles.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Released Craig Taylor, fullback.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Victor Bailey, wide receiver, to a two-year contract plus an option year.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Darrien Gordon, cornerback, to a three-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Signed Craig Simpson, forward, to a three-year contract, and Kelly Miller, left wing, to an offer sheet.


Garbo: The Feet
To the Editor:
Helen Manley's letter to the editor refers to a review by Robert Plunket of Susan Fromberg Schaeffer's book "First Nights." Ms.
Manley makes the point that, in her words, "Garbo was not sensitive about her feet."


When Baring All to 4 Million Viewers Doesn't Help
HOW much longer can it be before there's a talk show devoted to the emotional trauma of appearing on a talk show?
Ever since talk shows were invented, pain, deviance and public humiliation have been at the center of their appeal.
In recent years, though, as the field has gotten more crowded -- there are now about 15 syndicated talk shows on the air -- the appetite for kinkiness has increased to the point where many psychologists are warning that the shows may be hazardous to the participants' health.


Best Sellers: July 18, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
49
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
3
18
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
1
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
4
2
7
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
5
6
4
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
6
5
14
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
4
7
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
8
8
4
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
9
9
11
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
10
1
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $23.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal and destroy the Declaration of Independence.
11
7
11
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
12
1
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (HarperCollins, $23.) The plight of a woman whose estranged husband is found murdered in her house.
13
12
2
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $22.) Americans on a holiday in Italy learn a lot about their marriage and themselves.
14
14
2
THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II scandals that could embarrass the British.
15
1
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Doubleday, $25.) A German youth immigrates to Chicago and founds a family dynasty at the turn of the century.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
4
4
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
2
1
44
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
3
3
49
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
4
2
5
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
5
6
10
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
5
6
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
7
7
31
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
10
7
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
9
8
10
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
10
11
5
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
11
14
6
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
12 *
9
22
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
13
1
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
14
12
13
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
15
13
35
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
3
3
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
2
1
12
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice about beauty, age, relationships, sex, children and careers.
3
2
53
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
4
4
9
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 3, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest.) ALMOST PERFECT, by Alice Adams. (Knopf, $23.) Social and business pressures drive emotions in this painful, funny novel about a young woman on the rise who loves a crazy man.
ANGELS &amp; INSECTS: Two Novellas, by A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $21.) Two long novellas, and very clever ones, in which insect life is an analogue of Victorian society and literary immortality is compared to the real thing.
CRUELTY AND SILENCE: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World, by Kanan Makiya. (Norton, $22.95.) The cruelty is that of the Saddam Hussein regime in the author's native Iraq; the silence, that of the Arab intellectuals who condone or assist it.
DEAD MAN WALKING: An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United States, by Helen Prejean. (Random House, $21.) Governments should stop killing people, says a nun who has often seen death row up close.
DENYING THE HOLOCAUST: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory, by Deborah E. Lipstadt. (Free Press, $22.95.) A historian untangles the perverse and ingenious arguments of those who say there was no Holocaust.
DRUMS ALONG THE CONGO: On the Trail of Mokele-Mbembe, the Last Living Dinosaur, by Rory Nugent. (Houghton Mifflin, cloth, $21.95; paper, $10.95.) And was it found?
Well, something was, and the trip was loads of fun.
KING LEOPOLD'S DREAM: Travels in the Shadow of the African Elephant, by Jeremy Gavron. (Pantheon, $23.) An Englishman's boundlessly energetic quest finds elephants distinctly less endangered, in some places, than they used to be.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LITERARY REFLECTIONS: A Shoring of Images, 1960-1993, by R. W. B. Lewis. (Northeastern University, $24.95.) Penetrating, durable exercises in humane scholarship and criticism.
PACK MY BAG: A Self-Portrait, by Henry Green. (New Directions, $18.95.) All of his early life the enigmatic novelist (1905-73) chose to reveal; published in Britain in 1940.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.
TSVETAEVA, by Viktoria Schweitzer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) The life and apocalyptic times (1892-1941) of a great Russian poet.
UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In 40 years of essays and articles, the author expounds on sex, politics, literature, himself and other phenomena.


Technology; A Chip That Allows Parents to Censor TV Sex and Violence
Here's a news flash that television broadcasters would probably prefer parents not receive.
The technology is available that would let parents automatically block out programs loaded with violence and gore, and the cost of the equipment could be as little as $5 a TV set.
Under pressure from Congress, the four commercial television networks announced last month that beginning this fall they will voluntarily preface violent programs with a parental advisory.
But a back-room debate continues over whether television programmers should go a step farther by embracing automatic "lock out" technologies to let households block shows that carry such advisories, and whether these devices would be effective at controlling what children watch.


Family Pops Concert a Highlight of Festival Week
THE Summer Music festival continues its 10th anniversary season in New London this week.
On Thursday evening a Family Pops Concert begins at 7 in Harkness Memorial Park, with a program highlighting favorites from Disney films as well as Broadway standards, some classical favorites, solos by the banjo virtuoso Buddy Wachter and some fireworks.
On Saturday evening at 8 P.M.
Peter Sacco will conduct the Connecticut Orchestra in three works by Mozart: the Divertimento in D, plus two concertos featuring principal players of the New York Philharmonic, the concertmaster Glen Dicterow and the clarinetist Stanley Drucker.
For information about remaining events -- including performances by Canadian Brass, Jean-Pierre Rampal and Marvin Hamlisch -- call the Summer Music office at 442-9199 or 800-969-3400.


South Koreans Arrest 4 Former Officials on Bribery Charges
Two former Defense Ministers and two former military chiefs of South Korea were arrested today on charges of taking more than $1 million in bribes from military suppliers.
The arrests followed months of investigation of South Korea's military procurement system.
A separate Government inquiry into possible irregularities concerning the purchase of the F-16 fighters from General Dynamics is still pending.


Smoke-Free Air
To the Editor: In recent years I have suffered serious asthma attacks from smoke-fouled air on trans-Atlantic flights and concluded that I must forever forego the delights of overseas travel.
Then I learned that Air Canada offers smoke-free service on both domestic and overseas operations.


BMW Adds a Ragtop to Its 325 Series
DRIVING a top-down convertible through New York City's wee hours requires at least three things: an irrational sense of strength, a foolhardy mood and a car with more than its share of charm.
Quick getaway also is nice.
BMW's new 325i convertible ($40,825 as equipped), in the showrooms this month, scores on the latter two points.
And, what with the East Coast's recent crazy heat, I found myself fulfilling the other requirements.


Sound Bytes; Trotting on Software to the Global Village
Esther Dyson is publisher of Release 1.0, a monthly newsletter that examines trends in the software business, especially complex adaptive systems and the commercial implementation of artificial intelligence.
She also publishes Releast, a quarterly newsletter that focuses on the emerging computer industry in Central Europe, including Russia and other former Soviet republics. (She is fluent in Russian and recently gave the keynote speech at a computer show in Moscow.)
Her company, Edventure Holdings, sponsors the annual PC Forum, where high-level computer executives schmooze, cut deals and share ideas about the future of technology.
She started writing about computers in 1974 as a reporter for Forbes magazine and later worked five years as a Wall Street securities analyst.
Ms.
Dyson is the daughter of Freeman Dyson, the Nobel physicist, and Verena Huber-Dyson, a mathematician.


Report on Travel Office Incident Didn't Pull Any Punches
To the Editor:
Your description of the management review we issued July 2 on the White House Travel Office as "A Stealthy, Evasive Confession" (editorial, July 11) misses the mark.
The report gives a thorough account of what happened in the Travel Office incident.
We haven't pulled punches.
We have catalogued our mistakes, reprimanding those most responsible.
We have established procedures to insure that such mistakes don't happen again.
And apologized to those unfairly treated.
That's hardly business as usual in Washington.
News articles and editorials echo our belief in the report's honesty (see the July 8 Atlanta Constitution and July 7 Detroit Free Press).
Your news coverage termed the report "strikingly self-critical" and called its release "an extraordinary session of reprimand, self-criticism and confession," in which the two of us "were blunt in admitting mistakes."


Yanks Jump Off Fast and Hold On, 9-5
When Rickey Henderson reached across the plate to poke Jim Abbott's fourth pitch of the game into the cheap seats in left field, there was some grumbling throughout Yankee Stadium.
Fans were just getting comfortable, the hot dogs were still hot and the drinks were still cold, but the Yankees were already in trouble.
The groaning dissipated quickly.
Pow!
The Yankees slapped Bobby Witt for four runs and five hits in the first inning.
Zap!
They punched across one more run in the second.
Bam!
They ripped Witt for two more runs in a humorous fourth and sent him searching for shampoo and Batman repeats on the clubhouse television.
Take that! the Yankee bats shouted.


Correction
A review on June 20 of "Personal Effects," by Francesca Duranti, misstated the number and order of Ms.
Duranti's novels.
"The House on Moon Lake" was her third novel (and the first to appear in English).
It has been followed by "Happy Ending," her fourth novel, and "Personal Effects," her fifth.
Her first two novels have not been translated from the Italian into English.


Three Sculptors Create a Vista In Tones of Wood and Metal
THE sculptor Philip Grausman, whose own work, come July 31, appears at Paris-New York-Kent Gallery, in Kent, has joined with the painter Barbara Grossman, in staging a group show at the Washington Art Association, in Washington Depot.
Between them, the curators have chosen Tom Doyle, Lawrence Fane and John Crawford -- sculptors all.
Mr.
Doyle, the eldest and most prominent of the trio, has been exhibiting steadily in Manhattan since the early 1960's and, in roughly the same period, has figured in countless groups mounted all over the United States and in Europe.
Mr.
Fane has been visible on the same scene for the last 24 years but his overseas appearances have been confined to Italy.
Mr.
Crawford is a relative newcomer, having made his bow in 1979 with a show in Italy.
Since then he has appeared in numerous groups in New York City as well as in Italy.


All Pain, No Gain
I HAVE ALWAYS WANTED TO get a temporary tattoo.
Most people think of a temporary tattoo as a decal that is put on with water and that stays for a few days or maybe even a week, depending on your hygiene.
But I wanted a temporary, real tattoo.
Decal tattoos miss too much of the tattoo experience.
With a decal, all you get is the art and identification with people who really have tattoos.
They used to be sailors, carnies and bikers, but they are starting to become kids in malls.


Iraqi Leader Accuses U.S. of 'Hatching Conspiracies'
Still facing a tense dispute with the United Nations over arms inspections, President Saddam Hussein accused the Clinton Administration today of "racial fanaticism" and urged Europe and Japan to distance themselves from United States policy in the Middle East.
In an hourlong televised address on the 25th anniversary of the coup that brought his Baath Party to power, the Iraqi leader made his strongest public attack to date against the Administration, accusing it of arrogance and "political insanity" and of "hatching conspiracies."


Pink Socks, Purple Prose
To the Sports Editor:
Maureen Dowd's article on Henley is a sheer delight, a classic.
But then she trifles with trash in her vulgar piece on Wimbledon.
It's enough to cause one to shed one's pink socks and dump the strawberries.


Roses Are Red and Other Reminders
IT is hoped that those who are adding new plants to their gardens are remembering to jot down what the plants are, their full botanical name (especially if they are ornamental trees or shrubs), where they were planted, the source and the year acquired.
Prices help, too.
Although such note-taking may seem to be too much to consider for now, these notes will be handy in the future.
They are especially helpful when making plans, adding to or even subtracting from the garden.
If divisions or cuttings are given to friends, they, too, like to know what they are getting.


Baseball's Reward System
To the Sports Editor:
With the talk of an additional round of baseball playoffs becoming a reality for the 1994 season, I would like to comment on the remarks of George W. Bush (the Texas Rangers general partner) with regard to the integrity of baseball's 162-game season.


They Were Smart, All Right, But Then This Is a TV Movie
If a 40-year-old woman meets her former best friend, a younger woman now married to the older woman's ex-husband, what does the first wife say to the second wife?
a) "You lookin' at me?"


When You Wish Upon a Deficit
"How is everyone tonight? Ca va?" inquires a Texan in a cowboy hat at Euro Disney's Wild West Show.
"Now, on a count of trois -- that's one, two, trois -- I want you all to raise your hat, I mean your chapeau, and say, 'Yee-hi, yeeeeee-hi!' "
The assembled Europeans look bemused.
"Yee-hi" is not a sound that emerges naturally from their vocal chords; cowboy hats do not sit naturally on their heads.
But when the count reaches trois, that's three, they duly muster an imitation of what passes in the Paris suburbs for the cry of the Rockies and beyond.
Then they are herded into an arena where stage coaches, puffing buffalo and Chief Sitting Bull await them, as do bowls of "Cattleman's Chili," rendered on the Italian menu as "Pepperoncino alla Cowboy" and on the German as "Chili auf Cowboyart."


Blanche Belliveau and David Lyall Jr.
Blanche Bergen Belliveau, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald G. Belliveau of Saco, Me., was married there yesterday to David Lyall Jr., the son of Susan Lyall Utsch of Philadelphia and the late Dr.
Lyall.
Scott D. Gardner, a lawyer and the brother-in-law of the bride, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Belliveau, who is keeping her name, is the assistant to the manager of the Medical Dental Building, an office building in San Francisco.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Biddeford, Me.
Her mother, Madeline Bergen Belliveau, is a clothing designer and manufacturer in Saco.


Vargas Llosa Disparages Peru, and Vice Versa
Ask Peruvians about Mario Vargas Llosa and more often than not the reaction is surprisingly bitter.
"He hasn't lived here for three years," said Luis San Martin, a cabdriver who used to run a steel fabricating business.
"How does he know what we need, what we are going through?  It's easy to talk from Spain or London. But he doesn't live with the reality of the country, people getting killed every day, misery and poverty."


Firefighters Are the Targets of Pellets and Bottle
Three firefighters and an emergency crew supervisor were attacked over the weekend in two episodes in Brooklyn and upper Manhattan, a week after three firefighters were injured in a firebomb attack on a fire truck.
No one was seriously injured in the latest attacks, including one in which two firefighters and the emergency crew supervisor were struck by projectiles from a pellet-type gun, officials said.


Once Destitute, Oneida Tribe Braces for Flood of Gambling Profits
Until just a year ago, the Oneida Indians were in a struggle against extinction.
Their once-sprawling territory in central New York had been whittled to a 32-acre grassy patch where two dozen families lived in rusted trailer homes discarded by the Federal Government.
Unemployment routinely topped 60 percent.
Their once-proud culture had been forgotten by almost all but the elders.
But these days, no one sees destitution when they look at the Oneida Territory.
They see Fortune 500.


Commercial Property: The Diamond District; The Sparkle's Back on 47th
TENANTS at 20 West 47th Street are asking their landlord, Frank Ring, about expansion space.
And 10 West 47th Street and 580 Fifth Avenue, at the corner of 47th Street, have waiting lists.
At the corner of 48th Street, 589 Fifth Avenue had a 48 percent vacancy rate less than three years ago.
Today, only 6 percent of its space is left, and that's going fast.


Harold Brodkey's Printout
To the Editor:
In "Floppy Disks Are Only Knowledge, but Manuscripts Are Wisdom" (March 28) Jodi Daynard refers to the "manuscript" (her quotation marks) of Harold Brodkey's novel "The Runaway Soul." Her description of this manuscript has unfortunately given rise to the misinterpretation that what the Houghton Library has is simply a computer printout of the text of Mr.
Brodkey's novel.


Robin Simmons, Eric Turner
Robin Bleecker Simmons, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Simmons of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Eric Turner, a son of Virginia Turner of Alexandria, Va., and the late Warren D. Turner.
The Rev.
Douglas McCaleb performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church on Lafayette Square in Washington.
Mrs.
Turner, a graduate of Ohio Wesleyan University, is an elementary-school teacher at the Concord Hill School in Chevy Chase.
Her father is the president of The International Herald Tribune in Washington.
Her mother, Mary Simmons, is a clinical social worker with a private practice in Chevy Chase and the owner of the Rush River Gallery in Washington, Va.


Nona Weiner, Thomas Ullman
Nona Tepper Weiner, the daughter of Terri P. Tepper and Lawrence J. Weiner of Barrington, Ill., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Thomas Anthony Ullman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Anthony Ullman of New York.
Rabbi Samuel Gordon officiated at the Standard Club in Chicago.


Latin Leaders Ask End of Embargo on Cuba
In a rare display of consensus on Cuba, leaders of Latin America, Spain and Portugal called today for an end to the 31-year-old United States trade embargo against Havana.
"We take note of recent resolutions and international forums of the need to eliminate unilateral application, by any state, for political ends, of measures of an economic and trade nature against another state," said a resolution approved by the leaders of 21 countries.


Margaret Van Doren Bevans, 75, Children's Author and Illustrator
Margaret Van Doren Bevans, author, editor and illustrator of children's books, died on Wednesday at Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington, Conn.
She was 75 and lived in West Cornwall, Conn.
Her sister, Barbara Klaw, said the cause was lung cancer.


Maureen Smith, Jeffrey Doctoroff
Maureen Hamilton Smith, a head teacher at the Christ Church Day School, and Jeffrey Alan Doctoroff, an associate editor at Ballantine Books, both in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Steven Mason and the Rev.
David Walker, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Shuttle Meadow Country Club in Kensington, Conn.
Mrs.
Doctoroff, 24, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell Smith of Shavertown, Pa.
The bride graduated from Wheelock College.
Her father is a private investor.


Fishing for Broad Laughs in the McCarthy Era
LAST summer the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst produced "The Lady in Question," a crackling satire by Charles Busch that pokes needles into a great many hypocrisy-filled balloons.
It was so successful that the same creative team led by the actors, Fred Maliszewski and Louise M. Millman, and the director, Scott Hofer, joined to present Mr.
Busch's comedy "Red Scare on Sunset."
The caliber of the two works is, however, not on the same level.
Where "The Lady in Question" was a spoof on World War II hero movies, it had a serious subtext about the value of art in a society.
"Red Scare on Sunset," unfortunately, never quite decides what it wants to say, and it flounders, never going beyond the obvious.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
June 93
May 93
June 92
Rents
184.6
+1.2
+3.2
Homeowner's costs
183.5
+0.9
+3.4
Fuel and utilities
113.9
+2.7
+3.8
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.37
7.38
8.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.56
4.63
5.65
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.26
7.25
8.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.42
4.48
5.42
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.27
7.24
8.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.26
4.26
5.36
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.48
7.45
8.45
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.27
5.32
6.09
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.42
3.42
3.64
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.08
7.08
8.20
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Michelle Lee and John Kim
Michelle Eun-Joo Lee, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Chong-Jin Lee of Seoul, South Korea, was married yesterday to John Kim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
K.
B.
Kim of La Canada, Calif.
The Rev.
Sally Norris, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at Riverside Church in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Kim, 26, graduated from Wellesley College.
She will be a second-year law student at the University of Pennsylvania in the fall.
Her father is a vice president in Seoul at Allied Signal International Inc., the industrial equipment maker.


Julie Longo, Christopher Shoemaker
Julie Longo, a daughter of Michele Laracy-Andre of New Vernon, N.J., and Robert J. Longo of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Leigh Shoemaker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Shoemaker of Chatham, N.J.
The Revs.
Andrew Smith and Paddy O'Donovan, both Roman Catholic priests, jointly officiated at Christ the King Church in New Vernon.
Mrs.
Shoemaker, 24, graduated from Lafayette College.
She was until recently an administrative assistant in New York with the Yves St.
Laurent Parfums Corporation.
Her father is the president of R. J. Longo Construction Company in Denville, N.J.
Her mother is a vice president of Weichert Commercial Realtors in Morris Plains, N.J.


Have Viola, Will Travel: A Working Musician's Life
You think your life is crazy?
Juliet Haffner has to find a violist to substitute for her in the orchestra of the Broadway show "Guys and Dolls" because her Latin American pop group only has time for two rehearsals before they record their new CD.
Meanwhile, her regular flutist has a gig at the Metropolitan Museum, so now Ms.
Haffner has to find a sub for him, too.
Then there's a meeting with the CD cover photographer and, after that, one with an arranger, and at 6, a rewrite meeting on the album liner notes -- they need serious work.
After three and a half hours wedged into the curve of a grand piano with seven musicians in a 12-by-16 walk-up behind a woodwind repair shop off Times Square, Ms.
Haffner gets home close to midnight and her message machine is blinking: Be at the recording studio first thing in the morning.
This, she says, is an easy day.


Saxon Capital Reconstructs Glories of Old
"I WANT to see cranes in Dresden!" Mayor Herbert Wagner exhorted his awakening city last year as he began a sweeping program of renovation and reconstruction.
The Mayor must be a satisfied man, because giant cranes now dominate the historic skyline and most of the city's great buildings are covered in whole or in part by scaffolding.
Although Dresden's architectural jewels are temporarily shrouded, its rich collections of painting, sculpture, porcelain and other treasures are on full display.
Tourism and business are booming, overwhelming the modest capacity of local hotels.
The job of rebuilding the old Saxon capital, which was devastated by an Allied bombing attack in 1945 and largely neglected during 40 years of Communist rule, is expected to take more than a decade.
Restoration of old or damaged structures as well as new building projects are part of the program.
City planners hope that when the job is finished, Dresden will return to its former position as one of Europe's cultural capitals.


Tyler Ingham, Christopher Weld
Tyler Ingham, a daughter of Jonathan Ingham of Locust Valley, L.I., and Shawn de Gunzburg of London, was married yesterday to Christopher Parsons Weld, a son of David L. Weld of Bedford, N.Y., and the Rev.
Dr.
Louise P. Pietsch of Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Anne Plummer, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church in Locust Valley.
Mrs.
Weld is a designer at Curlin &amp; Associates, an architectural firm in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is an investment banker in Locust Valley.
The bride is a great-great granddaughter of President John Tyler.


Making Color Last: An Expert Speaks
NOT many photographers walk into a photo shop and ask, "Will the film you're selling me and the prints you make last a hundred years?"
But Henry Wilhelm has spent most of his life in the world of photography testing how long photographic films and prints -- both black-and-white and color -- can last, and what can be done to make them last longer.


Jordan Gambling Saga Has New Twist: Taylor
It seems the saga of Michael Jordan's gambling habits takes on a new and strange twist each month.
Just as one appendage is chopped off another one grows and, seemingly, engulfs another name.
The latest name to emerge is Lawrence Taylor, the Giants' linebacker.
During the course of the National Basketball Association's probe into Jordan's gambling habits, according to a person with knowledge of the investigation, a former associate of Jordan's told the league that Taylor owed the basketball star $150,000 because of gambling losses incurred on the golf course.


Roses Are Red and Other Reminders
IT is hoped that those who are adding new plants to their gardens are remembering to jot down what the plants are, their full botanical name (especially if they are ornamental trees or shrubs), where they were planted, the source and the year acquired.
Prices help, too.
Although such note-taking may seem to be too much to consider for now, these notes will be handy in the future.
They are especially helpful when making plans, adding to or even subtracting from the garden.
If divisions or cuttings are given to friends, they, too, like to know what they are getting.


20% of Trial Judge's Cases Reversed Because of Errors
Cases handled by one judge in Manhattan's main criminal trial court are overturned on appeal twice as often as those of any of his colleagues, and appellate courts consistently blame mistakes made by the judge.
In the most recent setback for the judge, Acting Justice Jerome Hornblass of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the Appellate Division of Supreme Court this month granted a new trial to a man convicted of attempted aggravated assault for aiming a machine gun at police officers.
The appeals court ruled that Justice Hornblass made no fewer than seven errors in the case, any one of which would have been grounds for retrial.


Keeping Watch


JULY 11-17: X Marks the Spot; Male Homosexuality May Be Linked to a Gene
As the political dispute over gays in the military last week resumed its passionate pitch, so too did the scientific debate on the origins of homosexuality.
Researchers from the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., presented in the journal Science the most persuasive evidence yet that sexual orientation is partly or largely innate, rather than being dictated by one's upbringing or a disregard of social norms.
Studying the family histories of 114 avowedly homosexual men, Dr.
Dean Hamer and his colleagues discovered that many of the men's male relatives on the mother's side of the family were themselves homosexuals.
The pattern pointed to a genetic link with the X chromosome, which in men is always inherited from the mother.
Scrutinizing the X chromosomes of 40 pairs of gay brothers, the scientists found that in 33 cases the brothers shared a region at the bottom tip of the chromosome, a far greater proportion than would have been expected from chance alone.


Kristen Wesson, Robert Hartgers
Kristen Margaret Wesson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce F. Wesson of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert J. Hartgers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hartgers of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Msgr.
Martin Rauscher officiated at the Sacred Heart Church in Bay Head, N.J.
Mrs.
Hartgers, 25, is a teacher at the Nightingale-Bamford School in Manhattan.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is the president of Galen Associates, a health-care company in New York.


Informer, Not Sheik, Holds Key to Bomb Plot; Acquitted in 1990
To the Editor:
Your reporting about Egypt's request to extradite Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman (news article, July 9) mentions that he is wanted by authorities for inciting a riot in Fayoum, south of Cairo, four years ago.
You omit the fact that in 1990 the sheik and 47 others were tried before an Egyptian state security court for their role in this incident and acquitted.
Cairo has now decided to reopen the same case before the same court; the proceedings began last April.
The move subjects Sheik Abdel Rahman and his co-defendants to double jeopardy.
This abuse is permitted under Egypt's longstanding and much-criticized emergency law, in force since the assassination of Anwar el Sadat in October 1981.
The emergency law grants the president or his designate, as military governor, the authority to approve or reject the rulings of state security court judges.


Hillbilly Supermodel
Ru Paul isn't the only drag-queen supermodel with crossover appeal.
Ragu Mountain Woman, the hillbilly creation of the performance artist Ken Bullock, will do her runway routine at Alice Tully Hall on July 27 as part of the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center.
Ragu Mountain Woman is a parody of the prototypical model's rags-to-riches story.
She's discovered wearing a burlap couture gown at the feed store in her native Georgia town, moves to New York with her pet possum Iman, parties with Mick Jagger and then flies off for the collections in Paris.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle on page 52 of The Times Magazine today includes an incorrect definition for 6 Down.
It should read "Mailed out again."


C. E. Bird, C. M. Martin
Christine Elizabeth Bird, the daughter of Rodney Bird of Worcester, N.Y., and Elizabeth Bird of Bradenton, Fla., was married yesterday to Christopher Miles Martin, the son of Robert and Lee Martin of Camden, Me.
The Rev.
John Phillippe, a Methodist minister, officiated at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Beatrice Bird, in Worcester.


MAN IN NEW JERSEY IS CHARGED IN PLOT TO KILL MUBARAK
An Egyptian immigrant who lives in New Jersey was charged in a Federal complaint yesterday with conspiring to kill President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in a "suicide mission" during his visit to the United States in early April and, when that plot unraveled, with planning to try again in September.
The complaint detailed an elaborate plan by the suspect, Abdo Mohammed Haggag, and at least 10 others to carry out the attack at a hotel in Manhattan, dressing in hotel uniforms so that they could blend in and move close to Mr.
Mubarak.
The complaint said the conspirators believed they had been betrayed by a "leak" that caused Mr.
Mubarak to change his plans, though it remained unclear last night whether Mr.
Mubarak had planned to visit New York.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
June housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.244
1.25
June housing permits, millions, annual rate
1.114
1.14
Thursday
Treasury budget statement, change, billions
-37
5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
334
335
Friday
Mid-July auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.9
6.9
Monday: House panel holds hearing on coal strike  Tuesday: Alan Greenspan gives House testimony  Johnson Redbook survey released  Thursday: Alan Greenspan gives House testimony


A Heart's Longings in 'Trip to Bountiful'
THEATERFEST'S "Trip to Bountiful" is nourishing an emaciated summer stock season.
The 1953 Horton Foote play, expanded from a television version, was critically dismissed as slight and sentimental in 1953.
Although it marked a personal triumph for Lillian Gish, the play faded into obscurity after less than five weeks on Broadway.
More than 30 years later, a film adaptation by Mr.
Foote won an Oscar for Geraldine Page.
Clearly, Mr.
Foote provided a bountiful role for an actress.
Carrie Watts, debilitated by the bickering and the pettiness that have crept into her life, yearns to recover her dignity before dying.
All she wants is a return to her hometown, a respite in rural Texas so remote that no bus stops there.
The town called Bountiful, between Harrison and Cotton, is deserted, she's told, but even though Carrie has packed a suitcase, she'll settle for just another look; 15 minutes will do.


Hey, It's More Than a Game
GAME OVER How Nintendo Zapped an American Industry,  Captured Your Dollars, and Enslaved Your Children.
By David Sheff. 445 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


Who's That Lady?
"BUT why would anyone want to interview me?" Lady Fairfax, returning a reporter's call, was phoning from the Metropolitan Club, where she was temporarily ensconsed during the renovation of her new digs -- the 41st, 42d and 43d floors of the Pierre Hotel.
"Well, for starters, you did buy three floors of a somewhat swank Fifth Avenue hotel for $12 million," the reporter said.


Yosemite Reopens After Searchers Give Up on Gunman


Roses Are Red and Other Reminders
IT is hoped that those who are adding new plants to their gardens are remembering to jot down what the plants are, their full botanical name (especially if they are ornamental trees or shrubs), where they were planted, the source and the year acquired.
Prices help, too.
Although such note-taking may seem to be too much to consider for now, these notes will be handy in the future.
They are especially helpful when making plans, adding to or even subtracting from the garden.
If divisions or cuttings are given to friends, they, too, like to know what they are getting.


WEARS JUMP SUIT. SENSIBLE SHOES.
It is true that there are real problems between the sexes that need correction: equality and opportunity in employment; the maintenance of a woman's right of choice; the reduction of sexual harassment, rape, etc.
But this silliness of stirring up gender differences where none should exist, making the female a symbol while the male is a cipher, is ridiculous.
It must stop.
Just Do It.
Just Say No.
Hey -- just get dressed.
L.
S.
WINDHAM Austin, Tex.


Data Bank/July 18, 1993


Steamers Still Ply The Mississippi
Floodwaters on the Upper Mississippi, which have swelled the flow of the river by hundreds of thousands of cubic feet per second, have stopped neither the steamer Mississippi Queen nor the National Historic Landmark paddlewheeler the Delta Queen.
The high waters forced the closure of the Upper Mississippi to river traffic but is not blocking traffic on the wider and deeper Lower Mississippi.
The Delta Queen Steamboat Company, which owns both boats, said the Mississippi Queen, scheduled to cruise the Upper Mississippi this month, has been traveling instead between Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., 70 miles below St.
Louis, and Chattanooga, Tenn., which lies on the Tennessee River.


JULY 11-17: Island Devastated; First an Earthquake, Then a Tidal Wave Strike Northern Japan
Living in what is perhaps the world's most active seismic zone, the Japanese have prided themselves on being prepared for earthquakes.
But the country was overwhelmed by a huge quake that struck in the Sea of Japan Monday night, unleashing a tidal wave that demolished homes and carried people out to sea.


The Comeback Of the Trolley Car
I am writing in response to a paragraph in "The Trolley Car Stages a Comeback" (June 20).
Specifically, the system in question is described by transportation officials as a "fast, pollution-free network that will tie together the massive commercial and residential developments that have sprung up in the last decade."
I do not have personal knowledge of the project enough to decide for myself if it is a good plan or a bad one.
However, the notion that public transportation is "pollution free" is a vast misconception.
Somewhere, power for locomotion of the vehicles must be generated; even if it is not generated by an onboard diesel or gasoline engine, somewhere there exists a power plant to provide the electricity used by the vehicles.


Gotta Dance!
I WALKED INTO THE CONFESSIONAL A repentant sinner and walked out a dancer.
The priest who heard my sins half-jokingly suggested that for my penance I join the church's production of "West Side Story," which he was directing.
I was 27 at the time and hadn't performed on a stage since fourth grade, but I figured at the very least I could help out with the lights.
Instead, I ended up with the featured role of Riff, the leader of the Jets, mostly because of a lucky break (as in the ankle of the actor originally cast), and the usual dearth of male bodies in community-theater productions.
After months of rehearsal, I was comfortable enough with the dialogue and the singing, but the dancing -- and "West Side Story" is mostly dancing -- petrified me.
Right up to opening night, I was never sure which foot I would land on.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson  $190,000
38 Crosby Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, porch, basement, attic; taxes $4,500.
East Williston  $575,000
55 Robbins Drive  6-bedroom, 5-bath, 22-year-old colonial; family room, music room, den, dining room; taxes $12,000.
Manhasset Hills  $332,000
54 Monterey Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 29-year-old split level; dining room, den, 61- by 116-foot lot; taxes $6,800.
Roslyn  $750,000
16 Shelter Lane  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 42-year- old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes 14,000.
New Hyde Park  $190,000
2 Oak Street, 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, living room fireplace; taxes $3,800.
Mineola  $197,000
51 Croydon Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 60- year-old Tudor; new eat-in kitchen, dining room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
OTHER AREAS Westport, Conn.  $330,000
26 Regents Park  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old town-house condominium; monthly charges $141, taxes $4,364.
Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.  $162,000
150 Draper Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old co-op; patio, private entrance, oak floors, modern kitchen, parking space; maintenance $772.
Mount Olive, N.J.  $180,000
9 Falcon Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; new windows, c/a, full basement; taxes $4,495.


If You've Got It, Hide It
BLOW How a Small-Town Boy Made $100 Million With  the Medellin Cocaine Cartel and Lost It All.
By Bruce Porter.
Illustrated. 311 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
New Canaan, Conn.  $1,435,000
Four Winds Lane
5-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, new colonial; library, spacious terrace, 2 acres; taxes to be determined.
Warren, Conn.  $567,500
14 Arrow Point Road  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 4-year-old lakefront farmhouse; exercise room w/sauna, finished basement, 1.1 acres; taxes $7,958.
Westport, Conn.  $330,000
26 Regents Park  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old town-house condominium; monthly charges $141, taxes $4,364.
Buchanan, N.Y.  $167,500
154 Seward Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old colonial; heated porch, deck, unfinished basement, attic, parking space; taxes $1,533.
Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.  $162,000
150 Draper Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old co-op; patio, private entrance, oak floors, modern kitchen, parking space; maintenance $772.
Hartsdale, N.Y.  $290,000
224 Dogwood Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; breakfast atrium, deck, outdoor pool, exercise room; common charges $300; taxes $7,200.
OTHER AREAS Roslyn, L.I.  $750,000
16 Shelter Lane  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 42-year- old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes 14,000.
New Hyde Park, L.I.  $190,000
2 Oak Street, 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, living room fireplace; taxes $3,800.
Mount Olive, N.J.  $180,000
9 Falcon Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; new windows, c/a, full basement; taxes $4,495.


Food For Thought
To the Editor:
In her article about the Domino Pizza collection of designs by Frank Lloyd Wright  [ "A Wealth of Wright Designs Is Dispersed," June 27 ] , Rita Reif quoted a collector-dealer from Milwaukee as saying that the four-foot-square cat house he had recently acquired was possibly "the only artifact Wright designed for a nonhuman."


Editorial Notebook; The Instant T. Rex
The blockbuster movie this summer is a freak of cultural evolution.
It has a tiny brain but boasts an enormous body that feeds on computer-generated special effects.
And it is not meant to be taken too seriously.
As the geneticist Henry Wu observes in Michael Crichton's novel, "Jurassic Park": "Entertainment has nothing to do with reality. Entertainment is antithetical to reality."


In Korea, Chilling Reminders of Cold War
THERE are few areas in the world where the tug of war between ideological opposites is being played out these days as starkly as it is on the Korean Peninsula.
There, the more familiar fare of Asian-American diplomacy -- trade wars and economic disputes -- has been suddenly overshadowed by the deadly serious business of tussling over who produces a nuclear weapon.
President Clinton, ending an economic summit conference in Japan, joined that tug of war with some trepidation last weekend, trying to decipher the erratic diplomatic signals that were being sent by President Kim Young Sam of South Korea as well as the message of foreboding he had just received in Tokyo from the Japanese Government over North Korea's threat to continue developing nuclear weapons technology.


For the Game's Best Hitters, .400 Is More Than a Number
With the predictable collapse of Andres Galarraga and the not-unexpected decline of John Olerud, baseball's .400 debate can be stowed on the statistical shelf until next season.
Did anybody really think either one would hit .400 this season?
As they do with 12-game hitting streaks, many people got excited because Galarraga and Olerud spent most of the first half of the season hitting in the stratosphere of .400.
The exploits of George Brett in 1980 (.390) and Rod Carew in 1977 (.388) were recalled with relish as speculation soared about the prospects of the first .400 hitter since Ted Williams hit .406 in 1941.


Bulgaria Has a University In U.S. Style
Mike Orenduff, president of the University of Maine at Farmington, seems at home at what used to be the desk of the mighty regional first secretary of the Communist Party.
It is here, in the palace that the former dictatorship built for its top officials shortly before falling from power in 1989, that Mr.
Orenduff is preparing for the arrival of a third class of students for the American University in Bulgaria.
A lanky professor of philosophy, Mr.
Orenduff is filling in as the university's interim president.


Conference Centers In Bid for New Clients
IN keeping with the austere business environment of the 90's, posh goes populist as the owners of at least two well-known Westchester properties open themselves to outside business meetings and conferences.
In Thornwood, the I.B.M.
Thornwood Conference Center, built by International Business Machines in 1985 for its exclusive use -- training executives and holding conferences for clients -- is being marketed to outside corporations and organizations for the first time.


A Program to Keep Families Together
IN a modest white frame house that huddles against the side of Main Street here, almost as an apologetic afterthought, Catherine and Byron R. were busy trying to get their 6-month-old daughter ready to take to the baby sitter so they could leave for work. (They agreed to be interviewed on condition that their last name not be used.)
Although their 9-year-old daughter, Tekeya, had already been picked up to go to school, the preparations were still hectic.
As Catherine tidied up the kitchen and put together supplies for the baby's diaper bag, Byron negotiated a passage around the family pets, a large dog and a small cat, to clear up the children's videotapes and toys, which lay scattered in the living room.
Intense Pressures
Morning can be a struggle in most households, but for this family the pressures are particularly intense: the couple's baby has multiple disabilities, which have not been fully diagnosed, and it requires more care and effort than most 6-month-olds -- and Tekeya has cerebral palsy.


The Comeback Of the Trolley Car
"The Trolley Car Stages a Comeback" mentions the inclusion of Bayonne in N.J.
Transit's plan for a light rail system along the Hudson River waterfront.
For more than five years I have served as Bayonne's citizen representative on the Alternatives Analysis Committee supporting such inclusion.
However, the committee's recommendation made earlier this year continued to exclude our community -- the second largest city in the region studied.
While the article accurately indicated that extensive lobbying has taken place, the real story is about this fine community and its citizens' efforts to control their future.


Three Sculptors Create a Vista In Tones of Wood and Metal
THE sculptor Philip Grausman, whose own work, come July 31, appears at Paris-New York-Kent Gallery, in Kent, has joined with the painter Barbara Grossman, in staging a group show at the Washington Art Association, in Washington Depot.
Between them, the curators have chosen Tom Doyle, Lawrence Fane and John Crawford -- sculptors all.
Mr.
Doyle, the eldest and most prominent of the trio, has been exhibiting steadily in Manhattan since the early 1960's and, in roughly the same period, has figured in countless groups mounted all over the United States and in Europe.
Mr.
Fane has been visible on the same scene for the last 24 years but his overseas appearances have been confined to Italy.
Mr.
Crawford is a relative newcomer, having made his bow in 1979 with a show in Italy.
Since then he has appeared in numerous groups in New York City as well as in Italy.


Nutritional Curiosity In Medicine
Your interview with Dr.
David Walters (June 27) points out a disappointing lack of nutritional curiosity in medicine.
Dr.
Walters, an eminent cardiologist, notes that patients, by choosing a healthy life style, are most responsible for the observed decline in cardiac mortality.
When asked his prescription for a heart-healthy life style, Dr.
Walters's reply is that people stop smoking and stay in school longer.
These are good suggestions but inadequate for the scope of the problem.
I see well-educated, nonsmokers in my practice whose poor dietary choices have created cardiovascular problems for them.
Physicians need to bear more responsibility for providing informed opinions about diet options for their cardiac patients.
Two to three apples daily is effective in lowering total blood cholesterol.
Vegetable or nut proteins such as soy or walnuts, when chosen as an alternative to animal protein at meals, result in a reduction of cholesterol.
The fiber from just two carrots daily may lower cholesterol as much as 10 to 20 percent.


Robert Pell and Anitra Christoffel
Anitra Christoffel, an English and humanities teacher at Baldwin (L.I.) Senior High School, was married yesterday to Robert L. Pell, a fund-raiser and an art consultant in Keene Valley, N.Y.
The Rev.
Barbara Hofrichter officiated at the Keene Valley Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Christoffel Pell, 52, graduated from the State University at New Paltz, N.Y.
She is a daughter of the late Irene Stippa of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Rama Atassi, Souheil Hajjar
Rama Atassi, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
M.
A.
Atassi of Kirtland Hills, Ohio, was married yesterday to Souheil J. Hajjar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean V. Hajjar of Paris.
Joseph Gurley, the law director of Painesville, Ohio, officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Cleveland.
Mrs.
Hajjar, 28, is a graduate of Lake Erie College.
He is a portfolio management assistant at Haven Capital Management, an investment-management company in New York.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from George Washington University.
Her father is a cardiologist in Willoughby, Ohio.


Follow Money Trail to the Answer of Yankee Stadium Decision
The search for a possible new home for the Yankees is also a search for the money to build it.
If the Yankees depart Yankee Stadium for Manhattan or New Jersey, at least $200 million would be needed to construct a new ball park.
In proposing the West Side railyard near the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center as a site for the Yankees -- in addition to a surrounding commercial and entertainment complex -- New York Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has suggested issuing state bonds backed by the complex's revenues as a form of financing.
But the state would undoubtedly incur costs to improve the surrounding infrastructure.


Serbian Plan Would Deny the Muslims Any State
While Muslim leaders in Sarajevo resist pressure to carve Bosnia into separate ethnic states for Muslims, Serbs and Croats, the leaders of Serbian nationalist forces are looking beyond partition toward the extinction of Muslims as an independent political force.
The Serbian nationalists, who already control more than 70 percent of this former Yugoslav republic, have said they are prepared to exchange land in a peace settlement and allow Muslims to have what they call "a small Muslim state" surrounded by larger states for Croats and Serbs.


Radika Eccles and Steven Weddle
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Eccles of Irvington, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Radika Elisabeth Eccles, and Steven Weddle, a son of Nellie L. Weddle and Willie Weddle, both of Milwaukee.
Ms.
Eccles, 27, graduated from Brown University and received a master's of management degree from Northwestern University.
Next month she is to become an assistant manager at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
Her father is an investment banker in New York and her mother, Achla Eccles, teaches history at the Riverdale Country School in Riverdale, the Bronx.


Long Island Q&amp;A: George Williams; Evolutionary Biology as an Approach to Improving Health
AN evolutionary biologist, Dr.
George Williams, professor emeritus of ecology and evolution at the State University at Stony Brook, belongs to a handful of researchers who say patients would benefit if doctors took an evolutionary or adaptive approach in evaluating them.
An awareness of the evolutionary history would redefine some illnesses and explain others, according to the theory.
Problems like infections, morning sickness, aging and psychological illnesses related to anxiety and stress would benefit from heeding Darwin's theory of natural selection.


Pennsylvania Governor Faces Health Questions
Gov.
Robert P. Casey, who underwent heart and liver transplant surgery just a month ago and is still hospitalized, says he cannot wait to go back to work.
But many wonder whether the popular 61-year-old Democrat should, for his own sake, return at all.
For now, doctors say Governor Casey has had an uneventful recovery and might be able to leave the hospital in a week or two.


THE DETOXING OF PRISONER 88AO802
I salute Bill Giddens!
And I hope he will continue on his road to recovery.
All life has to offer is now within his grasp.


Pennies From Hell: A Nation Is Saying, 'Keep the Change'
In trendy Georgetown, Rocklands barbecue restaurant programs its cash register to round off to $5.70 a check that would normally total $5.66.
More than 1,000 Winn-Dixie, Kroger and other supermarkets offer customers the option of raising their tab to the next dollar, with the extra pennies and other small change designated for charity.


Gooden Gets Hit Hard, by Reality
Doc Gooden sat on the bench and watched the San Francisco Giants walk off the field.
It was Friday night, the game was over and Gooden couldn't move.
The loss, his 10th of the season, shouldn't have come as much of a surprise.
Gooden is prepared now, prepared to lose even when he pitches well, prepared for his teammates' mistakes and his often undeserved defeats.


To Catch a Theif: Henderson On the A's Trading Block
Rickey Henderson batting leadoff for the Yankees?
According to the talkative Henderson, this could be more than a baseball flashback.
It could also be a peek at the Yankee future.
Although Henderson was still batting leadoff for the A's yesterday at Yankee Stadium, he claimed that several teams are interested in acquiring him before the July 31 trading deadline, and that the Yankees are among them.


India Asserts It Will Develop Rocket Engines
India said today that it would develop powerful rocket technology that it says it has been denied as a result of an accord between Washington and Moscow.
"The Government of India will not allow any setback to India's space technology and space program," the Foreign Office said in an official statement.


James Perlmutter and Heather Jacobs
Col.
Jack H. Jacobs, U.S.A., retired, of London, and Karen S. Rhinehart of New Paltz, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heather Renee Jacobs, to James Frederick Perlmutter, a son of Alvin H. Perlmutter and Priscilla N. Strauss, both of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Jacobs, 28, is an assistant portfolio manager at Bear Stearns Asset Management in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father, who received the Congressional Medal of Honor in 1968 for service in Vietnam, is a managing director of the Bankers Trust Company in London.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at the Ulster County Residential Health Care Facility in Kingston, N.Y.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
107.55
109.94
124.38
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7170
1.7227
1.4583
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2773
1.2785
1.1889
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4855
1.4805
1.9510
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$391.25
$391.25
$357.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Deals and Discounts
BELGIAN PACKAGE Sabena is offering a Belgian Starter Package for $699 a person that includes round-trip air fare to Brussels from four United States cities, three nights at the Brussels Hilton International and use of an Avis rental car for three days with unlimited mileage and value added tax. (The rental car is the smallest model available, an Opel Corsa or similar, with manual transmission.) Departure cities are New York, Atlanta, Chicago and Boston.
The package is based on two people traveling together and is available through Sept. 30.
Outgoing flights must be on Tuesday or Thursday from Boston and New York; Wednesday or Thursday from Atlanta or Chicago.
Hotel nights in the package must be used Thursday through Sunday, the rental car on Friday through Sunday.
Those who buy the package may extend their stay by making additional arrangements.
There is also a Plane and Train option for visitors who want a four-day Eurail Flexipass rather than the hotel and rental car.
The pass provides four individual days of first-class rail travel in any of 17 countries.
The rail option, which is offered through Oct. 31, is valid for Monday through Thursday.
There are minimum and maximum stay requirements for both packages, and both must be bought a week in advance.
Call (800) 955-2000.


Walking the Beat on Mean Streets
Officer Michael Lopez was walking his beat in East New York, Brooklyn, recently when the barrage began: rocks, bottles and debris hurtled toward him from the rooftop of a housing project.
Officer Lopez ducked, ran for cover and, getting the message, established a new policy: never to walk alone near high-rises again.


The View From: Essex; Will Publicity Change a Community's Character?
ON a recent weekday morning two buses carrying older people arrived in Essex almost simultaneously, one from Rhode Island and the other from New Jersey.
For the next few hours the visitors browsed in art galleries, boutiques and antique shops on Main Street, visited the historic waterfront and then had lunch at the 217-year-old Griswold Inn, the town's centerpiece.
Occasionally, other tourists drop in, usually in small family groups on what may well be Connecticut's most charming seacoast town, on the west bank of the Connecticut River, about six miles from Old Saybrook and Long Island Sound.


Probationary Officer Held in a Rape Case
A probationary New York City police officer was arrested on Friday and charged with raping a civilian employee of the Police Department whom he had befriended, the police said.
The officer, Mark Williams, 30, of the 73d Precinct in Bushwick, Brooklyn, was charged with first-degree rape and first-degree sexual abuse in an incident on July 6, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti.
The arrest was made at 4 P.M.
Friday at the department's Internal Affairs Bureau on Hudson Street in Manhattan.


More Rain for Midwest
For two weeks, the rainfall in the Midwest has been caused by a stalled low-pressure system carrying moist air north from the Gulf of Mexico.
The system is still stalled there, but now the storms are being fed by the Pacific Ocean.
The jet stream has moved back to its usual route across the northern United States, but it has failed to dislodge the system, which is expected to remain for another few days.
An even larger storm system will move into the Midwest tonight, said Dan Graf, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.


Your Home: Condo Fees; Creative Concepts Cut Costs
T-SHIRTS, sweatshirts, golf shirts, bumper stickers, decals and even personalized letterheads, emblazoned with the association's logo, are among novelty items that the leaders of the 4,000-unit Brandermill homeowners association in Richmond, Va., hope to sell to unit owners this fall.
It's one of an ever-growing list of revenue generating ideas to keep monthly common charges from rising.


How to Hold A Conversation With Living Sculptures
In 1971 the eccentric English artists Gilbert and George marked the opening of the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo by performing, again and again, a robotic dance to "Underneath the Arches," a haunting song of homelessness.
Twenty years later they returned to repeat the performance.
In "Gilbert and George: The Singing Sculpture," by Carter Ratcliff and Robert Rosenblum, a tribute to the double event published this month by Anthony McCall, Mr.
Ratcliff reminisces about the pair's first visit to New York.
ONE AFTERNOON, DURING their first visit to New York, I took a voyage with Gilbert and George on a Circle Line boat.
Like the Statue of Liberty, the Circle Line cruise around the island of Manhattan is an institution of interest chiefly to tourists.
Thus it was a proper diversion for Gilbert and George, who counted as visiting institutions.
Crisp and brilliant, the light of that September afternoon threw Gilbert and George into sharp focus as they stood on the deck in sculptural poses.
The skyline was their backdrop, measured off by landmarks like the Empire State Building and the headquarters of the United Nations.
It wasn't easy to know if one should point out less well-known features of the skyline, but we did.


Deirdre DeBlasio, Todd Engels
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. DeBlasio of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deirdre Noel DeBlasio, to Todd Henry Engels, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Engles of Upper Saddle River, N.J., and Wilmington, N.C.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss DeBlasio, 27, is a sales manager for A. C. Nielsen, the television and radio ratings organization, in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College, as did her fiance, and she received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the senior vice president of finance and the chief financial officer of the Loral Corporation, a defense electronics maker in New York.


Here Grows Imagination
WHEN you were a child, did you long for a secret garden?
A place that nobody knew about but you?
Maybe you grew up in the country, where you could wander down to a stream and build a dam, or catch tadpoles in a swamp.
"I had a big ditch to play in," said Kibbe Turner, a contractor-turned-landscape designer who grew up in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
"I'd play with crayfish and build little cities out of sticks and mud around the roots of big old mature trees. That's probably why I went into construction for 25 years."


Antonia Prescott, Daniel Lieberman
Antonia Courthope Prescott, the daughter of Peter and Anne Prescott of New Canaan, Conn., was married at her parents' home Wednesday to Daniel Eric Lieberman, a son of Philip and Marcia Lieberman of Providence, R.I.
David Howland, a local justice of the peace, officiated.
Ms.
Prescott will retain her name.
She and her husband, both 29, graduated from Harvard University, he summa cum laude.
She is completing work for a master's degree in English from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


A Split in Thinking Among Keepers of Artificial Intelligence
BEMUSED, skeptical and even a little bit angry, scientists attending the American Association of Artificial Intelligence conference here last week heard a businessman declare that the central focus of their work -- creating computers with human-like intelligence -- is obscuring gains in the field that can be exploited now.
Those same scientists have long debated the goals of their field.
Should it be singly devoted to creating computers that think like people?
Or does clinging to such an elusive goal only undermine the incremental achievements in making smarter software?


Pine-Tar Couture
1993: Mets' pitcher Anthony Young makes history by setting the record for consecutive losses.
The San Francisco Giants turn it around.
The Yanks are contenders again.
Teal enters baseball.
Anne Occi, the design director of Major League Baseball Properties, the marketing and licensing wing of Major League Baseball, gazed at the vast expanse of ocean along the Miami coastline two springs ago, dreaming of teal.
The water was teal.
Miami's fountains were teal.
The bottoms of the swimming pools were teal.
The stuffed fish hanging from the walls of restaurants were teal.
And sure enough, when she and some other honchos from Major League Baseball went to the library to check out what a marlin looked like -- the thrashing fish for whom the new Florida expansion team would be named -- it, too, was teal.


Reserve Early, and Often
NAME: Olivier Daubresse
IDENTITY: French-born maitre d'hotel and sommelier at Restaurant Daniel, 20 East 76th Street, the hot, two-month-old, $2 million French restaurant run by Daniel Boulud, the former chef at Le Cirque.


Credit for Child Care Centers
To the Editor:
"Financing Strategies for Child Care" (June 20) indicates that a lack of access to credit stands in the way of making more child care available.
I wish to point out that a ready resource for the development of child care centers currently exists with Community Development Financing Institutions.


Elizabeth to Restore Former Hub
After 10 years of stop-and-start efforts, this Colonial port city is poised to begin its largest redevelopment project, a $100 million restoration of a tract that once served as its industrial crossroads.
City officials see the tract, a frayed fringe of 23 acres on the edge of the central shopping district, as the right piece of property at the right time to develop into market-rate residential housing and commercial and retail space.
They also see it as an economic necessity for a city of 110,000 in which 47 percent of the property is tax exempt, owned either by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey or by Union County, for which Elizabeth is the seat of government.


A Gazelle, Stripped Down
No matter what we wear, we'll never be as elegant as the springbok, an African gazelle with subtly heart-shaped horns.
The skull and horns of the one below have been cleaned, bleached and sealed with a liquid wax for a slightly glossy look.
It is second quality because it is missing some teeth and part of its lower jaw.


Presidential Ball Is First In Rich Pace
Down the stretch they came, Presidential Ball, the overwhelming 1-5 favorite, in front on the inside; Life Sign, the 5-1 second choice, charging hard and making up ground on the outside.
Both were looking for the wire and a victory in tonight's $1 million Meadowlands Pace final.
As they charged to the finish, Jack Moiseyev, driving Presidential Ball, whipped his highly touted 3-year-old colt with a fury.


Kathleen Tracey, Michael Bulger
Kathleen Virginia Tracey, a daughter of Joseph and Barbara Tracey of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Michael Driscoll Bulger, a son of Dr.
James and Joan Bulger of Rockville, Md.
The Rev.
John J. Stack performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Timothy.
Mrs.
Bulger, 27, is the coordinator of the child-care project at the American Public Health Association in Washington.
She graduated from Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
Her father is the New England sales representative, in West Hartford, of the commercial graphics division of the 3M Company.
Her mother is a sales associate at the Prudential Connecticut Realty Company in West Hartford.


Refugees Are Sent Back to China Hours After They Dock in Mexico
Two boats loaded with weary Chinese refugees from halfway around the world docked here early today.
Within hours the first 100 refugees had their hands bound together with plastic restraints and their hair marked with a patch of brown dye and were on a charter jet carrying them back to the country they had risked everything to leave.
Five old green-and-white buses roared out of the main gate at the port of Ensenada at daybreak, giving a crowd of more than 50 Mexican and foreign journalists the only glimpse of the desperate Chinese whose attempt to enter the United States illegally set off a diplomatic incident.
Mexico at first rejected a United States request to allow the ships to dock in Mexico, but then reversed the decision.


Who Armed Iraq? Answers the West Didn't Want to Hear
THE terms of the punishment forced on Iraq since the Persian Gulf War may be most valuable for what they have taught.
Rarely has a country defeated in battle been so laid bare to outside scrutiny.
To the victors, the answer to how Iraq gained its power is now dispiritingly clear: it was us -- the West, and German companies in particular.
That conclusion is documented in stark detail in a new study by the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control.
Based in part on the work of United Nations inspectors, it identifies the Western companies who supplied the crucial parts in what was emerging as an extraordinary Iraqi arsenal.
German firms were by far the worst offenders, but others in Switzerland, Britain, France, Italy and the United States were also instrumental.
Without Western help, the report's author, Gary Milhollin, shows, Iraq could never have come so close to producing nuclear weapons and long-range missiles.


Head Cases


The Model T's
Some never stopped working.
Others are back with a mission: to change our perceptions of age and beauty.
They are the latest wrinkle in the model culture -- the baby boomers who wear their wrinkles (what few they have) as if they've earned them.
Of course, this group of vintage models always had something special.
In the 1970's, when they first made their mark, each had the kind of off-center looks that are suddenly in style again.
Today, their presence on Calvin Klein's fall runway and in prominent ad campaigns may say less about image and more about culture.
Their generation is growing older, looking younger, and it likes to see its own reflection.
Besides, the current haute-casual styles look great on them.


Runnymede
To the Editor: Regarding Runnymede in England (Letters on Travel, June 13), Magna Carta is the cornerstone of British and American jurisprudence.
But the place where it was signed is of no importance at all.
It is no surprise that the British did not put up a memorial.
The roadside historical marker is all that is needed.
What is surprising is that the British let the American Bar Association deface the natural appearance of the site with a jarring stone structure that has no relevance to the event or to its period of history.


A Duke at Age 6
To the Sports Editor:
The article about the Duchess of Kent comforting the Wimbledon loser Jana Novotna states that "her husband became the Duke of Kent upon the death of his mother, Princess Marina, in 1968." In fact, he became Duke of Kent in 1942, at age 6, upon the death of his father (a younger brother of King George VI), who died while serving in the Royal Air Force.
LAWRENCE N. CRUMB Eugene, Ore.


Striped Bass as Far as the Eye Can See and Angler Can Cast
The tide was rushing to the west across Dogfish Bar on Martha's Vineyard Island.
It was 11 o'clock at night, and I was one of more than two-dozen anglers involved in what must have been, for most, the best fly fishing for striped bass they had ever encountered.
Bass of all sizes were breaking water before us.
And at one point, four anglers to my right, two to my left and I were all fast to fish.


Young Russia's Defiant Decadence
Traveling in Russia recently as a writer, I came quickly to feel like a spy -- not a foreign agent for America, but a spy for each emerging social class to the others.
Members of the Russian mafia -- the organized-crime circle -- were fascinated to hear that intellectuals think the criminal class exerts social influence.
The intelligentsia were obsessed with the greed of the new rich businessmen, whom they blame for the end of heroic idealism.
A return to the Orthodox Church has left homosexuals worried about repressive neo-conservatism; nightclub owners are wondering whether the artists who flourished underground can survive in the new daylight.
Politicians wonder whether power will remain in the hands of government or will devolve to these chaotic elements.
Within all these social strata, the changes are most clear among members of the younger generation.
Overall, their outlook is harsh indeed.
According to an article in the mainstream newspaper Argumenty i Fakty in April, "Young Russian malcontents are considering suicide every second." One-third want to leave the country.
Since 1989, the birth rate has dropped 30 percent, as discouraged young people choose not to have children.
Even so, some young Russians are plunging ahead with often-decadent abandon to find freedom, wealth and power, defying the timidity, and idealism, of the older generation.


Cake Buyers, Be Not Afraid!
To the Editor:
While I believe the Sunday, June 27 article ("The Cake Of Cakes") by Florence Fabricant was done in good humor, the net effect was to do me a disservice.


The Buzz Says: Enough With the Hype
Well before they arrived in theaters, "Last Action Hero" was pronounced Arnold Schwarzenegger's first flop, "Jurassic Park" a record-breaking hit, and "Sleepless in Seattle" the sleeper of the summer.
That shouldn't be surprising at a time when the Presidential elections are accurately predicted by exit polls hours before the voting ends.
Tom, Dan and Peter know who won; they just don't tell you and me, and everyone pretends we don't know they know.
Politics and movies are both areas where the spin doctor is king, and both have been slow to wake up to the fact that the public is now savvy about the spin itself.
Movie hype, always at its peak when dealing with summer's potential blockbusters, has become more complex as audiences have grown increasingly knowledgeable.
Box-office grosses, once confined to the pages of Variety, now appear everywhere from The New York Times to Entertainment Weekly; Vanity Fair profiles Hollywood agents alongside celebs.
In this environment, advance word goes beyond advertising.
It includes the good buzz that a studio wants the public to hear ("Arnold's biggest movie yet!"), the bad buzz that a studio's competitors want the public to hear ("Arnold's in trouble! The movie will never be finished in time."), and all sorts of analysis from serious reporters as well as gossip columnists.
Even the most sophisticated viewer can find this process so confusing that politics seems straightforward by comparison.


THE DETOXING OF PRISONER 88AO802
After reading Peter Kerr's article "The Detoxing of Prisoner 88AO802" (June 27), I couldn't help asking myself: How can we as a nation afford to continue wasting the lives of countless young people like Bill Giddens -- through prejudice, discrimination and just plain stupidity.


Avoiding Summer Problems On Cranky Air-Conditioners
DURING humid summers even window air-conditioners that have been cleaned and serviced at the start of the season can benefit from a tuneup before or during the dog days.
Most tuneups are easy, take less than a half-hour and can improve cooling.
Begin by making sure that the air-conditioner is unplugged.
Vacuum or dust the front grille and controls.
Remove the grille to clean or replace the air filter behind it.
Some grilles are fastened with screws.
Others pop free when pressed along the top or sides.
If you have difficulty, consult an owner's manual, if possible.
Otherwise, probe with a narrow putty knife around the outside edges for hidden tabs.


NOTES
Marc Jacobs is moving out of the Perry Ellis office on Seventh Avenue at the end of July, and his partner, Robert Duffy, hasn't decided whether to pack the ashtrays.
"Marc's coming off the patch this week," Mr.
Duffy said, confirming reports that the designer, who is planning his own collection for fall 1994, has been wearing a nicotine patch and going to the gym religiously to kick his cigarette habit.


Cracow Emerges From the Shadows
CRACOW, the intellectual and historic heart of Poland -- with medieval and Renaissance churches, castles, aristocratic houses and a 16th-century synagogue -- is emerging again as a European city of charm and vibrancy.
Many of the elegant small Gothic and Renaissance palaces that rim the main square have been repainted in the last two years.
Jazz spots in stone cellars are being scrubbed down; new sidewalk cafes with spiffy furniture and umbrellas are opening almost weekly, it seems.
Bookshops, art and antiques galleries show the contemporary and the old.
The food, if you choose carefully, is perking up.
This reawakening is taking place against the backdrop of Cracow's immutable strengths: an old town of narrow cobbled streets and 60 churches, the Jagiellonian University, which counts Copernicus and Pope John Paul II among its alumni, and the 13th-century Wawel royal castle, a moody, dark bulk of fortressed walls, onion domes and spires atop a limestone hill.
Complementing Cracow's architecture is its music.
The variety of excellent music being performed makes Cracow more than just another museum town.
During a few days' stay, a Baroque chamber concert in a palace salon, a jazz group in a subterranean club or opera at the 1897 Juliusz Slowacki theater, a glittering miniature version of the Paris Opera, is almost assured.


RECORD BRIEF
Brahms: Piano Pieces (Opp. 116-19) Wilhelm Kempff, piano.
Deutsche Grammophon 437 249-2; CD.


Maria Grady, Jay Murphy
Maria Shanley Grady, a daughter of John and Michelle Grady of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jay George Murphy, a son of Raymond and Linda Murphy of Ballston Spa, N.Y.
The Rev.
William Kennedy performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel.
Mrs.
Murphy, 28, is a graduate of the University of Richmond.
She is the director of meetings for the National Association of Life Underwriters in Washington.
Her father is a sales executive for the John D. Lucas Printing Company in New York.
Her mother is the assistant vice president of public relations at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.


Works That Follow a Family's History
"ANCESTRAL LEGACY," as illustrated on this page, comes across as a monument crowned by an arch wrought seemingly with a single gesture.
And though it is actually a padlock scarcely six inches long, the object remains a monument -- to Steve Pace, the slave whom it originally shackled, and to all other slaves, including, most likely, the man who made it.
Today, this tiny monument is playing a part in a much larger one, at the Montclair Art Museum.
It is the installation called "Honor Thy Father," which is the work of Steve Pace's great-great-grandson, Lorenzo, and pays tribute to his father, Bishop Elder Eddie T. Pace (1909-91).
The assemblages incorporated, which are displayed in the four alcoves of the museum's rotunda, concern not only the artist's father and mother but also their 13 children.


Jenny L. Stogner, Eric P. Neff
Jenny Lenora Stogner, the daughter of W. Earl and Joyce R. Stogner of Lewisburg, Pa., was married there yesterday to Eric Parks Neff, a son of the Rev.
John W. Neff and Helen P. Neff of Winthrop, Me.
The Rev.
Maike Ewart, a Lutheran minister, and the bridegroom's father, a Methodist minister, jointly officiated at Christ Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Neff, 24, is a music teacher in the Meriden (Conn.) Public Schools.
She graduated from Michigan State University, from which she also received a master's degree in music.


Georgia Davidson, Gerald Mullany
Georgia K. Davidson, a program planner for the New York City Department of Health, was married yesterday to Gerald Mullany, a copy editor on the Metropolitan desk of The New York Times.
The Rev.
Richard J. Dillon performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Davidson, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., as did her husband, and she received a master's degree in anthropology from the State University at Albany.


Cracow Emerges From the Shadows
CRACOW, the intellectual and historic heart of Poland -- with medieval and Renaissance churches, castles, aristocratic houses and a 16th-century synagogue -- is emerging again as a European city of charm and vibrancy.
Many of the elegant small Gothic and Renaissance palaces that rim the main square have been repainted in the last two years.
Jazz spots in stone cellars are being scrubbed down; new sidewalk cafes with spiffy furniture and umbrellas are opening almost weekly, it seems.
Bookshops, art and antiques galleries show the contemporary and the old.
The food, if you choose carefully, is perking up.
This reawakening is taking place against the backdrop of Cracow's immutable strengths: an old town of narrow cobbled streets and 60 churches, the Jagiellonian University, which counts Copernicus and Pope John Paul II among its alumni, and the 13th-century Wawel royal castle, a moody, dark bulk of fortressed walls, onion domes and spires atop a limestone hill.
Complementing Cracow's architecture is its music.
The variety of excellent music being performed makes Cracow more than just another museum town.
During a few days' stay, a Baroque chamber concert in a palace salon, a jazz group in a subterranean club or opera at the 1897 Juliusz Slowacki theater, a glittering miniature version of the Paris Opera, is almost assured.


Michael Stifelman and Jill Zimmerman
Dr. and Mrs.
Barry Zimmerman of Pomona, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Jill Robin Zimmerman to Dr.
Michael Drew Stifelman, a son of Frank and Susan Stifelman of South Orange, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Dr.
Zimmerman and her husband, both 26, received their medical degrees from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a graduate of the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and is now an intern in internal medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Her father is a managing director of "21" International Holdings Inc. in New York, owners of the "21" Club in New York, and of Foamex, a plastics manufacturing company based in East Providence, R.I.


Minimalism Pumped Up To the Max
There is a new word floating around the downtown music scene: Totalism.
It is used to categorize some of the music of the erstwhile avant-garde.
I doubt that the term, with its hint of grasping ambition, will catch on, but it signifies an attempt by talented younger composers to move beyond Minimalism and other styles that have dominated the scene since the 1970's.
The esthetic of Totalism is inspired by Minimalism's use of repetition and by the instrumentation and styles of rock, pop and world music, but it also aims for the larger structures and more elaborate harmonies of the classical tradition.
Unlike much other recent downtown music, Totalist music is totally scored, not improvised.
It aspires to sounds and textures more complex than anything associated with the downtown scene or its pop counterparts.
Just as uptown locales have begun to institutionalize downtown, downtown has begun to rethink uptown.


Jean A. Oursler, Jeffrey B. Cherins
Dr.
Janice D. Oursler of Massapequa, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Jean Adele Oursler, to Jeffrey Bruce Cherins, a son of Karen and Robert Cherins of Livingston, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oursler and her fiance graduated from Ithaca College.
She is an associate account manager at D'Arcy, Masius, Benton &amp; Bowles Inc., the advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is an administrator at the Manhattan Psychiatric Center in New York.
Ms.
Oursler is also the daughter of William F. Oursler of Miami and the great-granddaughter of the late Fulton Oursler, the author.


Eastern Germans Angered by Cross-Border Crime
First robbers cleaned out Wilfried Zehder's house in this rural town in eastern Germany.
Then he surprised three other young men trying to break in.
They simply ran back across the Czech border, only a few yards away, laughing and waving as they went.
Like others in the border regions near the Czech Republic and Poland, he is now afraid to leave his house unattended.
"I feel like a prisoner," said Mr.
Zehder, who took early retirement from his job as a railroad worker after German unification.


Less Management, Please, and More Care
To the Editor:
The market is the worst possible mechanism for the delivery of health care.
We can expect market forces to intrude ever more heavily into the doctor-hospital link that forms the core of health care.
Nurses, even clerks, will track rulings on medical procedures.
Elaborate advertising campaigns are afoot to persuade doctors and hospitals to join a network.
Hospitals fear that their earnings, to cover the poor and for medical training, may be compromised.
And the struggle over payment between high-cost specialists and primary care physicians will intensify.


WEARS JUMP SUIT. SENSIBLE SHOES.
While I readily acknowledge the historical fact of the objectification of women, I do not agree with Deborah Tannen's rather dated diagnosis of women as punitively "marked" by the superficialities of clothing and cosmetics ("Wears Jump Suit. Sensible Shoes. Uses Husband's Last Name," June 20).


The Ph.D.'s Are Here, But the Lab Isn't Hiring
SCIENCE professors breed science professors.
More or less like mice.
Throughout a career of teaching and research, one Ph.D. can produce about 15 new Ph.D.'s to teach and carry on research.
If the 15 stay in teaching, and most try to, they can produce 225 more.
Countering the conventional wisdom's often predicted shortage, Dr.
David L. Goodstein, a physicist and vice provost of the California Institute of Technology, says the nation faces "a chronic, systemic oversupply of Ph.D.'s, a rising tide of Ph.D.'s that we seem helpless to stem."


Q and A
Through the Panama Canal
Q.
My husband and I are interested in going through the Panama Canal, but not on a cruise.
Is there any way we can do it? -- Marjorie C. Horowitz, Princeton, N.J.


Sega, Take a Long Look at Science
To the Editor:
If Hayao Nakayama of Sega Enterprises has a vision to change the amusement park industry ("Sega Takes Aim at Disney's World," July 4), why not embark on an undertaking that would provide Sega, Disney and others with an opportunity to demonstrate its technology in a real-life, profitable endeavor?


U.S. Team Rebounds To Defeat Canada
The United States men's basketball team plays better when it is pumping fists and talking trash on every successful shot.
Finally showing its accustomed verve after a listless first half, the Americans captured the gold medal tonight at the World University Games with a 95-90 victory over Canada.


In the Urban Jungle, Toys for Paleontologists
ON the sidewalk outside Evolution, a new store on Spring Street in SoHo that feels like a glorified gift shop at a natural history museum, a human skeleton dangles jauntily from a stand.
As a drawing card, it is somewhat macabre.
Most items in the attractive gallery evoke nothing but awe at nature's variety and magnificence.
There are patterned sea shells ($1 to $198), luminescent butterflies ($25 to $69) and antelope skulls with long, twisting horns ($145 to $1,200).
"This Jurassic Park thing is really catching on," said Amy Newman, a recent college graduate who was visiting the store with Rich Bennett, a graduate student in molecular biology at Cornell University.
He added, "Everyone wants fossils and prehistoric stuff."


Clinton Tours Floods and Considers Sending Troops
President Clinton made a third trip to the Midwest flood area today, this time to confer with Vice President Al Gore, eight governors and members of Congress and the Cabinet about how to relieve the misery and clean up what is turning out to be one of the worst natural disasters in American history.
But even as he and the officials gathered in a high school cafeteria here just south of St.
Louis, near the sodden, nearly overflowing levees of the Mississippi, the destruction continued upstream.
A bridge linking Missouri and Illinois was closed near Quincy, Ill., and a Des Moines levee threatened to give way and flood a residential and industrial area.


Seized Drug Cash Pays for Children's Play Sites
An idea to put drug money to good use -- helping New York City's children -- is gathering momentum, and money seized by law-enforcement groups is helping to pay for expanding the play-street programs run by the Police Athletic League that now operate in 28 neighborhoods torn by drugs and violence.
The money, about $250,000 so far this year, stems from an idea conceived in 1989 by Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, and Benjamin Ward, the Police Commissioner at that time, to help anti-drug efforts throughout New York.


Japanese Leaders Await Voters' Verdict


Sports of The Times; The Yankees' Future: Arms And The Man
IN THE bad old days, Buck Showalter might not have survived George Steinbrenner's impatience.
Until left-hander Jimmy Key spun his record to 12-2 on Friday night before yesterday's 9-5 victory, the Yankees had lost 9 of their previous 11 games.
Yankee managers have been fired for less, if not more.
But as the principal owner promised after modestly posing for a Sports Illustrated cover in a Napoleon costume before his return from baseball's Elba, he's kinder, gentler and quieter this season.
At least publicly.
Privately and telephonically, that is not necessarily so.
Win or lose, he is whispered to be nagging Showalter several times a day.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about Fire Island misstated the law on public drinking in the Corneille Estates section.
It is prohibited there, under the laws of the Town of Islip, of which Corneille Estates is part.


Saratoga
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Saratoga" (June 13) quotes Daniel Chester French's comment about his 1914 sculpture, "Spirit of Life," as "the best thing of the kind I have made" but does not give the reason the work is in Saratoga's Congress Park.
The "Spirit of Life," a memorial to Spencer Trask, shows how philanthropy lives on for the benefit of society.
Upon the death of their four children, Spencer Trask, a prominent turn-of-the-century New York financier, and his wife, Katrina, decided to establish Yaddo, their estate and baronial mansion in Saratoga, for the support of the creative arts, providing a residence and atmosphere for creative people.
After Spencer Trask was killed in a 1909 train crash, Mrs.
Trask continued with their plan, and in 1926 Yaddo opened.
Since that time Yaddo has been a haven for poets, novelists, painters, sculptors, composers and other artists.


The Executive Computer; Doesn't It Ever Stop? PC Price War Looms Again
JUST as in "Jurassic Park," the big dinosaurs -- Compaq, I.B.M., Digital and Hewlett-Packard among them -- are coming back to life and, boy, are they hungry.
With the ferocity of a Tyrannosaurus rex, these giants of the computer industry are stalking and chewing up any personal computer makers not big enough, smart enough or nimble enough to survive.
The weaker PC makers have no choice but to scurry for cover.
The Compuadd Corporation, following the lead of Everex Systems Inc., recently filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection and laid off more than half its workers.
Scores of smaller companies are going to unmarked graves.
Even some fairly large American companies are disappearing -- goodbye Gecco, Fast Micro, Standard.


Issue for Japan Voters Today: How Much Change?
Just beyond the soft hills and rows of green rice fields here in central Japan, workers are blasting through the hills, breaking ground for what may be the biggest monument yet to the nation's money politics: a magnetically levitated bullet train that will allow commuters to float over the rails from Tokyo to Osaka, about 325 miles, in an hour's time.
The project is here because it is the district of Shin Kanemaru, whose power came to symbolize all that went wrong with the one-party rule of Japan's Liberal Democrats.
Bus tours here now even stop by Mr.
Kanemaru's sprawling, heavily-guarded home, presumably built with the $50 million prosecutors say he obtained in return for political favors.


At Work; Elegy on the Steelworking Era
There is no shortage of chroniclers of the fade-out of the American steel industry.
Books like "Sparrows Point," by Mark Reutter; "And the Wolf Finally Came," by John Hoerr, and "Homestead," by William Serrin, sympathetically detail the loss not only of individual livelihoods during the last 15 years, but also of whole communities.
Wherever the blame for the decline is placed -- on capital's cupidity, labor's intransigence or God's mysterious ways -- the result is the same.
Hundreds of thousands of people well into midlife and beyond have watched their hopes and way of life evaporate along with their income.
A new book from Cornell University Press literally puts faces and voices to the story.
"Portraits in Steel" is a joint effort of the photographer Milton Rogovin and Michael Frisch, an oral historian at the Buffalo campus of the State University of New York.
Mr.
Rogovin photographed Buffalo steelworkers and their families first in 1976, while the region was productive, and then in 1987, after "deindustrialization."


20% of Trial Judge's Cases Reversed Because of Errors
Cases handled by one judge in Manhattan's main criminal trial court are overturned on appeal twice as often as those of any of his colleagues, and appellate courts consistently blame mistakes made by the judge.
In the most recent setback for the judge, Acting Justice Jerome Hornblass of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the Appellate Division of Supreme Court this month granted a new trial to a man convicted of attempted aggravated assault for aiming a machine gun at police officers.
The appeals court ruled that Justice Hornblass made no fewer than seven errors in the case, any one of which would have been grounds for retrial.


In the Region: Connecticut; A Taxation Tempest Over Private Schools
IT has been chapter, verse and law since time immemorial: Thou shalt not tax private schools.
But officials of the 81 independent secondary schools in Connecticut are watching with apprehension as the trial date nears for a landmark lawsuit filed in Superior Court in Hartford challenging the Town of Windsor's right to levy a property tax on the Loomis ChaffeeSchool, founded there in 1897.


Town Seeks Donations of Goods To Save the Taxpayers Money
WHEN the Berlin Police Department was renovating a holding cell this year, it was supposed to cost $12,000.
But by scavenging parts from a jail that was being torn down, the department finished the job for $4,500.
In a similar fashion, the police department solicited a truck from a utility company to transport the police dive team.
A bank gave the department used computers and wall partitions to set up a detectives' bureau, and an insurance company gave the department some furniture and office equipment.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LATVIAN PHOTOGRAPHERS
Pursuing the art of photography in Latvia during some 50 years of Soviet occupation was not easy.
"Stepping Out of Line: Artistic Persistence," the new exhibition at the Silvermine Guild of Artists in New Canaan, shows what 22 Latvian photographers were able to do against all odds.


Art That's Valued for What It Can Do
"ASTONISHMENT AND POWER: Kongo Minkisi and the Art of Renee Stout" at the National Museum of African Art is for the most part a soul-stirring and beautiful show.
But its pairing of 19th-century African "power objects" with the work of a contemporary African-American artist implicitly raises questions about the relationship of Western and non-Western art that the exhibition comes nowhere near answering.
The show, which runs through Jan. 2, includes more than 30 carved wooden figures called "minkisi" (min-KEY-see, roughly translated as "things that do things").
They were made a century ago by the people of Kongo (an ancient territory that covered parts of present-day Congo, Angola and Zaire).
Wrapped in fabric or bristling with nails, these objects are credited with the power to change human lives.
The last gallery is devoted to work by Renee Stout, a young Washington artist whose sculptures adapt many superficial features of these figures.
Superficiality is the problem.
For although "Astonishment and Power" suggests a continuity between pre-modern African art and African-American art today, it reveals instead how tenuous this connection can be if crucial cultural differences are ignored.
In fact, the most satisfying way for a viewer to approach "Astonishment and Power" is to treat the Kongo objects, carefully mounted and documented by Wyatt MacGaffey, an anthropologist, as an exhibition in itself.
Although most of the minkisi ("nkisi" in the singular) in the show are human figures, they can also take the form of clay pots, leaf-wrapped packets or stitched cloth pouches.
Once the nkisi is implanted with symbolic medicines -- ashes, roots, seeds, crushed bone, or dirt taken from graves -- it is considered to be inhabited by a spirit whose energies can be activated, often for a fee, by the insertion of nails or metal blades into the object itself.


The Big Leak in Serbia Embargo: Nervous, Needy Macedonia
Waiting as traffic inched forward through Macedonia's busiest border crossing with Serbia, a truck driver was asked what he was carrying.
"Roofing tiles," he replied, matter-of-factly.
Did he think the Macedonian border guards would prevent him from crossing, as required by United Nations sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro?
"No, no," he said.
"I've done it many times before."


Brooke C. Wight, Christopher Cabot
Brooke Conley Wight, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward I. Wight of Baltimore and Nantucket, Mass., was married yesterday to to Christopher Shepard Cabot, a son of Chilton S. Cabot of Quincy, Mass., and Lynne O. Cabot of Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
Joseph Lopes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Siasconset Chapel in Nantucket.
The bride, 27, graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in social work from Boston College.
Her father is the president of the Sterling Chemical Company in Timonium, Md.
Her maternal grandfather is Clark M. Clifford, the former Presidential adviser and former chairman of First American Bankshares, who was the Secretary of Defense under President Lyndon B. Johnson.


Ski Resorts Offer Golf Deals
Summer is off-season at most ski areas, and many Vermont resorts are trying to take up the slack with bargain packages centered around golf.
The packages, which usually require a two-day minimum stay, include the use of the resort's fitness centers, tennis courts and other amenities.
Travelers to Vermont will get a small additional bonus: As of July 1, the sales tax dropped from 5 percent to 4 percent and the rooms and meals tax dropped from 8 percent to 7 percent.


WHO'S GOT CLOUT
In "Who's Got Clout" (June 20), William Safire's characterizations of who wears the pants in the White House, the Clinton pecking order, the Hollywood factor and "Hairgate" show what the ossified conservative mind can't remember:


Dolphins Say Goodbye to Duper
MARK DUPER, the second-leading receiver in Miami Dolphins history, was waived by the team yesterday with training camp two days away.
That means the Dolphins will enter this season for the first time since 1983 without the "Marks Brothers" -- Duper and MARK CLAYTON, who were the team's top receivers for the past decade and are ranked 1-2 on Miami's career receiving list.


Adventure in Idaho: Rough Roads and Soft Hearts
It was Wordsworth, a 19th-century Englishman, who explained poetry as "emotion recollected in tranquillity." As a 20th-century American bicyclist safely ensconced here and about to enter Yellowstone Park with a mostly rebuilt back wheel, I feel the same way about Idaho.
It was not a prosaic passing.
Shaped like a lamb chop standing on its meat end, Idaho is nearly 400 miles across its southern base.
Most of southern Idaho is desert and farmland, a lovely and impressive vastness split by the Snake River.


'HOPEFULLY' SPRINGS ETERNAL
Cathleen Schine says "hopefully" will claim its rightful place in the language someday.
I hope not.


'Vindication' for a Diabetes Expert
WHEN Dr.
Richard K. Bernstein was asked, "How does it feel to be vindicated?" his answer was, "My feelings are mixed."
After 12 years of research, a new medical regimen for treating diabetics reveals that the devastating complications of the disease can be prevented or delayed when Type I, insulin-dependent diabetics lower their blood sugar.


Wall Street; A Little Respect for the Little Guy
WALL STREET'S highbrow money managers are showing a little respect for Joe Six-Pack, wooing the little guy to mutual funds with brand names like Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs.
The new partnership hasn't yet resulted in any tailgate parties on the boardroom table.
But firms that once looked down their noses at customers with only a few thousand dollars to invest today are welcoming them with open arms.
Executives at the firms say the moves amount to pursuit of a business opportunity: small investors are buying funds in droves, so why not move in on a willing market, they ask.
But the change in policy also exposes blueblood firms to new risks.
Not the least of the downsides is that fund operators must follow stringent investment-company rules about disclosure of performance, something other money managers need not worry about.
"Now their mistakes will be public knowledge," said Don Phillips, publisher of Morningstar Mutual Funds.


On the French Specialty Route, by Ferry
ALDO'S is a familiar name to lovers of French food on the North Fork.
For seven years Aldo Maiorana has operated a specialty food shop and catering business on Front Street in Greenport.
Last summer he leased the dining room at the Dering Harbor Inn on Shelter Island.
When the season ended he converted the rear of his Greenport shop into a restaurant.  [ See A la Carte below. ]


Jane Lieberman, Richard Rubin
Jane I. Lieberman, a daughter of Judith and Lester Lieberman of Harding Township, N.J., was married last evening to Richard E. Rubin, a son of Marlene Rubin of Edgartown, Mass., and Miles Rubin of El Paso, Tex.
Rabbi Tirzah Firestone officiated at the Pine Creek Cookhouse, a restaurant in Ashcroft, Colo.
The bride, 30, is a second vice president in the real estate group at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Chicago and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Metered Trip


Roses Are Red and Other Reminders
IT is hoped that those who are adding new plants to their gardens are remembering to jot down what the plants are, their full botanical name (especially if they are ornamental trees or shrubs), where they were planted, the source and the year acquired.
Prices help, too.
Although such note-taking may seem to be too much to consider for now, these notes will be handy in the future.
They are especially helpful when making plans, adding to or even subtracting from the garden.
If divisions or cuttings are given to friends, they, too, like to know what they are getting.


Results plus
GOLF  Coronary in '92, 64 Now Dick Rhyan shot an 8-under-par 64 yesterday to tie the Stonebridge Country Club course record one year to the day after suffering a heart attack during the same Ameritech Senior Open.


Tanana Stars on Mets Shopping Network
Frank Tanana went to the mound at Candlestick Park for the bottom of the seventh inning and he was happy.
This is unusual for Tanana -- unusual for any Mets pitcher, really -- but it was not an out-of-place feeling in this improbable game.
What a sight it was this afternoon, the 40-year-old pitcher, backed by the worst team in baseball and on the trading block, taking apart the club with the best record and highest batting average in the major leagues.
For six and two-thirds innings, Tanana kept the Giants unsettled with his array of off-speed pitches, occasionally beating a batter with a 78 mile-an-hour fastball that surprised.
During that stretch, only Will Clark, who was hit by a pitch on his left elbow in the first inning, managed to reach base.


Alissa Jill Blate, Andrew Jessup
Alissa Jill Blate, a daughter of Lynne Wexton and a stepdaughter of Charles I. Wexton, both of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married last evening to Richard Andrew Jessup, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Jessup of Selma, N.C.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson performed the ceremony at the New York Palace Hotel.
Mrs.
Jessup, 29, a graduate of Ithaca College, is a vice president at the Rowland Company, a public relations company in New York.
Her mother is the president of Cromwell Advertising Agency Inc. in New York.
The bride's stepfather is the president of the Park East Newspaper Delivery Service Inc. in New York.


Avoiding Summer Problems On Cranky Air-Conditioners
DURING humid summers even window air-conditioners that have been cleaned and serviced at the start of the season can benefit from a tuneup before or during the dog days.
Most tuneups are easy, take less than a half-hour and can improve cooling.
Begin by making sure that the air-conditioner is unplugged.
Vacuum or dust the front grille and controls.
Remove the grille to clean or replace the air filter behind it.
Some grilles are fastened with screws.
Others pop free when pressed along the top or sides.
If you have difficulty, consult an owner's manual, if possible.
Otherwise, probe with a narrow putty knife around the outside edges for hidden tabs.


Corrections
A map with an article last Sunday about Gramercy Park incorrectly located the Gramercy Park Historic District and several buildings within it.
A corrective map appears on Page 6.The article also misstated the address of the city's oldest surviving co-op.
It is 34 Gramercy Park East.
A box accompanying the article misstated the area's ZIP codes.
They are 10003 and 10010.
The article also misstated the starting price of one-bedroom apartments in prewar buildings abutting the park.
Apartments priced below $200,000 do not have park views.


After Elizabeth, the Deluge
THE RISE AND FALL OF THE HOUSE OF WINDSOR By A. N. Wilson.
Illustrated. 211 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending July 3  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $890,000
401 West 21st Street  2 attached single-family homes to be used as a one-family residence; 5 bedrooms, 3 1/2-baths,dining room, eat-in kitchen, 4 fireplaces, parking space, 1,000-sq.-ft. of commercial space on the ground floor, landmark district, 44- by 60-ft. lot; taxes $7,839 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Corcoran Group)  East Midtown  $540,000
309 East 49th Street  (Sterling Plaza)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, terrace, 4 exposures; common charge $1,161, taxes $8,940 (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Silverman Group)  Greenwich Village  $565,000
2 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op in need of renovation; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,710, 19% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Upper East Side  $607,500
180 East 79th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2 bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, fireplace, maintenance $1,860, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Stribling &amp; Associates-Corcoran Group)  West Side  $262,500
119 West 71st Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; elevator, dining room, windowed-kitchen; maintenance $850, 46% tax-deductible (Brokers: Eden Realty-Solarz Realty)  BRONX  Castle Hill  $210,000
402 Screvin Avenue  2-family, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  City Island  $260,000
293 Minneford Lane  2 one-family homes on one lot; 3 bedrooms, 2 bath, dining room in small Victorian home near street; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, cathedral ceilings in separate rear structure; 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  BROOKLYN  Marine Park  $175,000
1740 Kimball Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Century 21/Homefront)  Park Slope  $452,500
192 Sixth Avenue (Union St.)  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, double parlor, marble mantels in owners triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in garden rental, 16.8- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,608 (Broker: Susan N. Breen Realty)  Prospect Park  $380,000
184 Rugby Road  9-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; center hall, dining room, fireplace, billiard room, 2-car garage, landmark district; 85- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,736 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  Flushing  $130,000
154-18 Barclay Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  Forest Hills Gardens  $290,000
63 Burns Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, 3-story town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, solarium, fireplace, 25- by 91-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Oakwood  $162,500
399 Montreal Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 30- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,421 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Westerleigh  $214,000
291 St.
John Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached Victoran; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, full basement, 60- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone-Salmon Real Estate)


Pine-Tar Couture; THE CHAMPIONS AND CELLAR-DWELLERS OF FASHION
Like beer-drenched bleachers, fashion has long been a part of the game.
If not for hosiery -- specifically, the stirrup sock -- there would have been no White Sox or Red Sox or Tigers (the last having been named for the horizontal yellow stripes on their stockings).
Color isn't new to baseball, either.
In 1876, Alfred G. Spalding, the pitcher-manager of the Chicago White Stockings, assigned caps of different colors to every field position -- creating an effect one writer likened to "a Dutch bed of tulips."


Sports of The Times; Writing Happy Ending For Four Storied Parks
EBBETS Field.
Crosley Field.
Shibe Park.
Sportsman's Park.
Forbes Field.
Braves Field.
The Met.
The only places these ball parks exist any longer is in the recesses of people's memories.
At least one person is trying to make sure that Yankee Stadium, Tiger Stadium, Fenway Park and Wrigley Field will never be added to that list.


Cardinals Sign a Young Benes
The St.
Louis Cardinals signed their top pick in the June draft, right-handed pitcher ALAN BENES, the younger brother of San Diego Padres All-Star pitcher ANDY BENES.
Benes, 7-5 last season at Creighton, was assigned to Glens Falls of the Class A New York-Penn League. (AP)


Gray Foster, Hugh Jessiman
Gray Southerland Foster, a daughter of Mrs.
W.
Merritt Jones Jr. of Grosse Pointe, Mich., and Ridgely M. Foster of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Hugh Gaston Jessiman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew Jessiman of Nantucket, Mass.
The Rev.
Bryant Dennison performed the ceremony at the Christ Episcopal Church in Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.
Mrs.
Jessiman, 27, teaches English literature at the Antilles School, a private school on St.
Thomas, V.I.
She graduated from the University of Colorado and received a master's degree in elementary education from Marymount University.
Her father is a broker with Merrill Lynch Real Estate in Palm Beach.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Robert B. Evans of Grosse Point Shores, Mich., was a chairman of the former American Motors Corporation.


Dianne Berkun, Francisco Nunez
Dianne P. Berkun, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan M. Berkun of Suffern, N.Y., was married last evening to Francisco J. Nunez, a son of Ysmaela Marmolejos of New York and the late Emanuel Nunez.
Cantor Robert Abelson performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
The bride, 26, is a magna cum laude graduate of New York University.
She is the director of music at the Brooklyn Friends School and the founder and director of the Brooklyn Youth Chorus.


Darcy Davisson And John Rigas
Zita Davisson Hendrickson of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Darcy Davisson to John Rigas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Panayotis Rigas of Athens.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Davisson graduated from the American University in Paris.
Her mother is a portrait artist.
Miss Davisson's stepfather, Robert A. Hendrickson of New York, is an author and a partner in Eaton &amp; Van Winkle, a New York law firm.
Her maternal grandfather, the late John P. V. Heinmuller, was president of the Longines-Wittnauer Watch Company.


Light Starch
Whether milled for bread or cooked as nubbins, grains are stalwart little soldiers that can be counted on to add girth to dinner.
But there is also the inherent nuttiness of the grain, the teasing flavor of the kernel, that counters its stodgier properties.
Likewise, the bean, whether dried or fresh, would be a humdrum denizen of the kitchen if not for its buttery nuance, the snap of its outer membrane, the satiny mush of its interior, its unerring willingness to become either the soul of a meal or its soul mate.
Together, or combined with shellfish, herbs or a soupcon of meat, grains and beans make for delightful summer eating.
They can be fashioned into sturdy, do-ahead meals, and, when handled with panache and care, they suddenly cease to be staples and become more of themselves.


How to Donate to Flood Relief
A number of charities have established special funds and sent disaster teams to the region.
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations:
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256 (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


Bastille Day, Bastille Day
Corks, among other things, are liberated and art celebrated at events on July 14.


A Senate Tradition Faces Wide Attack
THE reappointment of a Superior Court judge has turned into a highly charged tug-of-war pitting the state's Democratic Governor, its Republican Assembly Speaker and the Chief Justice of the State Supreme Court against a Republican State Senator from Morris County and a 149-year-old unwritten code of senatorial conduct.
Judge Marianne Espinosa Murphy of State Superior Court was recently nominated for lifetime reappointment to the bench by Gov.
Jim Florio.
But Senator John H. Dorsey of Boonton Township has invoked senatorial courtesy, whereby a state senator acting alone can block such an appointment.


POSTINGS: After a Collapse; Site Monitored For Vibrations
Much remains of the Federal-style town house at 149 Mulberry Street that was built for Stephen Van Rensselaer in 1816.
Its gambrel roof is still there.
So are the pediment-topped dormer windows.
So, too, was the chimney -- until 10 days ago when it collapsed in a cloud of dust onto the roof of an adjoining building.
No one was injured and Paolucci's restaurant, on the first floor, was unaffected.


Strindberg Discovers Hollywood
Last year, in "Flaubert's Latest," the playwright Peter Parnell had the brooding 19th-century French novelist Gustave Flaubert materialize in an idyllic garden in Litchfield County, Conn.
Drury Pifer has gone him one better.
In a new comedy, receiving its premiere at the Woolly Mammoth Theater in Washington, he has the austere 19th-century Swedish playwright August Strindberg and wife show up in present-day Hollywood.


Jason Wolin and Sharon Nudelman
Sharon Mia Nudelman, a broker at Douglas Elliman, the real-estate management and brokerage firm in New York, was married last evening to Jason Lewis Wolin, a computer systems analyst at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
Rabbi David Fass officiated at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
The bride, 28, graduated from Lehigh University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Nudelman of New York.
Her father, a naval architect, is the director of the Westlawn Institute of Marine Technology, a correspondence naval architecture school in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Carole Nudelman, is a mathematics teacher at Lincoln High School in Yonkers.


Des Moines Patches Quaking Levee
Flood water eroded more than halfway through a 30-foot-thick levee in southeastern Des Moines today, but Iowa National Army Guard troops and local contractors quickly dumped dozens of truckloads of sand and rock to stabilize it.
Col.
Roger Schultz, the senior National Guard official at the levee, said the patch appeared likely to hold as long as the Des Moines River did not rise any higher.
The National Weather Service has predicted heavy rain upstream tonight, but it is expected to drain into a portion of the river that is partly controlled by a dam.


Co-op Gamble
To the Editor:
Your article on the tumbling values of co-o apartments ("Co-op Bargains -- A Gamble That Can Pay Off," June 17) makes many good points but stops short of making one final fundamental insight: The co-op apartment structure is for most people a terrible form of ownership of real estate.
This is part of the reason why values of co-ope apartments are tumbling.


The Executive Life; Translating Diversity Into High-Tech Gains
TWENTY years ago, when Silicon Valley was just beginning to boom, the electronics industry was notorious for being composed almost exclusively of white male engineers born in the U.S.A.
Times have changed.


Melanie Goodes and R. Louis Caceres
Melvin and Arlene Goodes of Far Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melanie Janette Goodes to R. Louis Caceres, a son of Fernando and Miriam Caceres of La Paz, Bolivia.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Goodes, 28, is a staff accountant at Price Waterhouse in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Warner-Lambert Company in Morris Plains, N.J., a maker of pharmaceuticals and other consumer products.


Conversations/Elaine R. Jones; In a Color-Conscious Society, She Challenges the 'Color Blind'
ELAINE R. JONES, director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, refers to herself and her staff of 28 lawyers as "technicians" and "plumbers."
"When I say technician, I mean, when the faucet isn't working, and you need running water, you need the plumber," she said over a recent lunch at the Metro Grill here.
"We know the law, the courts, we know systems." That is the role that the fund has played from the beginning, she noted: "Thurgood Marshall, all those Brown v. Board lawyers up at Howard University mapping out strategy -- they were legal technicians."


A Computer Game Can Be Personal
IT would be wrong to suppose that playing bridge in one's home while linked by computer and telephone to three other players must be an unsocial activity.
Conversation is possible and is always polite: there is no way to raise the voice in sending a typed message.
Since the players all have bridge and computers as common interests, friendships develop readily.
One East Coast-West Coast bridge partnership became a regular fixture, and after some exchanges of personal information and a face-to-face meeting, it seems headed for matrimony.
There seems to be an unlimited future for computer bridge.
At the bottom end of the scale, lessons are already available.
At the top end we can expect to see a world championship in which players will compete simultaneously while remaining in their own cities or countries.
One advantage is that in each country the action can be broadcast on closed-circuit television and on Vugraph.
The World Bridge Federation is considering plans for such an event.


Hunt Goes On for Smugglers In Fatal Trip
Amid the confusion on the beach at dawn on June 6, Kin Sin Lee looked like any other of the 300 Chinese immigrants huddled in blankets after swimming ashore from the Golden Venture, the freighter that ran aground off Rockaway Peninsula after a journey halfway around the world.
Within hours, investigators were told that this slender, plain-looking 23-year-old had been directing operations throughout the trip, immediately making him their main link to the organized-crime figures who planned and ran the smuggling operation.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Hillsdale  $265,000
93 Standish Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, sunroom, h/w floors; taxes $4,875.
Metuchen  $154,000
201 Midland Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; new patio, kitchen and appliances, full basement; taxes $2,838.
Mount Olive  $180,000
9 Falcon Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; new windows, c/a, full basement; taxes $4,495.
Roxbury  $216,000
3 Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 15-year-old bilevel; new carpeting, h/w floors, open foyer, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,698.
Saddle Brook  $132,000
17 Harrison Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; pool, deck, new w/w carpeting; taxes $2,773.
Tenafly  $385,000
39 Bliss Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; central air-conditioning and vacuum, 2-car garage, deck; taxes $8,993.
OTHER AREAS Westport, Conn.  $330,000
26 Regents Park  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old town-house condominium; monthly charges $141, taxes $4,364.
Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.  $162,000
150 Draper Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old co-op; patio, private entrance, oak floors, modern kitchen, parking space; maintenance $772.
Albertson, L.I.  $190,000
38 Crosby Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, porch, basement, attic; taxes $4,500.


Rebecca Bol and Jakob Dupont
Rebecca Ann Bol and Jakob Dupont, second-year medical students, she at Cornell University and he at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Washington, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard C. Sears performed the ceremony.
The bride, 26, is a cum laude graduate of Princeton University.
She is a daughter of Karen Silk of Washington, Conn., and Dr.
Morris Bol of Norwich, Vt.
The bride's father is a physician in White River Junction, Vt.
Her mother is the vice president of Auchincloss &amp; Silk Real Estate in Washington.
Her stepfather, C. Hugh P. Silk, is an educational consultant and a former headmaster of the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


PUMPED UP
Deborah Gimelson reduced her weight trainer to a cultural stereotype, then reduced his status to that of a device, one whose purpose was to stroke her outsize ego -- and, from all appearances, she is proud of that (Hers: "Pumped Up," June 27).
She cites, by way of justification, the fact that men have always done the same thing to women.
That is irrefutable, but I would hate to think that the suffering of countless women has resulted in nothing more than an appetite for revenge.
That Gimelson's lover ditched her left me cold.
The only sad thing is that they'll both go on to other relationships when, clearly, they deserve each other.
CLIFF THOMPSON Brooklyn


High School Cadets Assist County Police
TWENTY Westchester high school students raised their right hands one morning late last month and swore to uphold the Constitution of New York State and the Westchester County Charter.
After completing the oath at the Police Academy in Valhalla, the students became the first police cadets in county history.
The cadets are now working 35 hours a week in the Department of Public Safety.
They have not been assigned any police duties and are not going on patrol with regular county police officers.
But they are assisting the public at eight parks and the County Office Building in White Plains.
The cadets are also handling duties like answering telephones and typing reports at County Police Headquarters in Hawthorne.
They are earning $5.50 an hour during an eight-week assignment.  'The Right Side of the Law'
"We don't want them misinterpreted as police officers or out on patrol," said Ernest J. Colaneri, Acting Commissioner of Public Safety.
"This program is just to give them a taste of police work. Hopefully, it will make them want to do more and get into law enforcement as a career."


Moving Ahead On a Cleaner L.I. Sound
AN agreement last month between New York State and Westchester County to limit pollutants discharged into Long Island Sound from sewage-treatment plants in Port Chester, Rye, Mamaroneck and New Rochelle is being applauded by government officials and environmentalists as a first step -- albeit a small one -- in correcting decades of abuse of a troubled estuary.
The agreement to enforce a policy recommended by the Federal Long Island Sound Study in 1991 -- calling for no net gain in nitrogen to prevent depleted oxygen levels in the water -- is the first of its kind in the state and could act as a model for other local governments to follow, State Department of Environmental Conservation officials said.


Roller Hockey Incident in New Haven
A remark by a former National Hockey League player, BERNIE FEDERKO, was blamed for triggering a post-game incident in roller hockey in which two fans were injured and Mace was sprayed during a game in New Haven.
The incident occurred Friday night after the Roller Hockey International game in which the St.
Louis Vipers beat the Connecticut Coasters, 6-5.


More Is Less at a Free-Form Jamboree in Chicago
If you know Mies van der Rohe only from the Seagram Building, you may feel let down at first by 860-880 Lake Shore Drive.
There's no bronze.
There's no bronze-tinted glass.
There's no Four Seasons, with its bronzed and burnished clientele.
At 860-880, the glass is clear; the structural skeletons of the two apartment towers are painted black.
No sleek curtain wall smooths over their jutting bones.
And unlike Seagram's rows of neatly calibrated window shades, the windows at 860-880 are dressed with heavy curtains, randomly bunched against the sun.
It may take a while, in other words, to register that Miesian refinement did not depend on sumptuous materials or polished perfection.
It required clarity of purpose, 3,000 years of geometry, and a good eye.
No. 860-880 has the rawness of invention.
This is Mies fresh out of the box or, more accurately, fresh into it.
Built in 1949-51, these two Chicago towers are the first examples of the steel-and-glass high-rises that conquered the world.
If they look fresh today that is partly because to see these buildings now we have to take them out of a box ourselves: the framework of misperceptions that helped the generation after Mies pack him off to history.


Wall Street; Reading the Rise in Investment Manager Linkups
ACQUISITIONS and joint ventures among investment managers picked up substantially last year, but the rise was from a low base that reflects a healthy business, according to John Keefe, a brokerage industry analyst who runs Keefe Worldwide Information Services.
Mr.
Keefe, who just completed a study of deals among investment managers for the bankers at the Berkshire Capital Corporation, said merger-and-acquisition and joint-venture activities were up 66 percent in 1992, to 48 deals, from 29 in 1991.


Like Flood, Policy Shift Could Topple the Levees
Even as the Mississippi River continues to swamp cropland and force thousands of people from their homes, a debate is taking shape in Washington and the Midwest over whether to rebuild the levees that have washed away or to dismantle some and allow flood waters in the future to cover low-lying areas, effectively turning them into temporary reservoirs.
Two assessments by the Army Corps of Engineers, one completed almost a decade ago and one done this week for The New York Times, found that flood crests in Iowa, Illinois and Missouri would have been two to three feet lower had the river not been confined by hundreds of miles of levees on both sides of the Mississippi.


Thomas Mann's Daughter an Informer
The United States Government used Erika Mann, the daughter and biographer of the German writer Thomas Mann, as a willing informer on fellow refugees from Nazi Germany during World War II, then sought to deport her as a suspected Communist sympathizer during the height of the cold war, newly declassified documents show.
Alexander Stephan, a professor of German literature at the University of Florida in Gainesville, discovered Miss Mann's shifting relationship with the Government when he gained access to 10,000 pages of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's classified files through the Freedom of Information Act.
He published excerpts from F.B.I. files this month in neue deutsche literatur, the German review.
Not Enough Evidence to Deport
Dr.
Stephan said that despite Miss Mann's apparently eager cooperation with the F.B.I. and despite her repeated denials of ties to Communists, the Immigration and Naturalization Service wanted to deport her in 1951.
He said neither the I.N.S. nor the F.B.I. ever found enough evidence to start proceedings to do so.
Miss Mann died in 1969 at the age of 63.


Garbo: The Feet
To the Editor:
I am responding to your letter from Helen S. Manley ("How Big Were Garbo's Feet?," June 20).
When I wrote "First Nights," I probably knew as much about Garbo's feet as anyone else except Garbo herself.
I know, for instance, that when filming, she would ask, "Is the feets in?" and if they weren't she would film the scene in fluffy bedroom slippers.
I know about a shopping trip for shoes she took with the actress Eleanor Boardman, during which she bought a pair of shoes, wore them, found them uncomfortable and then insisted on returning them.
But "First Nights" is a novel, and fiction is a record of that conflagration that occurs when reality collides with imagination.
Anna Asta is a portrayal of the personality I sensed emerging through those unforgettable films.
I can only hope I succeeded.
Much of "First Nights" was literally inspired by Garbo.
SUSAN FROMBERG SCHAEFFER  Brooklyn


Correction
An article on March 14 about a drive from Salzburg to Vienna misstated the name of a restaurant on Mondsee lake.
It is Restaurant Plomberg-Eschlbock, not Gasthof Eschlbock.
A reader's letter dated June 25 pointed out the error, and further research determined the correct name.


WEARS JUMP SUIT. SENSIBLE SHOES.
Like it or not, every decision men make about their appearance sends a message, too.
Fitting in with the status quo, trying to be "unmarked," in fact, sends a strong message up the corporate ladder: "I'm one of you. I accept your values and will support your goals. Please promote me." In fact, just like Tannen's academic world, where beards on men are "unmarked," every milieu develops its status quo.
Conforming to it, far from being mute, speaks volumes.
E.
FOSTER Bala, Pa.


JULY 11-17: No Trade Center Warnings; New York Bomb Informer Contacted Officials in 1991
When police and Federal agents arrested eight men last month and charged them with planning bomb strikes against targets across New York City, they credited their success to an informer who had won the confidence of the militant Muslim conspirators.
The informer, Emad A. Salem, had become known to officials about five months before, they said, and in the wake of the Feb. 26 explosion at the World Trade Center, the authorities were quick to rely upon him.


RELIGIOUS FERMENT
The Vineyards of Spain date from antiquity.
They trace their history back to the Greeks and Romans, who extended their own viticulture to every corner of the Mediterranean world.
The one exception was Galicia, the dramatic and still-isolated northwest corner of the Iberian Peninsula.
The Romans came to Galicia, of course; so did the Visigoths and the plundering Norsemen.
The Moors came but stayed only briefly, unable to retain control of this lush, verdant country.


Checkpoints In City of London
Hoping to keep out invading armies, the Romans built a wall 1,800 years ago around their settlement in what is now London's financial district.
This month the police put a security cordon in place in the same area to deter the Irish Republican Army, which has succeeded twice in the last 15 months in detonating truck bombs amid the banks, securities companies, insurance houses and historical sites in the City, as London's financial district is known.
Under the new security program, which will be in effect for at least six months, the police have closed off most of the several dozen roads leading into the core of the City.
Inbound traffic is permitted to enter through just eight streets, one of which, Moorgate, is open only to taxis and buses.
Police officers have set up checkpoints on each of the eight streets to inspect any vehicles they deem suspicious -- mostly trucks and vans -- but are simply waving most traffic through.
High-resolution video cameras will record the passing traffic.


Adrift on a Sea of Diplomacy
Six hundred and fifty-nine Chinese refugees on three fetid freighters became pawns in an international game last week.
Headed for California, they were intercepted by the Coast Guard, rebuffed by a United States already concerned about joblessness and taken in by an eternally impoverished Mexico, ultimately to be returned to China, where they may face jail terms and fines.
Their desires were made plain by a crude sign: "Bread We Want, Freedom We Want." But they ran afoul of the Clinton Administration's crackdown on illegal immigrants seeking political asylum.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  CHINESE MIGRANTS ARE SENT BACK


Danna Greenberg, Michael Tobin
Danna Nagelsmith Greenberg, the daughter of Carole N. Greenberg of Greenwich, Conn., and Dr.
Richard Greenberg of Riverside, Conn., was married last evening to Michael Richard Tobin, the son of Lenore K. Tobin of Westhampton, L.I., and Stuart Tobin of Aquebogue, L.I.
Rabbi Mark Golub officiated at the bride's mother's home.
The bride, a magna cum laude graduate of Wellesley College, is a doctoral candidate in organizational studies at Boston College.
Her father is a dentist in Cos Cob, Conn., and an adjunct associate professor at the School of Dental and Oral Surgery at Columbia University in New York.
Her mother is a marriage and family therapist in Greenwich.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Michele Greenberg.


Pension Underfunding? Check Out the I.R.S.
To the Editor:
Representative J. J. Pickle's broadside against companies underfunding their pension plans ("Pensions: Grand Plans Short on Funds," Viewpoints, July 11) ignores the very real role the Government, through the Internal Revenue Service, played in encouraging those underfundings.


U.S. Acts Inconsistently on Macedonia
To the Editor:
Your report of the arrival of American ground troops in Macedonia is a reminder of serious contradictions in Clinton Administration policy toward that republic and its civilian population ("Balkan Update," July 6).
American military participation in the "Macedonian tripwire" follows by only a month the imposition of a de facto embargo on certain products made in Macedonia and consigned for the United States market.


Windsurfing Can Be a Breeze, but Only if There Is One


Bridge
The heart combination shown in the diagram is familiar to experienced players.
The right play is to finesse immediately if dummy has two entries, losing when West has a singleton queen but gaining when West has a small singleton, since the finesse can be repeated.
This deal is said to have been played in a match so long ago that anyone who believes the date probably also believes in witchcraft.
At one table, playing in six hearts after a spade lead, South correctly worked out that playing low would give him two chances.
West might have the spade king, and if he did not the heart problem might be soluble.


Corrections
A chart yesterday about Japan's political parties transposed the pictures of two of their leaders.
The picture at the bottom was of Tsutomu Hata, who leads Shinseito, the Japan Renewal Party; above him was Morihiro Hosokawa, who heads the Japan New Party.


Patents
TENS of thousands of babies born prematurely every year struggle in intensive care, often in incubators, until they are strong enough to survive on their own.
But many infants born between four and six months of pregnancy, the second trimester, do not survive for even a few minutes because their lungs are so undeveloped they cannot breathe.
Believing that those born this early can be saved, a Philadelphia obstetrician has patented an artificial uterus that would suspend a fetus in a liquid environment until its lungs matured.


Treasury Sales This Week Will Be Confined to Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bill market, starting with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Government will auction a new one-year bill.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.11 percent.
The rate for a one-year bill was 3.24 percent.


CLINTON NOMINEE LEAVES STATE JOB
President Clinton's choice for Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, resigned today from her job as director of the Arkansas Health Department to help erase one objection to her nomination.
Dr.
Elders resigned and then flew with the President from Little Rock, Ark., to Washington, where she is expected to undergo questioning by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee on Friday.
Mr.
Clinton, who gave the nominee a hug as they boarded Air Force One, has repeated his support for Dr.
Elders, telling reporters on Saturday that he did not think her nomination was in trouble.


Gardner Promotes Three as Principals
Gardner Communications in San Francisco has changed its name to Gardner, Geary, Coll &amp; Young to reflect the promotions of three vice presidents as principals.
The vice presidents -- Gayle Geary, 48, in charge of research and planning; John Coll, 45, the creative director, and Karen Young, 43, the director of account management -- were promoted to the new positions of principals.
Bob Gardner will continue as the president of the agency, which has billings estimated at $20 million from accounts like the toy maker Wham-O.


F.B.I. CHIEF INSISTS HE WILL NOT QUIT
After a night in the hospital with a broken arm, William S. Sessions returned home today, asserting that he would not resign as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation despite an ultimatum from the Clinton Administration to step aside or be dismissed.
"It's a matter of principle," Mr.
Sessions said as he emerged from Sibley Memorial Hospital with his right arm in a cast.
He fell Saturday outside the Justice Department, where he had met with Attorney General Janet Reno and other senior Administration aides who told him he could either leave office or face dismissal.


CHRONICLE
Hard on the heels of Phil, Sally Jessy, Geraldo, Montel and Joan Rivers, does New York need another talk show host -- or hostess?
The executives at WPIX-TV think so, and starting on Aug. 2 on Channel 11, there will be a new name in the hopper: Shirley.
Shirley is SHIRLEY SOLOMON, whose show on the CTV network in Canada will now be seen here.


Assault by Gang at Bronx Pool Wasn't Sexist, but Criminal; Lifeguards Aren't Cops
To the Editor:
Although New York City's 33 large outdoor pools and 29 mini-pools are not without problems, let's keep in mind that every day they provide more than 25,000 children with a safe place to escape the heat.


Taylor Discounts Golfing Losses
A feisty Lawrence Taylor showed up on the first day of Giants' training camp today and said that claims he had accumulated $150,000 in gambling debts to Michael Jordan were "outrageously ridiculous."
Taylor did not deny that he had gambled on the golf course with his good friend Jordan, and added that he did owe the Chicago Bulls star money.
But he said it was "substantially less" than $150,000 and that the amount "wouldn't even make a good poker ante." A person close to the situation said the amount was closer to $1,500.


A New Era In Abortion
When confirmation hearings begin Tuesday for Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, it will be the first time in more than a decade that a nominee for the Supreme Court has come before the Senate Judiciary Committee with a clear and unflinching position on whether the Constitution protects the right to abortion.
Beginning with Sandra Day O'Connor's appearance before the committee in 1981, all Supreme Court candidates had sought to make their legal and personal views of abortion as ambiguous as possible.
The strong presumption was that there was no issue more perilous to their chances to sit on the Court.


Publisher for TV Guide
Mary G. Berner, vice president and associate publisher of TV Guide, has been named publisher of the weekly magazine.
She will retain the title of vice president.
The position of publisher has been vacant since last month when Joseph W. Cece, the magazine's former president and publisher, was promoted to executive vice president of News America Publishing Inc., TV Guide's parent.
Ms.
Berner joined TV Guide in 1989 as advertising director.
She was previously the publisher of Success magazine.


Joshua I. Satlof, Carolyn L. Koerner
Carolyn Leslie Koerner and Joshua Ian Satlof, both graduates of George Washington University, were married yesterday at the Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
Rabbi Jody Cohen officiated.
The bride, 25, a daughter of Leonard and Suzanne Koerner of Chatham, N.J., is studying for a master's degree in social work at the University of Connecticut.
Her mother is studying for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
Her father is the chief assistant corporation counsel for New York City.


World Economies


Ubu Repertory Outlines Its Fall Season of Plays
Ntozake Shange and Andre Ernotte are among the directors who are to stage plays for the fall season of Ubu Repertory Theater, which presents English translations of plays from French-language countries.
The season is to comprise three full productions and five staged readings of plays from Belgium, Ivory Coast, Martinique and Quebec.
"Fire's Daughters," by Ina Cesaire and directed by Ms.
Shange, is to run from Oct. 5 to 24; "Talk About Love!" by Paul Emond, is scheduled for Nov. 9 to 21, and "The Orphan Muses," by Michel Marc Bouchard, staged by Mr.
Ernotte, from Nov. 30 to Dec. 19.


Kobayashi Wins One For Her Sponsor
Hiromi Kobayashi of Japan took advantage of poor play by Betsy King and an average performance by Rosie Jones to win the JAL Big Apple Classic today at the Wykagyl Country Club.
The 28-year-old Kobayashi earned her first victory on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour by shooting a two-under-par 69 today for a four-round total of six-under-par 278.
That gave her a four-shot margin over Jones, who shot a 71.
King, who started the final round with a one-shot lead over Kobayashi, faltered with a 75 and finished alone in third place, five shots back.


Review/Theater; The Very Human Mix of Benign and Malign
When Kevin Kline joined the rescue team at the New York Shakespeare Festival, taking the title associate producer, he was not just another celebrity blithely paying lip service to a worthy cause.
Mr.
Kline is putting his artistic capital where his mouth is, contributing a scintillating performance to "Measure for Measure" at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, in the first Shakespeare production from the George C. Wolfe regime.
That this actor and the large company around him have brought off a show this fine, not to mention energetic, during a virulent heat wave may in fact constitute valor above and beyond the call of duty.
The director is Michael Rudman, an American who has mainly worked in England (with the prominent exception of the Dustin Hoffman "Death of a Salesman" on Broadway).
His approach to this darkest of Shakespearean comedies is feather light: as he also did at the National Theater in London a dozen years ago, Mr.
Rudman has switched the play's setting from an intrigue-filled Vienna to a sunny Caribbean island of the 1940's.
The endlessly fascinating psychological and moral shadings of the piece vanish with Vienna, but the comic interludes, which are usually neglected in weightier stagings, have rarely been funnier.
As an added dividend Mr.
Rudman's interpretation gives his star license to play a double role not unlike the one he performs so winningly in the movie "Dave."


A Publisher of Conservative Books Complains
Erwin A. Glikes was in Cambridge, Mass., a few weeks ago doing what all publishers do when they travel, looking in bookstores for his books.
What he saw was common for Mr.
Glikes, the publisher of many best-selling works of serious nonfiction, whose latest product is "The Real Anita Hill," by David Brock.
"Every feminist book you can think of was prominently displayed around Harvard Square," he recalled.
"Every book about American racism. All the fashionable topics." But "The Real Anita Hill," which, like other books published by Mr.
Glikes, runs contrary to the received ideas of what he thinks of as the liberal establishment, was at best hidden in obscure corners as though it were a piece of pornography, even though at the time it was in the third spot on the New York Times best-seller list.


Without a Home, Clinton Is a Rolling Stone
As might be expected from a man who has no home but the White House, President Clinton used his Arkansas homecoming this weekend to visit -- and to visit some more.
George Bush had Kennebunkport.
Ronald Reagan and Lyndon B. Johnson had their ranches.
Jimmy Carter had his peanut farm.
Gerald R. Ford had a condominium in Vail.
Richard M. Nixon had San Clemente.
John F. Kennedy had Hyannisport.


After Chavez, Farm Union Struggles to Find New Path
Three decades after Cesar Chavez founded the United Farm Workers, which brought hope to thousands of impoverished laborers, the union is struggling for survival.
From the lemon groves in this desert community to the tomato fields outside Stockton in the San Joaquin Valley, many workers today toil under conditions not seen since the charismatic Mr.
Chavez first took up their cause in a series of hunger strikes, boycotts, marches and protests in the 1960's and 1970's.


This Late Starter May Hit Stardom Early
The critic was Billie Jean King, shipped in by the United States Tennis Association to play teacher for a day to a cluster of pre-teen, pre-phenomenons that included Jennifer Capriati.
When King assessed the talents of the bunch, it was obvious to her that Capriati was going to be a superstar super soon.
But it was also obvious that Capriati's partner for the National 14-and-under doubles championships, little Lisa Raymond from Wayne, Pa., possessed the best hands of the bunch.
The trouble was, she preferred to use them to throw a football than to play professional tennis.
And as if that weren't enough of a strike against incipient tennis success, Raymond had no intention of observing the mandate that assigns female prodigies professional status before they've even earned their driver's license.
She not only meant to graduate from high school, she also wanted to experience a taste of college before allowing tennis to take over.


U.N. Nears Settlement in Iraq Missile Dispute
The dispute between the United Nations and President Saddam Hussein over monitoring Iraqi missile tests appeared to be moving toward a resolution today after Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz indicated that Baghdad was interested in taking action to help lift economic sanctions against the country.
Officials taking part in the talks, which began on Thursday, said Mr.
Aziz had made clear that the sanctions were causing great hardship for ordinary people and that easing them was a top priority for the Government.


At Home Abroad; The Edge Of the Wave
Here and elsewhere in East Asia the visiting American feels as if he is at the edge of an enormous wave of growing prosperity and power.
We know about the economic success of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea.
But to see it up close -- to see how far and how fast it has come -- is astonishing.
Just a few decades ago, Hong Kong was a place filled with struggling refugees from Maoist China.
Today the annual per capita income is $18,000, moving past that of Britain and other European countries.
People live longer here than in the United States, and infant mortality is lower.


For a Rational Drug Policy, Look to Treatment
To the Editor:
With Senator Phil Gramm of Texas taking the hard line, and Federal District Court Judge Jack B. Weinstein the soft and fuzzy one, the July 8 Op-Ed Dialogue on "Drugs, Crime and Punishment" did little to clarify the issue of mandatory sentences for drug offenses or define a more rational national drug abuse policy.


Howard Finney Jr., Financier, 89
Howard Finney Jr., who retired in 1969 as a general partner in the Wall Street brokerage firm of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, died on Thursday at his summer home in Nantucket, Mass.
He was 89 and also had a house in Montclair, N.J.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


2 Roommates of Plot Suspect Held, Lawyer Says
Two men, apparently roommates of a man charged in a plot to blow up New York City tunnels and buildings, are being held in the Passaic County Jail in New Jersey, according to a defense lawyer in the case and an officer at the jail.
The lawyer, William M. Kunstler, said yesterday that he believed the Government might be getting information from the men, whom he identified as Osman El-Sheikh and Hasab Elrasoul Babekir.


Aiming for Even Greater Heights


STUDIES SAY SOOT KILLS UP TO 60,000 IN U.S. EACH YEAR
Several studies have concluded that tens of thousands of deaths are being caused in the United States each year by a form of air pollution that for the most part falls within current legal limits: tiny particles of soot that are inhaled.
Rough calculations emerging from studies at the Environmental Protection Agency and the Harvard School of Public Health suggest that 50,000 to 60,000 deaths a year are caused by the particle pollution, a far larger number than any other form of pollution and one that rivals the death toll from some cancers.


JAPANESE REJECT OLD GUARD BUT SPLINTERED VOTE MEANS A STRUGGLE FOR A COALITION
Thirty-eight years of single-party rule by the Liberal Democrats ended in elections on Sunday, but the party retained enough seats to insure a struggle for command of the Government with a new generation of opposition leaders.
The loss, the party's biggest since it was created with American backing in 1955, was a measure of the tremendous discontent with the scandals and influence-peddling that have plagued the conservative incumbents for five years.
Voters flocked to three new parties made up largely of defectors from the Liberal Democrats.


2d Bomb Plot Casts Shadow On the First
Two months before the scheduled trial of the World Trade Center bombing case, the complex strategies of prosecutors and defense lawyers are already being drawn, debated and revised.
But the emergence of what the authorities describe as a second bomb-and-assassination plot -- including the arrest on Friday of yet another suspect -- has raised a whole new set of questions for both sides in the trade center case.
Legal experts say the basic strategy of prosecutors for the trade center trial, which is to begin Sept. 14, is not likely to change.
But the pool of suspects in the second case could provide them with new leads or new weapons against the six Trade Center defendants, one of whom is still missing.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
June Wednesday  None Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Federal Budget Balance . . .
June Friday  None


CHRONICLE
Another wedding in the Kennedy family: Representative JOSEPH P. KENNEDY 2d said Saturday that he was engaged to ANNE ELIZABETH KELLY, a member of his Washington staff.
Mr.
Kennedy, 40, the oldest son of the late Senator Robert F. Kennedy and Ethel Kennedy, and Ms.
Kelly, 36, met at the Citizens Energy Corporation, a nonprofit company he established to provide low-cost heating fuel for poor people.
She was the corporation's director of special projects.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY
Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber  Crompton &amp; Knowles  Dana Corp  Eastern Utls Assoc  B F Goodrich Co  Eli Lilly &amp; Co  Southern Co  TUESDAY
Banc One Corp  Cincinnati Milacron  Emerging Mkts Inc Fd  Federal Natl Mtg Assn  First Intst Bancorp  Gleason Corp  Hawaiian Elec Inds Inc  Honeywell Inc  Interpublic Group Cos Inc  Kmart Corp  Kemper Corp  Learonal Corp  Mellon Bk Corp  Salomon Bros Fd Inc  Scott Paper Co  Southern Ind Gas &amp; Elec  Sturm Ruger &amp; Co  Wells Fargo &amp; CO  Western Res Inc  WEDNESDAY
Archer-Daniels-Midland  Carter Wallace Inc  Centura Bks Inc  Chase Manhattan  Cincinnati Gas &amp; Elec Co  Clorox Co  Core Inds Inc  Federal Mogul Corp  McClatchy Newspapers  Minnesota Pwr &amp; Lt Co  Oakwood Homes Corp  Pacific Gas &amp; Elec Co  Piper Jaffray Cos Inc  Republic NY Corp  Sherwin Williams Co  Southwest Airls Co  St Joseph Lt &amp; Pwr Co  Ultramar Corp  Zero Corp  THURSDAY
Acme Cleveland Corp New  Alltel Corp  Bay St Gas Co  Bearings Inc Ohio  Delta Airlines Inc  R R Donnelley &amp;Sons  Eastern Enterprises  Empire Dist Elec Co  Ethyl Corp  Firstar Corp  Homestake Mng Co  Interstate Pwr Co  Iowa-Ill Gas &amp; Elec Co  Martin Marietta Corp  MCN Corp  L E Myers Group  Niagara Mohawk Power  Potlatch Corp  Potomac Elec Pwr Co  Sonat Inc  FRIDAY
Alex.
Brown Inc  Central LA Elec Inc  Dean Foods Co  John H Harland Co  Hewlett-Packard Co  Massmutual Corp Invs  Monsanto Co  Nashua Corp  Nationwide Health Pptys  Savannah Foods &amp; Inds  Wachovia Corp New


Assault by Gang at Bronx Pool Wasn't Sexist, but Criminal; Between Standards?
To the Editor:
A front-page article July 11 described an ethic of extreme sexism and exploitation of adolescent women by many adolescent men.
This is appalling, but the standard shocked reaction is hypocritical.


A Racing Call From Yore: Gentlemen, Hoist Those Mainsails
A vestige of yacht racing the way it once was, with a group of wealthy sailboat owners deciding how, when and where they will race, still exists in Europe.
If not for the fact that some of the best sailors in the world are competing in this unusual racing series, no one might notice.
But it is hard to ignore the 50-Footers.
Although the fleet has dwindled from 18 boats in 1991 to 9 this year, the Cowes 50-Foot World Cup remains one of yachting's most competitive events.


Election Impact on Tokyo Markets Is Muted
Japanese financial markets reacted with a mixture of trepidation and relief to the result of Sunday's national election, in which the long-governing Liberal Democratic Party lost its control of Parliament.
The election's outcome portends a period of instability in Japan's politics, something that investors usually abhor, and possibly a gradual change in the nation's economic policies.


Many Questioning Value Of U.S. Flood Insurance
As flood waters recede in the Middle West, thousands of people will be turning to the Federal Flood Insurance program for the money they need to repair or rebuild their damaged homes.
But in a development long predicted by its critics, the program is out of money.
The homeowners will get their benefits because the program can borrow up to $1 billion from the Treasury, and that should be more than enough to pay their claims.
But questions about how -- or if -- the program should repay the loans are raising questions about whether it should exist at all.


CHRONICLE
Is it possible to indulge both a passion for prolonged tennis and the necessity to raise funds for a political campaign?
Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS demonstrated that it is when he put in two hours on the courts at Dunewood, Fire Island, on Saturday morning.
As residents of the small beach community waited their turn to volley with the Mayor -- he played doubles with all comers in rotation -- RAY ROBINSON, his host for the morning, asked him if he wanted to stop.
"The Mayor kept saying, 'No, not yet,' " Mr.
Robinson, a biographer, said.
"He played nonstop."


Mexico Allows a 3d Ship to Dock; Most Are Put on a Plane to China
A third smuggler's ship carrying Chinese migrants was finally towed into port here today after being kept offshore because of tensions among the 235 passengers.
Most were then deported.
After the rusting, 30-year-old cargo ship docked, most of the Chinese were herded down a gangplank onto 10 buses that took them to the airport in Tijuana.
They then boarded an L-1011 jet for China, where their long voyage began many weeks ago.
Mexican officials said 19 refugees who were suspected of causing friction had been handcuffed and put onto a separate bus.


Arrow Shirt Chooses San Francisco Shop
The Arrow Shirt Company, a division of Cluett, Peabody &amp; Company in New York, selected Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley in San Francisco to handle its account, with billings estimated at $10 million.


Accounts
*
BASF Corp., Parsippany, N.J., to Houston, Effler, Hampel &amp; Stefanides, New York, to handle its carpet fiber division's network television account, previously handled by Geer, Dubois, New York, which closed in February.
Houston, Effler already handles the BASF corporate advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $1 million to $2 million. *
Union Planters National Bank, Memphis, to the Richards Group, Dallas, to handle the multimarket bank's account in Tennessee, previously divided among various local agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.


As Campaign Warms, Dinkins Manager Is Cool, Calm and Directed
Four years ago, Bill Lynch led David N. Dinkins to victory against a battle-weary Democratic incumbent -- and then on to become New York City's first black Mayor -- by coaching a hungry team of liberal outsiders from a Times Square building so seedy that his staff shared elevators with porno actresses between scenes.
The knock on him then: He was a roly-poly former labor organizer who was always behind schedule, refused to delegate or share strategy, and had never run such a big campaign.


Economists' Advice for Clinton
Bill Clinton's promise to focus on the economy "like a laser beam" created great expectations among the nation's economists.
But in the six months since his inauguration, many of them have been sounding increasingly disenchanted with his policies.
Some say the President promised and did not deliver.
Others, who thought his can-do approach would bolster confidence and provide the economy with a catalyst, complain that uncertainties, backpedaling and prospects of much higher taxes have sown fear and confusion among business and consumers.


Technology Opens Doors for Cahners Magazines
When Peter Bart joined Variety three and a half years ago, reporters at the 87-year-old entertainment publication still banged out their articles on vintage Underwood manual typewriters.
At least one editor still wore a green eyeshade.
"It was like circa 1930," said Mr.
Bart, vice president and editorial director of Variety and Daily Variety.


A Failure to Battle Fraud Bleeds Empire of Millions
Two years ago, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield decided to find out whether the 3,000 small groups and businesses on which it had been losing the most money were submitting fake claims.
Company officials quickly discovered that the groups were breeding grounds for fraud and similar abuses.
Some ploys involved companies that were just post office boxes or vacant offices.
Others were complicated schemes in which sham companies brought in people from other countries for costly operations.


Sheepshead Bay at Odds on a Waterfront Proposal
Of all the transformations and evolutions that New York City neighborhoods have undergone in the last century, few are as stark as that of Sheepshead Bay.
This is a place where Sousa played, where the wealthy raced horses, where at least one America's Cup-winning yacht was berthed and where the first trans-Atlantic phone call was placed.


California Phone Plan
California regulators have proposed an extensive overhaul of their telephone rules, tentatively deciding that long-distance companies should be allowed to compete against Pacific Bell in the $2 billion market for calls between neighboring cities.
The ruling, which was issued late Friday and is expected to take effect on Jan. 1, would hasten the erosion of traditional boundaries between local and long-distance service.
Companies like A.T.&amp; T., MCI Communications and Sprint would be able to place calls between locations as close as 16 miles apart.


Politics Can Change Rapidly but Economics Can't
When President Clinton came here two weeks ago, he sensed a historic opportunity and pressed more aggressively than any of his predecessors for a breakup of the collusive forces that have made Japan such a frustrating market for United States companies.
Sunday's election did shatter the old political order, which was dominated by the conservative Liberal Democratic Party, but there was little immediate prospect that the economy would be thrown open to the same bracing jolt of change, or that Japan's trade surpluses would begin to shrink any time soon.


A Lesson in One Woman's Decision; Knowledge Is Key in Choosing Clinics for Abortions
The autopsy report says Guadalupe Negron bled to death.
But she may have died from a lack of information.
Ten days ago the 33-year-old Bronx woman paid $800 for an abortion at what a health worker called a filthy, underequipped clinic, in Corona, Queens, even though she could have had a less expensive, safer operation performed at hospitals and licensed clinics throughout New York City.
The outcome of her decision to use the Queens clinic -- death -- is extremely rare, city and state health officials say.
But the decision itself was not.


For a Rational Drug Policy, Look to Treatment; Punishment Pushers
To the Editor:
Senator Phil Gramm's support of mandatory minimum sentences is unfortunately based on faulty logic ("Don't Let Judges Set Crooks Free," Op-Ed, July 8).
Much of his argument is premised on a study by Morgan Reynolds of Texas A &amp; M University that calculated the time people committing crimes could expect to spend in prison.
Senator Gramm concludes that people committing serious crimes can expect to serve only a matter of days and therefore prisons have little deterrent value.


For Microsoft's Rivals, It's a Question of Fairness
Is the software industry leader Bill Gates accountable to a higher authority?
Look for an answer this week, when the Federal Trade Commission is expected to consider longstanding industry complaints that the Microsoft Corporation competes unfairly.
For years rivals of the Microsoft have groused publicly and privately that the company and its chairman, William H. Gates, have used hardball tactics to dominate the software business.
They say Microsoft has unfairly leveraged its near monopoly in personal computer operating system software, linking it with sales of its spreadsheet, word-processing and other application software that faces greater competition.
They also accuse the company of nefarious pricing schemes.
And they even contend that Mr.
Gates has inserted devious code into his programs to make non-Microsoft programs incompatible with the company's products.


Calculating the Midwestern Floods: Gauges, Notebooks and Simple Math
Patrick Lustgraaf, a young technician with the United States Geological Survey wearing a lime-green T-shirt and camouflage pants, stood on a low concrete bridge this morning and used a hand winch to lower a small propeller into the swirling, muddy waters of the Des Moines River.
The propeller sank quickly, pulled down by a two-foot-long lead sinker shaped like a torpedo.
Eyeing a stopwatch strapped to the inside of his left wrist, Mr.
Lustgraaf listened intently to a headset attached by a thin wire to the propeller below.
Both river banks are submerged, and the water tugged at the lower limbs of a forest of cottonwood trees that stretches into the distance above and below the bridge.


On the Roof, a Shelter From a TV Storm
Just when you were getting ready for the age of high-tech interactive 500-channel television, here comes the caveat: don't throw out that old-fashioned rooftop antenna.
Under the cable bill passed by Congress last fall, cable companies have until Oct. 5 to reach an agreement with broadcasters to continue carrying their programs.
Effectively, though, the two sides have only until the beginning of September to reach agreements, because the bill requires that cable subscribers be informed of any changes in service a month in advance.


A Non-policy on Non-proliferation
Where have Iraq, India, Pakistan, Iran and others been getting the technology to build nuclear arms?
From Western Europe, where lax export controls allow companies to sell to dangerous buyers, no questions asked.
And where can proliferators get uranium and plutonium?
From global stockpiles that keep growing, making it harder to keep track of the small amounts needed for a bomb.


St. Louis Wins the Early Rounds As the Mississippi Does Its Worst
The Missouri and Mississippi Rivers, both surging to maximum crests in the great Midwest flood of 1993, joined muddy forces today at their nexus just north of here, then swept down on this city's sodden, weakened system of protective levees.
The extra water pouring into the Mississippi from the Missouri swelled the nation's greatest river toward a record crest, or maximum depth, of 47 feet as it roiled southward past the soaring Gateway Arch.
Some small berms on the suburban outskirts of the city were topped, forcing emergency evacuation of several hundred homes in the River des Peres neighborhood of South St.
Louis.


Norman Overcomes, and Then Makes, History
After enough heartbreak, frustration and criticism to fill three careers, Greg Norman essentially reinvented his today with the best performance of his life to win the 122d British Open.
Firing an all but flawless six-under-par 64, the 38-year-old Australian mastered both the pressures that have hindered him in the past and the harsh challenge of Royal St.
George's in one of the greatest closing rounds in the history of major championship golf.


Review/Music; Beauty and Seduction, by Mozart and Strauss
Making connections is something the music business suddenly can't do without.
Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall it was Richard Strauss holding hands with Mozart, in a Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra concert conducted by Gerard Schwarz.
Context is the idea.
Put disparate elements in a shared world and watch the symbiosis take place.
There may be justifications for the Mozart-Strauss combination but perhaps not the ones offered here.
Friday's event -- an interesting, well-played collection of music -- bore the burden of a theme it may not have needed.
One suggested connection: Strauss loved Mozart's music.
He put on his operas and worshiped the G-minor Quintet.
Such ties of affection are touching, but then one remembers Frank Sinatra, who loves Ray Charles while singing nothing like him.


Peter Coni, 57, Dies; Lawyer Who Headed The Henley Regatta
Peter Coni, a former chairman of the annual Henley Royal Regatta, the world's most famous rowing event, died Tuesday in London.
He was 57 years old and lived in London.
The cause was a heart attack, The Times of London reported.


Jamie A. Alpert, Jeffrey B. Davis
Dr.
Jamie Allison Alpert, a chief resident in dermatology, and Dr.
Jeffrey Brian Davis, a chief resident in internal medicine, both at the North Carolina Baptist Hospital in Winston-Salem, were married yesterday.
Rabbi James S. Glazier officiated at the Blueberry Hill Inn in Goshen, Vt.
The bride, 31, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman R. Alpert of Shelburne, Vt.
She received undergraduate and medical degrees from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the chairman of the department of molecular physiology and biophysics at the University of Vermont College of Medicine in Burlington.


Mets and the Giants Reverse Roles for Day
The starting pitcher, Pete Schourek, had lost seven straight games.
The first reliever to get warm in the bullpen, Anthony Young, has a notorious 26-game losing streak.
The Giants are the best team in baseball.
The Mets are the worst.
It didn't figure, then, that on this Sunday in California, the Mets would manage to win their second straight game for only the third time this year.


Sports of The Times; A Racquet Puts a New Spin in Chandra's World
PETE Sampras and Andre Agassi and John and Patrick McEnroe arrived from the genteel and plush surroundings of their tennis world yesterday to play in a charity tennis exhibition for the Safe Passage Foundation.
Chandra Pinkney, 18 years old, came from the apartment she shares with her mother in the 21-story, low-income housing project on King Boulevard and West Kinney in Newark, where, as she had said, "there's drugs on every floor."
But Chandra's a star, too, though she was on the court only as a spokeswoman for the foundation, describing it as a home.
"Home," she said, "is where the heart is."


For a Rational Drug Policy, Look to Treatment; Ravages of Alcohol
To the Editor:
Jack B. Weinstein has chosen as a senior Federal judge not to try minor drug cases because, he says, mandatory drug sentences fail to deter the illegal drug trade.
Senator Phil Gramm disagrees (Op-Ed, July 8).


A Chrysler Rolls Into Brooks Brothers' Summer Catalogue
IN addition to seersucker suits, white bucks, oxford sports shirts and a variety of golf togs, the Brooks Brothers summer catalogue features an automobile.
No, Brooks Brothers, the 175-year-old store chain that has sold millions of American men their first suit, has not decided to try its hand at selling cars.
Instead, it has sold the two pages inside the back cover of its summer catalogue to the Chrysler Corporation, which is using them to advertise its sleek new luxury model, the LHS.


Zulu Party Again Abandons Constitutional Talks
The Inkatha Freedom Party, which has taxed South Africa's democracy talks with an erratic campaign of filibusters and threats, announced today that it was withdrawing from the negotiations until it is given a veto over the country's new political order.
If the party, most of whose members are Zulu, holds to its demand, the decision could be the first step toward an attempt at secession by the predominantly Zulu eastern province of Natal and a civil war.


Business Digest
International
The Liberal Democrats lost their majority in the Japanese Parliament, but retained enough seats to assure themselves a place in expected coalition struggles with a new generation of opposition leaders.
Voters flocked to three new conservative parties.
The party had governed Japan alone for four decades.  [ Page A1. ]


Cable Outduels Free TV
Congressional efforts to help broadcast television may be thwarted if the first two deals negotiated under last year's Federal cable law are any indication.
Congress was alarmed by the decline of free TV and eager to pump money to local TV stations.
So it required cable operators to negotiate with broadcasters for permission to carry their signals.
Now cable retransmits those signals for free.


For a Rational Drug Policy, Look to Treatment; Mandatory Sentences
To the Editor:
Judge Jack B. Weinstein should be commended for his condemnation of mandatory minimum sentences in "The War on Drugs Is Self-Defeating" (Op-Ed, July 8).
He recommends a nonpartisan drug commission, a proposal I endorse.


METRO DIGEST
SHOCK THERAPY LOSING ITS STIGMA Although many people still recoil at the thought of electroshock therapy, associating it with images of Frankenstein's monster, the electric chair and bolts of lightning, the treatment has made a discreet comeback in the last decade.
Increasingly, those who have been aided are willing to speak out, describing its benefits and lobbying to make the treatment more widely available.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY YOUTH IS KILLED IN HARLEM SHOOTING Joanne Ackie always felt better when her 17-year-old son stayed indoors at night, talking and laughing with his friends in the hallways of their Harlem apartment building instead of outside on West 125th Street.
But the warm weather drew a group of young people out of the building Saturday night, and when the shooting started, Kareem Ackie was the first one down.
When officers arrived Kareem was dead and three other people, including a cousin of Kareem's, were wounded.
The police said all the victims, including Kareem, were apparently innocent bystanders.
B3.


There's a Steep Price To Play at Camp Reeves
Giants Coach Dan Reeves began training camp by having his players run 10 40-yard dashes with just a 40-second break between them.
One player was so exhausted after running he could barely move as other players teased him.
Another player was sick.


No Headline
"My heart goes out to those people who are getting hit. But if you live near this river, you have to know that sooner or later it's coming to get you." -- JACK KIBLER, at the Gateway Arch in St.
Louis.  [ A1:2. ]


Oh, for a Louganis: China Still Dominates in Diving
It seems as if it were only yesterday that the young, slight Chinese diver stood atop the platform as spectators' murmurs dropped to a hush.
Who was this prodigy giving Greg Louganis of the United States a run for the gold at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea?
He was only 14 then, but the Americans, accustomed to dominating in men's diving, were already threatened by his talent.


Cheap Beeps: Across Nation, Electronic Pagers Proliferate
At the Countryside Mall in Clearwater, Fla., parents cruise the stores as their children nap or play games at the mall's child-care center.
What happens if one child bites another, complains of a stomachache or begins to sob inconsolably?
Scott Kaufman, who heads the center, can instantly dial the number of the hand-held pager that the parents are given as part of the child-care service.
Hearing the beep, mom or dad knows to scurry back.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Australia Advances to Davis Cup Semifinals  Richard Fromberg beat Stefano Pescosolido, 7-6, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday, giving Australia a 3-2 victory over Italy in the Davis Cup quarterfinals in Florence.
Italy's Paolo Cane had tied the three-of-five-match series, 2-2, earlier by defeating Australia's top player, Mark Woodforde, 6-2, 1-6, 7-5, 6-4.
Australia will meet the winner of the France-India series in the semifinals.
The deciding match of that series was halted because of darkness and was to be completed today. (AP)


Books of The Times; Edmund Wilson, Curmudgeon Untamed by Time
The Sixties The Last Journal, 1960-1972 By Edmund Wilson Illustrated.
Edited with an introduction by Lewis M. Dabney. 968 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $35.


Jeffrey Weitzman, Rachel Milliken
Rachel Sue Milliken, a daughter of Linda Botton of Harrison, N.Y., and the late Lloyd G. Milliken, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Walter Weitzman, the son of Donald and Harriet Weitzman of Morristown, N.J.
Cantor Richard Botton, the bride's stepfather, officiated at the Bretton Woods Inn in Morris Plains, N.J.
Mrs.
Milliken-Weitzman is a special education teacher at Public School 151 in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in special education and reading from New York University.
Her father was an assistant state attorney general in Manhattan.
Her mother teaches at the Midland School in Rye, N.Y.


Tokyo Markets Still Sheltered
Japan's political upheaval is not expected to have an immediate effect on its import curbs or trade imbalance with America.
Page A10.


Chinese Dissident's Odyssey: In and Out of Prison, Now Trying to Flee Abroad
He is not afraid, he repeats insistently, but he peers nervously over his shoulder every few minutes.
No, he declares, he absolutely is not afraid -- not of another arrest, not of more beatings by the police, not of more toil in prison making Christmas tree lights for foreigners, nor even of another round of exhausting 12-hour days in the prison mine where his buddy attempted suicide.


Market Place; A Texas Case Tests the Limits of Directors' Responsibilities
A FEDERAL judge in Dallas will begin considering today a new twist on an old proverb: Is $2.8 million in the hand worth $28.5 million in the jury room?
The answer could determine the future ownership of the Box Energy Corporation, an oil and gas company in Dallas.
But the implications could go deeper, potentially further defining the responsibilities of independent corporate directors.


Sydney Williams, Kimtoya Williams
Kimtoya Williams, a daughter of Lawrence Williams of Brooklyn and Naiyah Khalifah of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Sydney G. Williams, a son of Hylton Williams of Brooklyn and Phyllis Williams of Berrien Springs, Mich.
The Rev.
Garnet Morris performed the ceremony at the Hanson Place Seventh-day Adventists Church in Brooklyn.


Officials in Des Moines Delay Resumption of Water Service
In another bitter disappointment for a quarter-million people, city officials today announced a delay of at least 24 hours in the resumption of municipal water service.
They decided that giant pumps at the water treatment plant were still too damp from floods a week ago to be safely started.
The people of Des Moines, who have been without running water for a week, had thought they would start to get water back on Monday.
But L. D. McMullen, the chief executive of the Des Moines Water Works, said that high humidity had prevented the electric pumps from drying properly.
The result was a postponement of the city's plan to begin pumping water tonight and to have the entire system back in operation by Thursday or Friday.


Laura McGinn, David Leichtman
Laura A. McGinn, a daughter of Loretta McGinn of Westerleigh, S.I., and the late Thomas McGinn, was married yesterday to David Leichtman, the son of Arnold Leichtman and Maxine A. Leichtman, both of New York.
The Rev.
Joseph Mostardi, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church Center for the United Nations, in New York.
Ms.
McGinn, who is keeping her name, is a legal assistant in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a law student at New York University.


In the Ultimate Cycling Race, the Pyrenees Is 'There'
Unlike many riders in the Tour de France, Alvaro Mejia, the Colombian climber who ranks second over all, sounds remarkably blase about the Pyrenees.
"They're there," he says offhandedly, paraphrasing Gertrude Stein, of the mountain range between France and Spain.


A Flag. Taps. A Race With No Allison.
They ran a big stock-car race here today, and for the first time in over 17 years, they did so without any driver named Allison.
By itself, that wouldn't figure to infuse much sentiment into a sport generally lacking in it and into a crowd well-fueled by beer.


Daley Is Bluntly Criticizing Clinton
Before the Illinois primary last year, Bill Clinton was so solicitous of Mayor Richard M. Daley of Chicago that he was defensive about his overtures.
"I was not buttering up the Mayor!" the future President declared.
These days, no one, certainly not the Mayor, is accusing Mr.
Clinton of buttering up Mr.
Daley, a Democrat who has presided over the nation's third-largest city since 1989.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about the ethnic partitioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina misidentified Slobodan Milosevic in some copies.
He is the president of Serbia.


Bosnian Leader Says Partition May Be Inevitable
As Serbian nationalist troops advanced today on a mountain stronghold crucial to Sarajevo's defense, the President of Bosnia said his Government might have to accept the "inevitable" and agree to the partition of the country on ethnic lines.
Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, has agonized publicly over a plan proposed by Serbia and Croatia to partition Bosnia into three "ethnic states," for Muslims, Serbs and Croats.


Export of Prison Goods Seems to Continue
The Chinese authorities strenuously deny that they use prison labor to manufacture goods for export.
So why was Xu Yiruo assembling Christmas tree lights in the Qingdao No. 1 Prison?
Christmas trees and Christmas tree lights are almost unknown in China, so it is almost inconceivable that the lights were for sale in the domestic market.
Mr.
Xu says prison officials spoke of the lights' being exported to Britain.


Electricity Consumption
The heat wave this month will raise overall electricity consumption in the region above last year's levels, according to utilities officials.
Demand for electricity fell last year, after a rise the year before, a year that also had unusually hot summer.
Three-fifths of that decline came in residential use, which is chiefly affected by use of air conditioners.
Generally, the troubled economy has moderated residential usage, which rose through the 1980's as consumers bought larger homes, many of them with central air conditioning, and acquired personal computers, microwaves, color TVs and other consumer appliances.


Big Mexican Retailer Wins Bidding for State-Owned TV
In a deal that could bring the end of one company's monopolistic control over television in Mexico, the Government announced today that it would sell its two television networks to private investors for $641 million.
The investors, led by Ricardo Salinas Pliego, the 37-year-old owner of a chain of appliance and furniture stores, surprised many businessmen by outbidding two of Mexico's richest industrialists and a third group that included Paramount Communications and Capital Cities/ABC.
Of these four groups that entered bids on Friday for a package of Government-owned properties, Mr.
Salinas's had been viewed by some analysts as the weakest.


Ruth Ginsburg to the Stand
When Ruth Bader Ginsburg was an advocate before the Supreme Court, she confronted nine robed men, many of them highly dubious of her arguments for sexual equality.
Yet she quietly commanded their attention and more often than not persuaded them.
By comparison, the male and female senators who will question her on Tuesday are already persuaded that she is fit to sit on the high court.
Does that mean that the Judiciary Committee hearing will be a bore as well as a breeze?
Hardly.
It should produce some enlightening testimony and clues as to whether, as many predict, Judge Ginsburg's appointment augurs a Supreme Court turn back to the legal and philosophical center.


At The Post, Quiet Talk About Turning a Profit
Now that Rupert Murdoch is HERE TO STAY, as the front page of the money-losing New York Post boomed last week, it is time to answer the question: WHY DOES HE WANT IT?
The answer appears to be a usual one for would-be newspaper publishers: he wants power and profit.


David Brian, 82, Actor, Is Dead; Starred in 'Mr. District Attorney'
David Brian, an actor who starred in the 1949 film "Intruder in the Dust," appeared in movies opposite Joan Crawford and played the title role in "Mr. District Attorney" on television in 1954 and 1955, died on Thursday at his home in the Sherman Oaks section of Los Angeles.
He was 82.
He died of cancer and heart failure, The Associated Press reported.


INSIDE
Pakistan's Government Falls
Pakistan's President and Prime Minister both resigned after months of struggle that had paralyzed the Government.
Parliament was dissolved, and elections were called.
Page A3.
Behind the Dinkins Strategy
Bill Lynch is used to proving his doubters wrong, but Mayor Dinkins's campaign chief is now facing his greatest challenge.
Page B1.
Norman Takes British Open
Greg Norman of Australia shot a flawless six-under-par 64 to win the British Open title with a record-low 267.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Review/Dance; Susan Marshall Puts Entr'actes Into the Act
A man and a woman move from left to right or right to left in apparent harmony before a stage curtain.
Later, another couple fills the same trajectory with tension and ambiguity.
Susan Marshall's always experimental choreography provides food for both the eye and the mind, as these two new duets showed again at Serious Fun on Friday night.


Review/Television; The Small Screen Opens To a More Intimate Room
Small is beautiful.
That became the mantra of the 1960's with its implicit back-to-nature plea for simplification and sincere connections.
In the grossly excessive 1980's, the message was all but forgotten, not least in mammoth Broadway musicals and giant rock events in sports stadiums.
Guess what.
Small is beautiful all over again.
On Broadway, this season's most charming event is a revival of 1963's "She Loves Me," the equivalent of a chamber musical.
And on television, music stars are increasingly discovering the advantages of audience intimacy.
MTV's "Unplugged" series is one example, its unpretentious, cut-to-basics format in modest settings proving a boon for veteran performers like Eric Clapton and Rod Stewart.
Another is public television's summer series "Center Stage," a co-production of the Chicago station WTTW and Viacom's VH-1 on cable.
Tonight on Channel 13, the "Center Stage" spotlight is on the guitarist Keith Richards.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  JAPAN PARTY LOSES MAJORITY  The Liberal Democratic Party lost its majority in the Japanese Parliament but retained enough seats to set off a struggle with a new generation of opposition leaders for command of the Government.
A1  CHINA DISSIDENTS STILL FEARFUL  One Chinese student's odyssey underscores the continuing scrutiny and repression the dissidents from the Tiananmen Square democracy movement face even when they are released from prison.
A9


Faldo's Birthday. Little to Celebrate.
As he strode between the overflowing grandstands that create a corridor of tribute on the way to the final green at the British Open, Nick Faldo's reign as champion was finally over.
Faldo had lost an opportunity to win the championship for the fourth time, and the third time in four years.
Had he won, it would have given him six major championships for his career, a figure surpassed by only 10 other golfers in the history of the game.
And a victory would have fulfilled Faldo's goal of winning a major championship each year.


Damages Again Denied In 'Six Degrees' Lawsuit
The New York State Appellate Division has upheld a State Supreme Court ruling that David Hampton, whose real-life confidence scheme inspired John Guare's play "Six Degrees of Separation," was not entitled to civil damages for the fictional use of his story.
The ruling, issued on Tuesday by five judges from the Appellate Division, First Department, in Manhattan, affirmed an April 1992 decision by Justice Edward H. Lehner that denied Mr.
Hampton's claim for damages.


With Reforms in Treatment, Shock Therapy Loses Shock
Roland Kohloff, principal timpanist for the New York Philharmonic, had such severe depression last spring that he was forced to stop performing.
"I could feel it coming on," he said.
"My chemistry was going out and I was totally helpless. You don't want to get out of bed. It's very hard to do anything."
Because his son, who has schizophrenia, had been helped by electroshock therapy, Mr.
Kohloff decided to forgo medication and talk therapy, and try a treatment that many people associate with oppressive efforts to control the mentally ill in the 1940's and 50's.


For a Rational Drug Policy, Look to Treatment; Where's the Saving?
To the Editor:
Senator Phil Gramm tells us in "Don't Let Judges Set Crooks Free" (Op-Ed, July 8) that each extra year of imprisonment saves $430,000 in crime and that this return on investment is "a brilliant allocation of resources." If the Senator is right, he has solved the Federal deficit.


Pakistan Government Collapses; Elections Are Called
Pakistan's Government collapsed tonight after months of political struggle between the President and the Prime Minister.
Both President Ghulam Ishaq Khan and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif resigned, Parliament was dissolved and elections were called for October.
The collapse came after Pakistan's increasingly restive army demanded an end to the standoff, which had paralyzed the Government.
Adding to the pressure was Benazir Bhutto, the leader of the opposition and a former Prime Minister, who threatened repeatedly to bring thousands of protesters to the capital if new elections were not held.


Race and Politics: Issues That Most Still Sidestep
THE REV.
Calvin O. Butts 3d of the newly landmarked Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem was asked the other day whether, upon reflection, former Vice President Dan Quayle had been right in condemning the erosion of traditional families and the values attributed to them.
"Well," Mr. Butts replied slyly, "he wasn't wrong."


A Smelly Retainer Refunded
Abraham Sofaer, who was the top lawyer at the State Department from 1985 to 1990, contracted recently to represent Libya in dealing with the legal consequences of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
There was no law against it, no lawyer's rule of ethics or State Department rule.
But it was a smelly example of revolving door lawyering, with Mr.
Sofaer switching sides in the struggle over Libyan terrorism.
To his credit, Mr.
Sofaer changed his mind Friday and withdrew from the deal.
He said too many reasonable people disagreed with his earlier view that he could represent Libya, for money, with propriety.
He will now return his fee.


Shots Into Crowd Kill Youth in Harlem
Joanne Ackie always felt better when her 17-year-old son stayed indoors at night, talking and laughing with his friends in the hallways of their Harlem apartment building instead of outside.
But the warm weather drew a group of young people out of the building Saturday night, and when the shooting started, Kareem Ackie was the first one down.
The police say two or three young men walked up to the building at 430 West 125th Street in the General Grant Apartments, a public housing project, and started shooting into the crowd.
When officers arrived at 12:30 A.M., Kareem was dead, hit once in the back, and three other people -- including a cousin of Kareem's -- were wounded.


Assault by Gang at Bronx Pool Wasn't Sexist, but Criminal
To the Editor:
"The behavior of the boys at the Crotona Pool was rotten," you say in "Boys and Their 'Fun' " (editorial, July 9), on the sexual assault of a 14-year-old girl at a South Bronx pool, "and it will last as long as sexism lasts." The disgusting behavior of the boys was assaultive and criminal; and while it may well have stemmed from a general lack of respect for women, there are many sexist men out there who would not think of jumping a woman, singly or collectively, in a pool or in private.


St. Petersburg Journal; Diary Shows Mad Monk as Something of a Bore
As historical discoveries go, the Rasputin diary that surfaced here this year is hardly a bombshell.
Written in an ordinary notebook in a crude, barely legible scrawl and a style described as half-literate, the musings of the Siberian monk who wielded such a sinister influence over the court of the last Czar of Russia are disappointingly dull.
"As in old times, our mother the Czarina is busy only with her daughters and the education of her son, the great heir Aleksei Nikolayevich," reads one of the passages from the 12-page text, written sometime from 1911 to 1913.
"Here is the proof of this education. He is like a sun shining with love for his people, and he is loved reciprocally."


Corrections
An artist's rendering in Science Times on Tuesday, showing the weaving method believed to have been used in the earliest known piece of cloth, depicted the pattern incorrectly.
The pairs of weft, or horizontal, strands probably wound around each other as well as around the warp, or vertical, strands.


The Long Bond's Magic Numbers
What will derail the rally that has carried the yield on the 30-year bond to its lowest level in 16 years, within a whisper of 6.50 percent?
Not much, two market economists say.
John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers, predicts that the long bond's yield will reach 6.50 percent soon, and then "grind" its way lower.
But he thinks it will take some "unexpected event" to test 6 percent.


New Crisis In Europe's Currencies
After months of relative calm, Europe's monetary system is once more under attack from speculators, threatening to extinguish the European Community's already dim hopes for a single currency and endangering the benefits of its single market.
In a repeat of a pattern that first appeared last summer and that has reoccurred intermittently since, speculators have judged that a number of European governments do not have the political will or the financial wherewithal to sustain the value of their currencies if investors begin selling en masse.


A Belated Message from ABC's Deal: Broadcast Stations Are Valuable to Cable Operators
WHEN ABC cut a deal last Wednesday with the cable industry on the arcane but bitterly fought issue of "retransmission consent," the rest of the broadcasting industry generally denounced the decision in terms suggesting treason.
But by the end of the week, the broadcasters were finding some gold in the dross.
For if nothing else, ABC's deal with Continental Cablevision reminded the world just how valuable broadcast stations are to cable operators.


Ikea Account Moves To Deutsch/Dworin
Ikea U.S.
West of Carson, Calif., the West Coast unit of the Ikea U.S.
Inc. furniture store chain, said on Friday that it had moved its $10 million account to Deutsch/Dworin in New York, from Stein Robaire Helm in Los Angeles, after three years.
The move consolidates $30 million in billings at Deutsch/Dworin, which already handles the Ikea East Coast account.
"It's a pretty crisp position; we wanted to get the most out of our resources," said Judy McNamee, the advertising manager for Ikea U.S.
West.
She added that "consolidating with Ikea U.S. East was the best way."


Corrections
A map yesterday with articles about the Midwestern flooding included outdated figures for Saturday's water levels and incorrect figures for the flood stages at the locations charted.
Corrected and current figures accompany a map today on page B6.


4 Die in Egypt as Militants Attack General's Car
Islamic militants tried to assassinate a high-ranking army official here in an ambush early today, leaving four people dead and six wounded and drawing the military into the battle against the underground movement, the police said.
Five or six attackers opened fire on a car carrying Maj.
Gen.
Osman Shahin, the commander of Cairo's central military area, who escaped unharmed.
Police officials said they believed that the attack was in revenge for recent executions of militants but that the actual target was another official, the general who oversees the special military courts that try "terrorist" offenses.


The Jets Add 3 Propellers: Esiason, Lott and Marshall
Everyone associated with the Jets is hoping that last year's 4-12 mark is just an aberration -- a season in reverse that won't repeat itself.
Just in case, Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg went out and bought some insurance policies, namely safety Ronnie Lott, defensive end Leonard Marshall and quarterback Boomer Esiason.
And though no one will know until the season is finished just how important these acquisitions were to the Jets, Steinberg feels better heading into training camp with these players than without them.


No Sticky Wicket This: Revival for Cricket Fans
It was barely 10 A.M. yesterday, but the sun was already blazing as a crowd of cricket enthusiasts carrying coolers and umbrellas and wearing sun hats trickled into Columbia University's Lawrence A. Wien Stadium.
As the players warmed up, a 16-piece Calypso steel band bounced its sound across the stadium.
The smell of curried goat came from the food stand and people opened bottles of Red Stripe, a Jamaican lager, that had somehow made their way past strict security guards.


3 Kirin Brewery Executives to Resign
The chairman and two other top executives of the Kirin Brewery Company, Japan's largest beer producer and a leading member of the powerful Mitsubishi group, announced over the weekend that they would resign after four corporate officers were arrested on charges of making payoffs to gangsters.
The resignations, the latest in a series that have followed disclosures of ties between prestigious Japanese companies and the underworld, were a typically Japanese exercise.
Kirin's officials said they were taking responsibility for the illegal links to the organized crime figures, but denied any knowledge of the cash payoffs and refused to disclose what information the company had been trying to conceal in making the payoffs.


A Hard Yankee Rain Falls on A's in 7th
Save the moments from the bottom of the seventh inning on videotape, play the tape back in a decade and it may seem as though it was 1978.
The Yankees are involved in an intense pennant race and they are not frazzled.
They are loose, confident and dangerous.
Very dangerous.
Even though it was the 1993 Yankees last night, the A's found out how dangerous these Yankees can be when they become ornery.
In a wild 29-minute half-inning that took 58 pitches to complete, the Yankees hammered three pitchers for 10 runs and 10 hits and the A's saw their 4-3 lead crumble.


French Revival Is Much Needed
Pascal Lino, a convenient symbol for all that has gone wrong in French professional bicycle racing this season, reclaimed a few credits today by winning a sprint finish in the Tour de France and ending a national embarrassment.
When Lino passed the finish line in Perpignan half a wheel ahead of Giancarlo Perini, he became the first Frenchman to win a stage in this 80th Tour.
No Frenchman had even finished second since the start of the race on July 3.


Jacques Chazot Dies; Dancer and Wit, 64
Jacques Chazot, a French dancer, choreographer and wit, died on Monday at a friend's chateau in Seine-et-Marne department in north central France.
He was 64 and lived in Paris.
According to the British newspaper The Independent, the cause was throat cancer.


Professor John Bolton, Radio Astronomer, 71
John Bolton, a British-born pioneer in radio astronomy, died at Buderim in Queensland, Australia, on July 6, The Times of London reported last week.
He was 71.
He was credited with having discovered, in 1947, the first radio "stars," galaxies that broadcast incredibly strong signals in radio wavelengths.
By 1956 he was regarded as one of the world's foremost experts on radio astronomy, an extension of optical astronomy in the sense that it allows the observer to "see" objects that emit radiation that is not visible.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Advanced Surgical Inc., Princeton, N.J., an initial public offering of 1.5 million shares and 1.5 million warrants.
GKN Securities.


No Murderers' Row But Plenty of Punch
And to think the primary question, in some observers' minds, about the Yankees before the season began was whether or not they would have enough hitting.
Would the Rockies have enough fans?
With the season almost three-fifths gone, the Yankees indeed have enough hitting.
They have the best team batting average in the American League and, entering last night's game against Seattle, they were a close second to Detroit in runs scored and only one behind the Tigers in home runs.


Three at Last: Mets' Streak Hits Milestone
In the battle of Joe McIlvaine, somebody had to win, and it was the Mets by a nose tonight, 2-1.
McIlvaine, in the same season, has been general manager of the Padres and Mets, and tonight he found himself on the right side when Charlie O'Brien hit a 10th-inning home run for the victory.
O'Brien hit it deep over the left-center field wall off Gene Harris to lead off the 10th, and it not only bailed out reliever John Franco but also got an asterisk off the Mets' collective backs.
Ninety-two games into the season, New York has finally won three games in a row.


Forget Electric Car and Tax the Gas Guzzlers
To the Editor:
Re "Don't Foist the Electric Car on Taxpayers" (letter, July 9) by George A. Kritzler: I am also an energy conservation engineer, retired from a major oil company.
For a few years I worked as an energy consultant and am now semiretired.
Mr.
Kritzler's experience with his electric golf cart is hardly relevant; however, the automobile industry's effort on the electric car's behalf is unadulterated hype.


Frank Garcia, a Master Magician Who Aided the Police, Dies at 66
Frank Garcia, a master magician who also taught law officers how to know a crooked card dealer when they saw one, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66 and also had a home in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He died in his sleep of natural causes, his family said.


Rooney Didn't Find Marilyn Monroe
To the Editor:
I've long admired Mickey Rooney as a performer, but I must take issue with his claim that he "found and brought to the fore Marilyn Monroe" ("At 73, Still the Star, Still the Child," July 7).


Panel Wants Airlines to Get Tax and Regulatory Breaks
A Government commission charged with reviving the airline business said today that it would recommend tax cuts and regulatory relief to help reverse what it called the industry's "abysmal financial condition."
In preliminary findings that were cheered by the industry, the panel called for exempting airlines from any new tax on transportation fuels, rolling back taxes on passenger tickets and revising the Federal income tax code so that money-losing airlines would not be subject to the alternative minimum tax.


Laclede Steel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


DEFIANT F.B.I. CHIEF REMOVED FROM JOB BY THE PRESIDENT
President Clinton today dismissed William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who had stubbornly rejected an Administration ultimatum to resign six months after a harsh internal ethics report on his conduct.
Mr.
Clinton said he would announce his nominee to replace Mr.
Sessions on Tuesday.
He was expected to pick Judge Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court in Manhattan; officials said Judge Freeh had impressed Mr.
Clinton favorably on Friday at their first meeting.


Colombian Climbs Ahead of Pack
The Tour de France pack was riding at an exceptionally leisurely pace this morning, arriving about 20 minutes behind its slowest expected time at the bucolic village of Molitg-les-Bains in the outcropping of the Pyrenees.
Understandably, the racers appeared to be in no hurry to begin in earnest the first of three days in these mountains.
At that point, about 30 miles into the 144-mile stage that boasted nine strenuous climbs from Perpignan, France, to the principality of Andorra, Oliviero Rincon made his move.


A Record Purse For the U.S. Open
When the competitors gather at the National Tennis Center on Aug. 30 for the United States Open, they will be vying for more than a Grand Slam title.
They will also be fighting for shares of the record prize money the Open will offer.


Sports of The Times; Giants' Job: Keep Simms On the Job
IN the morning rain, Coach Dan Reeves, wearing a blue baseball cap with a red peak, a blue parka and blue shorts, was standing a few yards behind Phil Simms as the Giants' quarterback barked, "Yellow 20, Yellow 20." At the snap, shoulder pads clacked and linemen grunted.
Simms dropped back and fired a pass to wide receiver Mark Jackson.
"Good job, good job," Reeves said.


BHC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Comerica Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


G.M. Plans Rebates to Settle Suits
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it would give a $1,000 rebate for the purchase of a new truck to each of the millions of current owners of 1973 to 1987 G.M. pickups with side-mounted fuel tanks, thus settling 36 class-action lawsuits.
The value of the rebates could conceivably exceed $5 billion, although G.M. said the settlement would not be a financial drain on the company.


CompuCom Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Golden West Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In This Emergency, Agency Wins Praise for Its Response
Looking ahead to a multibillion-dollar cleanup in five states, the head of the Federal agency that manages the Government's response to disasters said today that the greatest damage from the Mississippi River flooding was likely to be to roads, bridges, sewers, electrical utilities and other parts of the Midwest's public works systems.
James Lee Witt, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, added that he and other Federal agency heads, including Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, were working to find the money to rebuild the levees damaged by the floods and were beginning to think about building stronger levees to provide protection from future floods.


Flightsafety International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Lawyer, Testifying in Fraud Trial, Gives Details of Bank's Operation
Most criminal defense lawyers are reluctant to put their clients on the witness stand.
And the fraud and bribery trial of Robert A. Altman seems to be no exception.
With the trial well into its fourth month, prosecutors from the Manhattan District Attorney's office have not yet completed their case, and it is possible that the defense could call Mr.
Altman as a witness.
But after J. Griffin Lesher testified for six days for the prosecution, the chances that Mr.
Altman will testify in his own defense have gone down.


For Jets, the Talking Comes Ahead of the Tackling
The Jets have stepped up negotiations with their first-round draft pick, linebacker Marvin Jones, in an effort to get him signed before the start of the team's training camp on Thursday.
But a quick resolution doesn't appear likely.
The Jets' president, Steve Gutman, said he would meet with Jones's agent, Drew Rosenhaus, in Miami today to try to secure a deal that would have the rookie linebacker from Florida State in uniform in time for the team's first practice on Saturday.


CHASE MANHATTAN CORP. (N)
Higher earnings from its trading aactivities helped the Chase Manhattan Corporation report a sharply higher second-quarter profit yesterday.
Earnings at Chase, the sixth-largest banking company in the United States, rose 53 percent.
Its earnings of $1.20 a share was significantly higher than the 81 cents a share that analysts had estimated.


Albert Schlesinger, 88, Civic Leader in West
Albert E. Schlesinger, a civic leader and founder of one of the largest automobile dealerships on the West Coast, died on Saturday at the California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 88 and lived in San Francisco.
The cause was cardiac failure, said his wife, Gail.


Texas Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Penn State's Tarman to Retire
JIM TARMAN, who guided Penn State from Eastern powerhouse to Big Ten neophyte, is retiring as athletic director.
Tarman, 65, yesterday said he will step down from the post he has held for 11 years as soon as a successor can be installed, probably by Dec. 31.
Tarman has been with the school's athletic department for 35 years.
He saw the school through two national football championships, in 1982 and 1986, and helped orchestrate the 10,000-seat addition to the school's Beaver Stadium.


Spy Network Inflaming Uruguay-Chile Tension
On a lazy morning last November in this beach town 30 miles outside the capital, Montevideo, a man staying in a white bungalow broke a window from the inside, climbed out and rushed to a neighbor's house pleading for help.
Speaking with a Chilean accent, he said he was being held prisoner and was about to be killed.
At the local police station, he repeated the assertions.
But by the end of the day, an entry in the police record indicated, Eugenio Berrios had recanted his accusations, saying he had been under too much emotional stress.
The police returned him to the custody of two Uruguayan army officers, and that night, according to Government officials, he was escorted out of Uruguay into Brazil.


With 'Line of Fire,' Writer Discovers Ending for Hollywood-Failure Story
On the day last year that Jeff Maguire was told his script "In the Line of Fire" had been sold to the movies, the writer and his wife had no money with which to celebrate.
Their credit cards had lapsed, the rent was overdue, their phone was about to be disconnected and they were in the early stages of moving to New Hampshire from Los Angeles after years of struggle.
"That day we traded in a blouse I got my wife for her birthday so we could go out and celebrate," Mr.
Maguire, 41, said in a recent interview.


Japan's Leader, Defying Critics, Vows to Keep Power
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa defiantly asserted today that he would remain in office and try to patch together a conservative coalition around his Liberal Democratic Party, which lost its parliamentary majority in elections on Sunday.
But Mr.
Miyazawa was all but drowned out by other leaders of the Liberal Democrats, who suggested that he resign, while a host of other parties maneuvered furiously to claim a share of power in an eruption of wide-open political competition after 38 years of one-party rule.


Baldor Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Miscellany
*
Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell Inc., New York, opened a Minneapolis shop called GHBM/Midwest.


High Court Nominee Faces Easy Road Through Senate
When the Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday takes up the nomination of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court, the atmosphere will be rich with impending historic change.
If she is confirmed as the nation's 107th Justice, as is widely expected, Judge Ginsburg would be only the second woman to sit on the Court.
In joining Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who has been on the Court since 1981, Judge Ginsburg would, in her words, show that women would no longer "appear in high places only as one-at-a-time performers."


Ex-Officer Shot In Gun Battle With Car Thief
A man leaped into a parked Mercedes-Benz -- unlocked, with keys in the ignition -- at East 62d Street near Fifth Avenue yesterday, then shot and wounded a retired police officer who tried to stop him, the police said.
The former officer also opened fire, the police said, and about 10 shots were exchanged at about 5:30 P.M. on the busy Upper East Side street.


Ticket Sales Save 2 Shows
Two supposedly doomed musicals, one on either side of the Atlantic, have won reprieves, it was announced yesterday.
Producers for "The Will Rogers Follies," who posted a closing notice last week, announced that the show would stay open for a few more weeks, thanks to last-minute ticket sales.
And in the West End in London, a rush of ticket-buying for "City of Angels" has prompted producers to extend its run an extra two months, from early August to Oct. 7.


U.S.-North Korea Meeting Yields Some Gains on Arms
The United States and North Korea agreed tonight to several steps to ease international fears about North Korea's nuclear weapons-making ability but failed to resolve their dispute over an American demand for inspections of two suspected sites of nuclear materials.
The two sides ended their latest round of talks with a commitment from North Korea to discuss the inspections with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The North Koreans also said they had discussed the possibility of the United States' helping North Korea replace its nuclear reactors with reactors that are less capable of producing weapons-grade plutonium.


PRIMERICA CORP. (N)
Low interest rates drove a 25 percent increase in second-quarter earnings at the Primerica Corporation.
The growth was led by a strong performance at its brokerage subsidiary, Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Primerica, a diversified financial services company, earned $186.4 million, or $1.02 a share, in the second quarter, exceeding analysts' estimates of 99 cents a share.


No Headline
Fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote. -- SUPREME COURT OF COLORADO.  [ A8:1. ]


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE BLUE CROSS PLANS TO LIMIT CHOICES Battered by years of deteriorating finances, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans to limit the choice of doctors and hospitals for its oldest and sickest customers.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY DRUG ALLEGATIONS IN BOMB-PLOT CASE Some of the 11 men charged in the plot to bomb New York City targets are also suspected of trafficking in drugs, investigators said.
Their comments -- challenged by a defense lawyer -- added a new dimension to a multilayered case replete with curious twists.
B3.


New Material May Be Harder Than Diamond
THE hardness of diamond, like the speed of light, has long been regarded as an absolute -- a value that could never be exceeded.
But four years ago, theorists calculated that it might be possible to combine carbon and nitrogen atoms in a substance even harder than diamond, and now, at last, such a substance may have been created.
The new material, a blend of carbon and nitrogen atoms with the formula beta-C3N4, was synthesized by scientists at Harvard University under the direction of Dr.
Charles M. Lieber.
Announcing their success in the current issue of the journal Science, they said the carbon nitride they had prepared had all the molecular structural characteristics predicted for an ultrahard substance.
But because the material is in the form of a very thin film containing many microscopic discontinuities, it has not yet been possible to test its hardness or ability to conduct heat.


Whirlpool Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Colorado Law in Peril
The Colorado Supreme Court ruled that a measure against gay rights appeared to violate the Constitution.
Experts said the ruling could be fatal to a law whose passage last year led to a boycott that has cost the state millions in lost convention business.
Article, page A8.


Corrections
A chart yesterday comparing historic floods on the Mississippi River misstated the damage estimate for the 1973 flood.
It was $1.154 billion, not $11.54 billion.


In New York, Rain Is Good News


Kingsley Morse, 62, Executive Who Led A Commuter Airline
Kingsley G. Morse, founder and president of Command Airways and a pioneer in commuter airlines, died on Saturday at his home in Millbrook, N.Y.
He was 62.
His wife, Ann Lawrance Morse, said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Review/Fashion; The Excitement of Versace-Lacroix Counterpoint
Gianni Versace put an audacious spin on his collection on Saturday, the first day of the fall and winter couture openings here.
It was enough to insure the viability of the season as a whole.
He was followed on Sunday by Christian Lacroix with a totally different point of view; the tension between them gave the showings of made-to-order clothes a vitality that would not otherwise exist.


Ramirez Gains In Indian Chain
Manny Ramirez, the Dominican-born player whose skills attracted pro scouts when he played high school ball in Washington Heights, took another step forward yesterday when the Cleveland Indians promoted him to their Class AAA Charlotte affiliate.
A 21-year-old right fielder, Ramirez was leading the Class AA Eastern League in batting at .340, was second in runs batted in with 79 and was tied for third in home runs with 17 while playing for Canton-Akron.


Clinton in Crossfire
In announcing his compromise on homosexuals in the military, President Clinton today sought to close the book at last on an explosive issue that had become a glaring benchmark of the White House's own political naivete.
But the announcement, carefully staged before an audience of military brass, will not be enough to make the furor go away.
Indeed, it now threatens to haunt Mr.
Clinton even through his re-election campaign three years from now.


People
*
James B. Nash, a senior vice president at Ira Thomas Associates Inc., Youngstown, Ohio, was named president and to the new position of chief operating officer.
As president, Mr.
Nash succeeds Ira D. Thomas, who was named to the new positions of chairman and chief executive.


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A map in Science Times last Tuesday showing the temperature differences between deep ocean water and surface water misstated them.
A corrected map appears today on page C8.


Learning the Ropes from Old Hands
To newcomers in any field, lessons can be learned in front of computers and in laboratories, at the country clubs of law or accounting partners, and at the water cooler.
But the most important education comes from the experience of longtime workers.
Sometimes this is in the form of a specific program of mentors, sometimes as just a boss-employee relationship.
Most often, it's catch-as-catch-can in the daily tumble.
Even for summer interns and associates, who often have no more than 10 weeks to get a taste of the working world, those relationships are vital.


Honors
*
Leagas Delaney and TBWA/ Holmes Knight Ritchie, both of London, took top honors at the Campaign Press Awards for print advertisements, sponsored by Campaign, the British advertising trade publication.
Leagas won a gold award for the best single ad, for Mothercare, and four silvers.
TBWA/Holmes Knight won a gold for the best overall campaign, for Nissan Motor Great Britain Ltd.'s Micra model, and three silvers.


Romanians and Hungarians Building a Bit of Trust
In the end they were so surprised at the agreement they had achieved that they applauded and congratulated each other -- Romanians and Hungarians representing two traditionally hostile countries.
The setting for an ethnic accord providing practical improvements for Romania's Hungarian minority was bizarre: the Black Sea villa of Nicolae Ceausescu, the Communist dictator whom the Hungarians despised as their cruel oppressor.


John Bolton, Astronomer, 71
John Bolton, a pioneer in radio astronomy, died July 6 at Buderim in Queensland, Australia, The Times of London reported last week.
He was 71.
He was credited with having discovered, in 1947, the first radio "stars," galaxies that broadcast incredibly strong signals in radio wavelengths.
By 1956 he was regarded as one of the world's foremost experts on radio astronomy, an extension of optical astronomy in the sense that it allows the observer to "see" objects that emit radiation that is not visible.


Sonoco Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


11-Year-Old's Unusual Story
An 11-year-old Floridian, CANDICE FUCHS, will play in the Pathmark Tennis Classic today in Mahwah, N. J. But the circumstances surrounding Fuchs's admission into the weeklong exhibition event and her first-round match against her coach, PAM CASALE-TELFORD, remained unresolved yesterday.
"She was invited to play," HOLLY SIMMONS, a spokesperson for Advantage International, the management firm, said, when asked why Fuchs, who is not even among the nation's top 12-year-olds, was accorded a singles slot in the draw.
Asked how Fuchs came to draw her coach in the first round, Simmons said, "That's the way the job was done." Simmons said Fuchs was invited because of the difficulty the event had in lining up representative players.


Russia Sends Troops to Protect Tajikistan's Border With Afghanistan


CHRONICLE
YEVGENY YEVTUSHENKO, once the angry young man of Soviet poetry, turned 60 on Sunday, still angry but for different reasons than in the past.
Mr.
Yevtushenko became one of the most admired poets of the 20th century, known for such searing works as "Babi Yar," and for his outspoken criticism of Kremlin leaders.


First Financial Management Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ruddick Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Colorado's Anti-Gay Measure Set Back
In a decision that is likely to nullify a measure against gay rights passed last year by the state's voters, the Colorado Supreme Court ruled today that "fundamental rights may not be submitted to a vote."
In upholding a lower court's injunction on the measure, known as Amendment 2, the State Supreme Court said the law appeared to violate the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution.


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Tennessee National Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First of America Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tough U.S. Enforcement on Trade: Is It Fair?
Just who is being unfair to whom?
While President Clinton spent much of his time at the Tokyo summit meeting pleading for an even break on trade, some experts counter that fair play must begin at home.
They argue that Federal bureaucrats have been playing the same games that outrage American exporters, and point to the reversal of a string of recent Commerce Department rulings that foreign companies have been "dumping" their goods in the United States at prices that are unfair to American competitors.


Q&amp;A
Feeding Birds
Q. What kind of mixed seed is best for bird feeders?


Stocks End Day Mixed as Dow Gains 6.99
Stock prices were mixed yesterday, with little news to affect the overall market.
Instead, individual stories moved individual stocks, with the technology sector weighing over everything.
The weakness in technology was a carry-over from last week, when concern over earnings touched off a sell off.


Macy to Name Chief for West
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, the department store retailer operating under bankruptcy-law protection, intends to tell its creditors on Thursday that it plans to appoint Michael Steinberg, the former chief executive of the Foley's division of May Department Stores Inc., as the chairman and chief executive of its West division, people familiar with the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Steinberg, who retired from Foley's in February, is 64.
His name had previously appeared on a list of potential candidates to head up the corporation's overall merchandising efforts, but some creditors objected that he was too old.


Colombian Climbs Ahead of Pack
The Tour de France pack was riding at an exceptionally leisurely pace this morning, arriving about 20 minutes behind its slowest expected time at the bucolic village of Molitg-les-Bains in the outcropping of the Pyrenees.
Understandably, the racers appeared to be in no hurry to begin in earnest the first of three days in these mountains.
At that point, about 30 miles into the 144-mile stage that boasted nine strenuous climbs from Perpignan, France, to the principality of Andorra, Oliviero Rincon made his move.


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Put Caps on Hydrants
To the Editor:
Every summer it seems the same story gets reported: A heat wave causes some New Yorkers to open fire hydrants, causing millions of gallons of wasted water.
Every summer we are told that hydrant sprinkler caps are available at police stations to cut down on water use.


Suspect's Aunt Is Arrested
The aunt of a man being sought by the police in the firebombing of a fire truck in Washington Heights was arrested and charged with taking him into her apartment and treating a leg injury he suffered while fleeing from detectives after a stakeout, the police said yesterday.
Angela Figueroa of 3343 Bailey Avenue in the Bronx was arrested on Saturday and charged with first-degree hindering of prosecution.
The police have been seeking her nephew, Jose Corporan, 20, in the attack that left three firefighters injured during a night of unrest in the Manhattan neighborhood on July 9.


Critic's Notebook; Music and Virtue: Is Making Art Good Making Good Art?
Music has a hard time doing good.
It lifts the spirits of serial killers and social workers alike.
It can fall on deaf ears attached to the saintliest of listeners.
Its beauty serves evil easily.
Note the wartime film clips of SS officers deeply moved by the Berlin Philharmonic in concert.
If music is not itself an engine of virtue, institutions have been using it for virtuous purposes.
American symphony orchestras show us how, for these are not only purveyors of beauty, but also anchors of cities.
Pittsburgh has its Steelers, its Pirates, its Carnegie Library, its universities -- and its symphony.
Even a businessman barely conversant with Mahler or Bruckner is comforted by their presence in his community.


Northern Trust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patterns
A Charivari 'Thing' Shop
Enough already about the Barneys New York opening uptown.
The new news is that Charivari might add a store downtown, in SoHo.
The catalyst is the object obsession of Jon Weiser, the store's president.
What better locale than SoHo, where "thing shopping" reaches a near-religious level?


Warren Christopher Serves Ably at State
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's "Mr. Clinton Abroad" (column, July 12) properly compliments many of President Clinton's foreign policies but unjustifiably attacks our dedicated Secretary of State, Warren Christopher.


As Crest Nears, a Historic Town's Emotions Rise
Today was supposed to be crest day on the Mississippi River here, and an eerie quiet hung over this historic river town.
On the long-anticipated day, only the occasional buzz of a backhoe dumping the last loads of rock on the levee penetrated the silence.
Would it all be enough to save the 4,500 residents and the community's pride, seven wood and brick structures that are important historical and architectural relics of the 18th and early 19th centuries?


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Alco Health Distribution Corp., a unit of Alco Health Services Corp., is offering $126.5 million of senior debentures due in 2005 at 100 to yield 11.25 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Nonredeemable for five years, the debentures are rated B-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and B- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Commercial Credit Corp., Baltimore, a unit of Primerica Corp., is offering $200 million of 5.75 percent senior notes due in 2000 at 99.516 to yield 5.836 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Young Movie Studio Moves Its Account
Savoy Pictures of Beverly Hills, Calif., a movie studio formed last year, said yesterday that it had terminated its three-month relationship with the New York and Torrance, Calif., offices of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi and moved its $15 million to $20 million account to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Los Angeles and New York, effective immediately.
"There were differences in objectives and operations that couldn't be overcome despite everyone's best efforts," Steve Hayman, Savoy's president of marketing said in a statement.
D.M.B.&amp; B. was the other finalist vying for the Savoy account in April.


Home Repair or Retail Ruin?
Liberty Avenue in Queens, beneath the shadows of an elevated subway line, still resembles one of New York City's traditional neighborhoods, a cluster of Italian delis, Laundromats, pastry shops and a hardware store, called Molbegott's, that draws people precisely because they can ask Mr.
Molbegott himself how to fix their plumbing.
"I find everything I need right on this avenue," said Wanda McCaffrey, 43 years old, of Richmond Hill as she shopped on Liberty Avenue, pulling her nephew on a tricycle.
"You don't have to go very far for anything."


Mr. Glenn Hatchets the Hatch Act
All the lofty promises of political reform cannot hide one bedrock truth: In Congress, big money still talks.
Today, the millions of dollars that Federal and postal union political action committees pour into Congressional campaigns will be talking loudly when the Senate takes up a misguided Democratic plan to ease Hatch Act restrictions on partisan political activity by Federal employees.
Two Republican amendments would do much to improve the Democratic bill.
One would maintain current Hatch Act restrictions for Internal Revenue Service examiners and auditors.
The other would keep all Federal employees from participating in political fund-raising.


Hospital-Chain Officials Quit
Richard K. Eamer and Leonard Cohen, who were founders of National Medical Enterprises, one of the nation's largest hospital chains, will resign as chairman and vice chairman today, the company said yesterday.
Analysts said the company, now headed by Jeffrey Barbakow, an investment banker and former outside director, was struggling to defend itself against possible criminal charges and 130 lawsuits including a claim by 15 large insurers that the chain had submitted $750 million in fraudulent billings.


Accounts
*
Boyd's Men's Store , Philadelphia, to Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano , New York, to handle the store's account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million. *
Michaels Stores Inc., Irving, Tex., to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich., to handle the arts and crafts retailer's account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Yanks' Bat-Order Switch Pays Another Dividend
Scott Kamieniecki started the season ticketed for the bullpen, Bernie Williams started the season as the leadoff batter and Wade Boggs started the season as the No. 2 hitter.
During the first four months of this season, each has seen his role change.
The change was for the better last night.
With Kamieniecki suddenly emerging as one of the steadiest starters on the club by pitching a complete-game eight hitter with a career-high eight strikeouts against the Mariners, with Boggs acting like the leadoff hitter the Yankees never had by starting two more rallies and with Williams embracing his new opportunity to produce runs by driving in four, the Yankees cruised to an 8-2 victory over Seattle last night at Yankee Stadium.


Bush Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  India Stuns France  Ramesh Krishnan needed less than 13 minutes yesterday to send India past France and into a Davis Cup semifinal against Australia.
In a match that had been suspended because of darkness Sunday night, Krishnan quickly won two games for a five-set victory -- 2-6, 6-4, 4-6, 7-5, 6-4 -- over Rodolphe Gilbert in Frejus, France.
The victory gave India a stunning 3-2 victory over the French in the three-of-five quarterfinal.
India will now be host to Australia, a 3-2 winner over Italy, in the semifinals on Sept. 24-26.
Germany will travel to Sweden for the other semifinal. (AP) Novotna Avoids Nightmare No. 2: Jana Novotna, playing her first match since her tearful loss to Steffi Graf in the Wimbledon final, once again blew a big lead before recovering to lead the Czech and Slovak Republics to a first-round Federation Cup victory in Frankfurt, Germany.
Novotna, ranked eighth in the world, prevailed in the rain-delayed match, defeating South Africa's Amanda Coetzer, 6-1, 6-4.
Earlier, Helena Sukova had outlasted Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer, 6-4, 3-6, 6-4, to put the Czech and Slovak team ahead in the weeklong, 32-nation tournament on clay. (AP)


OnBancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, a table in Business Day last Tuesday depicted the stock price movement for the Samuel Goldwyn Company incorrectly.
The stock was not among those on the American Stock Exchange with the largest percentage declines in price the previous day.


GAY RIGHTS IN TH MILITARY: Chiefs Back Clinton on Gay-Troop Plan; President Admits Revised Policy Isn't Perfect
Flanked by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, President Clinton today presented his plan for easing the ban on homosexuals in the military and appealed to his generals and admirals to find in their hearts "the will and the desire" to carry it out.
Immediately after the President laid out his policy, which was announced in a speech to a friendly audience of military officers at the National Defense University at Fort McNair in Washington, the top commanders of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines and Coast Guard as well as Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, met with reporters.


Upjohn Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chess
Almost everyone else may have given up the hoary principle of education, "spare the rod and spoil the child," but not Viktor Korchnoi.
The 62-year-old Swiss grandmaster, originally from the Soviet Union, roundly defeated his pupil, the Dutch champion, Jeroen Piket, by 6-2 in a training match in early June in Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
Korchnoi can justify his taking the rod to the Dutch grandmaster by noting that Piket, at 23, should be man enough to profit by it.
Piket's reaction is not known.
The match is the first of 10 to be contested by Piket under the sponsorship of the eminent organizer Joop van Oosteroom with the objective of giving him the practice that might lead to his reaching world-class status.


Empire Blue Cross Planning To Limit Its Patients' Choices
Battered by years of deteriorating finances, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans to limit the choice of doctors and hospitals for its oldest and sickest customers.
The move is intended to hold down costs while making medical insurance affordable for more New Yorkers.
The action would affect 1.4 million Empire customers who are considered poor insurance risks because of their health, age or occupation.
Their current policies allow them the choice of virtually any doctor and a wide latitude in seeking medical services.


Indictment Cloud Hangs Over Administration's Budget Plan
If Representative Dan Rostenkowski is indicted, he will have to step aside as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and President Clinton will lose his strongest ally in Congress on many of the issues that are central to his Presidency.
Lawmakers and their staff members said today that they doubted the new developments would affect the way the House-Senate conference committee deals in the next few weeks with the President's deficit-reduction program.


Amcore Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Student Poll Finds Many Using Guns
A new nationwide survey finds startling numbers of students in the 6th to 12th grades who say they have shot at someone or have been shot at themselves.
The survey of 2,508 students in 96 schools across the country by the pollster Louis Harris, painted a bleak portrait of violence and fear among American schoolchildren.
Some experts expressed doubts about that portrait, but the pollster defended it and the survey on which it was based.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Promoted Manny Ramirez, outfielder, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League to Charlotte of the International League.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Recalled Chris Gomez, shortstop, from Toledo of the International League.
Sent Buddy Groom, pitcher, to Toledo.
Released Mark Grater, pitcher.


Arms Sales to Third World At Lowest Level in 8 Years
Arms sales to the third world last year fell to their lowest levels since at least 1985, primarily because Russia's sales hit record lows, the Congressional Research Service reported today.
Sales from Russia to the third world plummeted to $1.3 billion.
Sales from the Soviet Union were $5.9 billion in 1991, and reached a high of $28.8 billion in 1986.
Russia was by far the largest arms producer and exporter of the Soviet republics.


Beckman Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Northwest Natural Gas Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Israel High Court Ready to Rule in 'Ivan' Case
In a long-awaited announcement that sets the stage for probable new disputes, the Israeli Supreme Court said today that it would rule next week on the fate of John Demjanjuk, the retired auto worker from Ohio who was convicted and sentenced to hang as the monstrous "Ivan the Terrible" of the Nazis' Treblinka death camp.
No matter what the five Supreme Court justices rule on July 29, their findings are likely to touch off arguments both here and abroad, where the Demjanjuk case has drawn considerable attention.


3.9% Increase Is Proposed By A.T.&amp; T.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would increase its rates for some long-distance residential and business calls an average of 3.9 percent.
The proposed price increases, if approved by the Federal Communications Commission, would take effect on Aug. 1.


Chemical Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


HOUSE AIDE LINKS A TOP LAWMAKER TO EMBEZZLEMENT
The former postmaster of the House of Representatives has told prosecutors that he helped Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the powerful Illinois Democrat, embezzle $21,300, according to prosecutors, defense lawyers and public records that describe some of the transactions.
The former postmaster, Robert V. Rota, pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Washington today to one count of conspiracy and two counts of embezzlement and said he had helped an undisclosed number of lawmakers embezzle tens of thousands of dollars since his appointment in 1972 until 1992, when he resigned.
Important on Big Issues
Government and defense lawyers said the guilty plea was a significant step toward indicting Mr.
Rostenkowski, but it could be weeks before the Government moves against the Chicago Democrat.
Still, the plea today by Mr.
Rota, who has agreed to testify against Mr.
Rostenkowski, came at a delicate moment, when the House and Senate have just begun negotiations on Mr.
Clinton's economic program.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 IRAQ AGREES TO U.N. MONITORING
After a cycle of threats and warnings, Iraq agreed to interim United Nations monitoring of its military industries to insure that the country does not build more weapons of mass destruction.
A1


Barbara Whitney, An Administrator And Educator, 56
Dr.
Barbara Whitney, an expert in sex education and a leader in the battle against AIDS in New York City's public schools, died on Friday at a friend's home on Squam Lake, N.H.
She was 56 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.
For the last two years, Dr.
Whitney worked in the School Chancellor's office as director of the H.I.V./AIDS Technical Assistance Project, a privately financed program that teaches AIDS prevention throughout the school system. 20 Years in the Field
Dr.
Whitney spent the last 20 years as a trainer, educator and administrator in the field of human sexuality.
From 1978 to 1985 she was executive director of Siecus, the Sex Information and Education Council of the United States, in New York City.
She was director of health services for the Children's Aid Society and director of the AIDS Training Institute in the New York City Department of Health.
Dr.
Whitney, a native of Iowa, graduated summa cum laude from the College of Nursing at the State University of Iowa and earned a master's degree at Boston University's School of Nursing.
While pursing her career, she studied psychoeducation at Temple University and not-for-profit management at Columbia University's School of Business.
She received a Ph.D. in 1988 from the human-sexuality program in the Department of Health Education at New York University, which entailed studies in Sweden, Japan and Kenya.
Dr.
Whitney is survived by her mother, Azalea Boeke of Sun City, Ariz.; a sister, Janice Hayes of Bloomington, Ind., and two daughters, Jennifer Whitney of Port Townsend, Wash., and Katie Whitney of Philadelphia.


Four Agencies Seek Shoney's Account
Shoney's Restaurants of Nashville said yesterday that it had named four agencies to compete for its account, with billings estimated at $15 million to $18 million.
The account has been handled by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Atlanta.


Ipsco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pawnshop Perils
Ezcorp Inc. , a publicly traded pawnshop operator, usually profits in tough economic times.
But yesterday, the company fell on bad times of its own as investors, disappointed with weaker-than-expected third-quarter results, knocked the Ezcorp stock price down 47.6 percent.
Trading volume, at 2.8 million shares, was almost 30 times the three-month daily average.


Youth Faces Arson Charge
A teen-ager was arrested yesterday in connection with a fire last week that destroyed six buildings in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and left 75 residents homeless, the police said.
The youth, identified as Wilfredo Montes, 16, of 140 Scholes Street in Williamsburg, turned himself in to detectives from the 90th Precinct yesterday after his family arranged for his surrender, the police said.
He was charged with arson.
The five-alarm fire began behind 108 Scholes Street in Williamsburg about 7:30 P.M.
Friday and spread along Manhattan Avenue, destroying 18 apartments.


Old Faces, New Politics in Japan
What happened to Japan's predicted electoral revolution?
The morning after the vote, many familiar faces could still be found at center stage.
The Liberal Democrats remain the biggest party -- by far.
Prime Minister Miyazawa even talks about hanging onto his job, at least for a few weeks.


Ondieki Owns the 10K And Covets the Marathon
Yobes Ondieki, who owns a world title at 5,000 meters and the world record at 10,000 meters, hopes to complete a distance-running triple by moving up to the marathon and, ultimately, running the 26.2-mile race at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
"I've been thinking about the marathon a lot," the Kenyan said recently by phone from a training site in Davos, Switzerland.
"That is my dream."


Water and Fear Start to Subside In St. Louis Area
It was only a drop of a tenth of a foot, but the rain-swollen, rampaging mighty Mississippi began to subside here today, and with it some of the fear and destruction caused by the great flood of 1993.
There was still plenty to worry about and plenty of need for more sandbagging as one of the worst floods in the nation's history rolled on down toward the Gulf of Mexico.


Demonstrators Protest Against Call to Disband Kiryas Joel School District


Workers of the World, Get Smart
Throughout the industrialized world, there seem to be too few good jobs to go around.
The problem manifests itself differently in different countries, but the failure of any country to insure good jobs for many able and willing citizens raises a troubling question: Do advanced nations have to choose between good jobs and more jobs?
Over the past two decades, Western Europe has experienced growth in wages but stagnation in employment.
Between 1975 and 1992, the real -- that is, inflation-adjusted -- average wages of manufacturing workers in France, Germany, Italy and Britain grew by 30 to 50 percent.
But unemployment in European industrialized economies has risen close to a staggering 11 percent.


Jim Yestadt, 41, Artist Of Corporate Symbols
Jim Yestadt, a graphic designer who helped create corporate identities and packaging for MasterCard International, Bell Atlantic Corporation and Sterling Drug Inc., died on Wednesday at his home in Fire Island Pines, L.I.
He was 41 and lived on Fire Island and in Manhattan.
The cause of death was AIDS, said his companion, Richard Barbieri.


Zions Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New York City Set to Sell Bonds
New York City comes to the market today to sell about $675 million in general obligation bonds, including almost $70 million of the popular New York City "mini-bonds."
The mini-bonds are aimed at small investors, who can buy a bond with a face value of $5,000 and a 25-year maturity for about $1,200.
The bonds are sold at a discount because they pay no interest until maturity, when the buyer gets the face value of the bond.


Dinkins and School Board Call Truce
As he runs for re-election, Mayor David N. Dinkins is grappling with a runaway school board that has left him with less influence on school policy than perhaps any modern mayor of New York -- even as the public continues to hold the Mayor accountable for the schools.
It is this political and governmental problem that has brought Mr.
Dinkins into a complicated courtship with the seven-member Board of Education that has so often thwarted him, as it goes about selecting a new schools chancellor.


A Weak Link in the Yank Lineup
With the Yankees on the brink of something exciting, even something great, electronic fans are without a Great Voice to carry us at home, in the car, on the beach, at school, or at work.
There is no Red Barber and no Mel Allen, who shifted between radio and TV as Yankees Voices, no Vin Scully of the Dodgers.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jamesway Files for Bankruptcy Protection
As expected, the Jamesway Corporation, the struggling discount department store operator based in Secaucus, N.J., filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, succumbing to increasing competition that made many of its stores seem dowdy.
The company said it would continue to operate its 108 stores using a $75 million line of credit supplied by the CIT Group/Business Credit.
The company had $336 million in assets and $277 million in liabilities.


Looking for a New N.B.A. Life, Haley Crashes the Boards Again
It looked like an after-school pickup game.
The small arena was dotted with fans yelling for their favorite players.
The uniforms were mix-matched -- some with the look of a couple of washings, some with T-shirt sleeves sticking out.
But Jack Haley did not care.
The game could have been played on an outside court in the rain.
He was here, and all he wanted was a chance to prove he still belongs in the National Basketball Association.


Iraq Agrees to Allow The U.N. to Monitor Weapons Industries
Bowing to diplomatic and military pressure, President Saddam Hussein has agreed to let the United Nations monitor Iraq's military industries to insure that Iraq does not build more weapons of mass destruction, a senior United Nations official said today.
After five days of talks with the Iraqi leadership, Rolf Ekeus, the head of the special commission that the United Nations Security Council formed to disarm Iraq, declared that "we have broken out of the vicious circle" of threats and counter-threats that had raised the prospect of another armed confrontation with Iraq.


Critic's Notebook; When Gay Images And Reality Conflict
Gay-rights advocates have a television problem.
That is surprising, since unlike the yak-radio industry, television news departments have tended to be sympathetic to homosexual causes.
In addition to their bent in behalf of minorities, television professionals are more likely than most Americans to have homosexual friends and colleagues and to have lost some of them to AIDS.
Despite the prevailing sympathy, however, evidenced in the heavy coverage given to AIDS, the pictures commonly used to enliven stories about homosexual issues seem to have been chosen to stir the anxieties and antipathies of many viewers.


3 Years Later, Still No Arrests in Huge Armored-Car Robbery
Three years after bandits committed the second-largest armored car robbery in United States history, there have been no arrests in the case and little visible progress in solving it, despite intense pressure on two men considered suspects.
"The F.B.I. and my office are working very closely together," said the Monroe County Sheriff, Andrew P. Meloni.
"But any suggestion that we have all kinds of new leads to pursue would not be accurate. I can tell you we have an open file and regular conversations with the F.B.I. over strategy and tactics."


Ahmanson Says It Expects to Show a Loss
H.
F.
Ahmanson &amp; Company, the nation's largest savings and loan holding company, announced yesterday that it expected to report a $290 million loss for the second quarter as a result of its sale of about $1.2 billion in seriously delinquent real estate loans to Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
The loans were sold for approximately $900 million, or 71 to 76 percent of their face value, the company said.


Some Cited in Bomb Plot Are Linked to Drug Sales
Some of the 11 men charged in the plot to bomb New York City targets are also suspected of trafficking in drugs, investigators said yesterday.
They declined to name those suspects or describe the degree of their involvement.
But their comments -- challenged by a defense lawyer -- added a new dimension to a multilayered case replete with curious twists.


Health Care Must Be Available to All, First Lady Tells Medical School


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Effort Aims to Preserve Patchwork of Rural Life
More than three centuries ago, a family descended from Spanish Jews received a cryptic message from Spain's monarch, King Philip 4th: "The onions begin to smell." It was warning that they were in danger from the Inquisition and should leave Spain speedily.
The family fled to France, and eventually found refuge in the New World where Louis Moses Gomez became a prosperous fur trader and built a fortress-like stone house in the Hudson Valley north of Newburgh.
Now the Gomez House, reputed to be the oldest remaining residence of Jewish settlers in North America, is in peril: developers are carving up nearby farms and building homesteads to the South.
Vibrations from traffic on a nearby road have weakened the stone walls surrounding that house and small outbuildings like a former icehouse are falling into disrepair.


Japan Businesses See Little Threat in Vote Results
One day after voters ended 38 years of conservative rule by the Liberal Democratic Party, Japan's business sector has begun concluding that the election results could turn out to be more of a benefit than a threat to the dominance of their interests in the nation's politics.
The voting patterns, business leaders said today, show that while the Japanese people might desire political change, they want economic continuity and an essentially pro-business conservative government.
They interpreted the results as showing that Japanese want an end to the corruption of the governing Liberal Democratic Party, but are hesitant to depart from policies that have guided Japan from postwar ruin to industrial powerhouse.


Central Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Pentagon's New Policy Guidelines on Homosexuals in the Military
Following is the text of the Pentagon's new policy guidelines to commanders on homosexuals in the military.
Accession Policy
Applicants for military service will no longer be asked or required to reveal if they are homosexual or bisexual, but applicants will be informed of the conduct that is proscribed for members of the armed forces, including homosexual conduct.


CHRONICLE
There's no such thing as too many opening nights for CHARLES STROUSE, the composer of scores for such shows as "Annie," "Bye Bye Birdie" and "Applause." In less than a month he will have three shows open, and that's just fine with him, he said yesterday.
"Bojangles," a show he wrote with the late Sammy Cahn, opened last Friday at the Barksdale Theater in Richmond.
On Aug. 8, "Let's Make Music Together," a review of his songs that have a particular appeal to teen-agers, will be performed at the Stagedoor Manor, a summer camp in Loch Sheldrake, N.Y.
"It's a funny kind of tryout," said Mr.
Strouse, who wrote the review with Carl Schmehl, a coordinator at the camp.
"It could be a very valuable production for the stock and amateur market, and even more."


Hawkeye Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; Janacek and Smetana On a Barge on Sunday
The informal, intimate confines of Bargemusic in Brooklyn seem to promise a laid-back approach to music making.
Entering a docked barge on a splendid summer afternoon, one might expect to encounter performances more agreeable than intense.
But intensity, of an unusual kind, is precisely what Sunday's program brought.
Rolfe Schulte was primarily responsible.
Best known for his work in 20th-century repertory, this violinist produces a wiry but passionate tone, underpinned by a searching musical intelligence.
In the Janacek Violin Sonata, he dug out all the edgy tension of the score without losing hold of its principal lyric line.
Although his heavy use of vibrato occasionally produced an odd quavering timbre in the upper range, nothing in the music was obscured.
Especially striking were the Ballada, taken entrancingly slow at the close, and the seething finale.


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tubes of Ice Hold Record of Climate In Past and Future
IN a refrigerated van kept in a parking lot at the University of New Hampshire, just outside Durham, lies an archive that assuredly holds many secrets of the earth's past and future.
The archive consists of tubes of ice, each a meter in length, stacked row upon row and representing a large part of the earth's climatic history.
When the remaining ice arrives from Greenland, it should cover the past 250,000 years.


Hungarian Goes Australian
Hungarian-born NORBERT ROZSA, who holds the world record in the 100-meter breast-stroke, will be granted Australian residency today and hopes to compete for the country in the 1996 Olympics.
Rozsa, the silver medalist in the 100 breast-stroke in the 1992 Olympics, lives in Perth.
Rozsa hopes to gain Australian citizenship. (AP)


Central Fidelity Banks Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. May Threaten China With Sanctions for Reported Arms Sales
The Administration plans to warn China that its weapons exports could bring punitive sanctions, and a debate continues within the Government over whether the message is tough enough, senior Administration officials said today.
In response to what Washington calls mounting evidence that Beijing is shipping missile technology to Pakistan, Secretary of State Warren Christopher will raise the issue when he meets with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on Sunday in Singapore, the officials said.
The issue will be discussed in detail on the following two days in Beijing by Lynn E. Davis, Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs.


After 3 Years, Bulls Finally Sign Kukoc
After three years of courting him, the Chicago Bulls finally landed Toni Kukoc yesterday, signing the 6-foot-11-inch guard known as the "Magic Johnson of Europe" to a multiyear contract.
Although contract details were sketchy, it has been estimated for weeks to be hovering in the range of $17.6 million over seven or eight years.
There is no salary cap restriction because the Bulls have owned Kukoc's rights since drafting him in 1990.


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Co-Steel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beware Of Orphans In Clones
THE financial pages have been reporting bad news about computer companies in recent weeks, and there are signs that more is to come.
Profits are down sharply at many companies, and some big names, including Apple Computer Inc., the Dell Computer Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation, are reporting record losses.
Everex Systems Inc. and the Compuadd Corporation are in bankruptcy, and lots of smaller PC makers are quietly closing their doors.
The Tandy Corporation is getting out of the PC business, while other companies are looking for investors to keep afloat.


Augat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Security Strengthened at Hudson River Crossings
New security equipment has been installed in the Holland Tunnel since the authorities uncovered what they described as a terrorist plot to bomb the Hudson River crossings, and the police commanders for the Holland and Lincoln Tunnels have increased training to make sure that officers are familiar with safety and evacuation procedures.
In addition, officers at the tunnels and at the George Washington Bridge have been stopping and searching more vehicles, especially unmarked trucks, before they cross the river, Port Authority officials said yesterday.


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Midlantic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Free-Agent Richer Still a Devil
Right wing STEPHANE RICHER, the Devils' leading goal scorer last season, signed a multiyear contract with the team, officials announced yesterday.
Richer, 27 years old, had been a free agent, but the Devils had the right to match any offer he received.
Richer scored 38 goals and added 35 assists in 73 games last year.
"Pure goal scorers are a rare commodity, but Stephane has proven over his career that he fits into that category," said General Manager LOU LAMORIELLO.
"Because he has so much natural talent and people expect so much from him, sometimes Stephane does not get the credit he deserves."


Dinkins Meets With Leaders In Brooklyn
On the eve of the release of a state report that is widely expected to criticize his handling of the Crown Heights disturbances, Mayor David N. Dinkins went to Brooklyn yesterday to try to demonstrate his long-term efforts to bring together people in the divided neighborhood.
Mayoral aides -- anxiously awaiting the release of the long-delayed report, as are the Mayor's political opponents -- acknowledged that they had scheduled Mr.
Dinkins's meeting with a multi-ethnic coalition from Crown Heights to offset some of the likely political fallout from the state report, which even before its release has become prime fodder for this year's mayoral race.


Recession's Romantics Fix Up Their Factory
IT didn't take long for somebody, probably Adam Smith, to make the connection between the value of a product and the wages of the people who make it.
When $350 in raw materials are made into a $15,000 automobile, it equals happiness and high wages.
Fifty cents worth of chopped beef flipped into a 75-cent hamburger equals low wages and woe.
Because they understand this rule, because they were determined to save the factory they built -- and maybe because they were a little bit lucky -- the men and women at Garry Precision Screw Machine were not among those who lost 24,500 well-paid manufacturing jobs in New Jersey last year.


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Forget Electric Car and Tax the Gas Guzzlers; On the Autobahn
To the Editor:
"Vacationing by Car Makes a Comeback at Full Speed" (news article, July 5) alludes to lower gasoline prices as the reason for increased travel speeds on United States highways and rampant disobedience of the 55-mile-an-hour speed limit.


School Psychologist Is Charged With Sex Abuse
A supervisor of psychologists for New York City's public high schools was charged yesterday with sexually abusing two teen-age boys, and police and school officials said they were investigating whether other school employees were involved in similar crimes.
Investigators said the supervisor, Pedro Cumba, a longtime school psychologist, brought the two boys, who were 13 and 14 years old at the time, to his Brooklyn Heights apartment several times a week for a year and paid them between $20 and $40 to perform oral sex on him.
In all, Mr.
Cumba, 40, was charged with 268 counts of endangering the welfare of children.


Observer; Get The Boys
You've probably forgotten Charlie Spatz.
He was one of the boys.
The only one, in fact, ever fired for disgracing his profession.
It was a big story in those days.
Marlene Dietrich had told somebody to see what the boys in the back room were having, as she wanted to have the same.
Unfortunately for Charlie, he was the only one of the boys left in the back room when Marlene's scout arrived, and what Charlie was having was an ice-cream soda.


Des Moines Water Restoration Stalls
City officials refilled part of the municipal water system here today, nine days after it was knocked out by flooding, but unauthorized and premature use of water quickly dealt another setback to their efforts to relieve the suffering of 250,000 residents.
After officials announced this morning that a third of the system had been filled, many businesses and residents began using the water, despite numerous pleas from officials that they not yet do so.


Wise-Guy Team for Comedy Central
Again and again, the irreverent summer air of the Comedy Central cable television network is punctuated by an urgent cry: "Get me the Lampoonies!"
A press release needs some punching up, a busy comedian requires help with a charity speech, a provocative news report demands a fast tasteless joke.
The merry band of five interns from Harvard University, all 21-year-old editors of the Harvard Lampoon, leap to the task.


Feasting on Topics With Universal Appeal
Bertolt Brecht liked to castigate bourgeois esthetes by calling them "culinary." He was more prophetic than he knew.
This weekend in Reading and Oxford, west of London and a mere 25 miles apart, were two events that gave Brecht's ideas a fuller meaning.
Often quite literally fuller.
The two were the principal summer manifestation in Britain of Womad, or the World of Music, Arts and Dance festivals, at the Rivermead Leisure Complex in Reading, and the Oxford Symposium on Food and Cookery at St.
Anthony's College in that venerable university town.


The Hearings On Television
The Senate Judiciary Committee's confirmation hearings on Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg's nomination to the Supreme Court will be covered live on three television networks today, beginning at 10 A.M.
Eastern daylight time.
The Public Broadcasting Service will provide gavel-to-gavel coverage with no interruptions.
The C-Span cable network will have live coverage from 10 until noon.


Nearby Galaxy Seems to Have a Double Nucleus
ASTRONOMERS peering deep into the core of the neighboring Andromeda galaxy are seeing double.
Where there should be only one nucleus of densely clustered stars, they have detected two, and so are confronted with yet another puzzle over the violent forces that roil the central regions of galaxies.
The discovery of the apparent double nucleus in the M31 spiral galaxy in the Andromeda constellation was announced yesterday by the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore.


Politics of Present Snags Remembrance of Past; Plan for Potter's Field Memorial Near African Burial Ground Stalls in Emotional Debate
All they wanted, Melinda Hunt and Margot Lovejoy insist, was to resurrect the memory of New York City's forsaken dead.
They wanted to erect a sculpture for the nearly 1 million people buried anonymously over the centuries in the city's potter's fields.
And they wanted to put it at the site of the city's first, at Broadway and Chambers Street, at what is now City Hall Park.
The artists' remembrance of the past, however, has encountered the politics of the present.
The permit needed to erect the sculpture has become stalled in a sensitive debate over the proprietorship of the city's rich history -- over how and where that history is portrayed, and by whom.


Hawaiian Electric Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Great White Shark Puts the Final Teeth Into His Game
Of all the things Greg Norman buried in the ancient linksland at Royal St.
George's on Sunday, the most important was his dangerously escalating image as golf's biggest cartoon character.
Until he beat Nick Faldo and Bernhard Langer at the 122d British Open, Norman was The Great White Shark -- hitting the ball a mile, spinning it back off greens, shooting at island greens with 1-irons.
Sometimes he won, more times he lost.
Either way, it was bigger than life.


A Question Mark Is Hovering Over Giants' Moore
When Phil Simms spoke to reporters today, there was a smile on his face.
And why shouldn't he be happy?
Giants Coach Dan Reeves has made him the starter.
The Man.
But how long that smile remains depends in large part on how healthy the quarterback stays.
And how healthy he stays depends on the offensive line.
That's where right guard Eric Moore comes in.
Or may not come in.
Moore is facing anything from probation and a fine to one year in prison stemming from his January arrest in Atlanta along with the former Giants defensive end Mark Duckens on three felony counts -- conspiracy to possess and distribute anabolic steroids, possession with intent to distribute anabolic steroids and possession with intent to distribute human-growth hormone pills.


Man Kills Sons, Daughter and Himself
A 44-year-old Bridgeport man, despondent over his wife's leaving him and his poor health, shot and killed his 13-year-old twin sons and his 22-year-old daughter in their sleep before killing himself early this morning, the police said.
The Bridgeport police said that the man, Jose Lopez of 13 Colony Street, apparently killed his children -- Nathan, Nicholas and 22-year-old Deanna -- and then himself about 5 A.M. with gunshots to the head.
They said he used a .25-caliber Beretta pistol.


Hon Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors will give $1,000 rebates on new pickup trucks to millions of current owners of the 1973-to-1987 models with side-mounted fuel tanks, to settle 36 class-action lawsuits.
The settlement does not resolve a dispute with Federal regulators who want the trucks recalled for what they say is a safety defect.  [ Page D1. ]
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans to limit the choice of doctors and hospitals for the oldest and sickest policyholders, trying, the health insurer said, to hold down costs.  [ A1. ]


Books of The Times; Horrors, or, Why Monsters Are So Appealing
The Monster Show A Cultural History of Horror By David J. Skal Illustrated. 432 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $25.


Jerusalem Journal; Lights! Camera! News! Palestine TV Is on the Air
As the anchor signed off, the music came up and credits flashed on the closed-circuit screen, wild applause erupted in the packed performance hall of the Hakawati Theater in East Jerusalem.
The first television news program written and produced by Palestinians here was broadcast today without a hitch, and the audience was euphoric.


Mattingly Puts His Best Foot Backward
Don Mattingly prefers not to discuss the intricacies of hitting.
He occasionally makes adjustments between pitches, but he is adamant about keeping his hitting secrets a secret.
After failing to bat .300 in the last three years, Mattingly finally decided last year to avoid answering questions about his hitting.
He usually responded to queries about his approach by saying, "It doesn't do me any good to share it."


Bridge
The 1993 Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship, organized by the Greater New York Bridge Assocation, is nearing its end.
The last undefeated team, which will now wait for the results of the losers bracket, consists of Michael and Judi Radin, Michael Kopera, Edgar Kaplan, Brian Glubok and Nick Nickell.
Playing on Thursday at the Beverly Club, with Glubok and Nickell absent, they defeated a group led by John Solodar by a margin of 45 imps.
In a recent Chicago game Judi Radin held the South hand shown in the diagram, and was faced with a difficult decision when East, in third seat, opened with a highly imaginative three-diamond bid.
She chose an underbid of three no-trump, which proved to be right.
But if the North and West hands were reversed, North-South could make seven clubs, seven spades or seven no-trump.


Caremark International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Decrease in New York Sour Cherry Crop Caused by Winter Freeze
As the harvest of sour cherries began in New York, state officials said that the crop would be less than half of last year's because of freezing weather over the winter.
The state Agricultural Statistics Service estimated the 1993 crop at 14.8 million pounds, down 52 percent from last year's 31 million pounds.


Boatmen's Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


200 Children Are Abandoned In Besieged Bosnian Hospital
Nobody could be sure when Edin Lisnjic died.
The only witnesses, three other toddlers in a stuffy upper room at a hospital for physically and mentally handicapped children here, were in no condition to say.
Edin was 2 1/2.
It seemed likely that he had succumbed of dehydration in the intense summer heat only a few hours before United Nations troops arrived here late this afternoon.
For 72 hours before that, Edin and more than 200 other children in the hospital had been abandoned, without doctors, nurses or other staff members, and with nobody to turn to but a handful of adult patients with severe mental handicaps of their own.


TCF Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
COOPER ROLLS, Houston, a joint venture of Cooper Industries and Rolls-Royce P.L.C., received orders worth $70 million for offshore oil and gas platform equipment from Esso Production Malaysia Inc., and Shell U.K.
Exploration and Production.
RAYTHEON CO., Lexington, Mass., won a $14.4 million contract from Oman to modernize its air traffic control systems.


BMC Software Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Field Trip That Has Their Attention


Dinkins, in Israel, Excelled in Role of Good-Will Ambassador
To the Editor:
Mayor David N. Dinkins's trip to Israel is now history, but to the 34 delegation members who accompanied New York City's Mayor the story is incomplete.
We admired the energy and involvement of news media representatives, but since they were excluded from most of the meetings with Israeli leaders, they may not have known some aspects of the trip.


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Moscow Draws Line on Cigarette and Liquor Ads
As the smog of Communism lifted over Moscow several years ago, enabling a market-oriented economy to take root, products like Reebok shoes, Benetton clothes, Sharp electronics and Estee Lauder cosmetics were suddenly available to people who had known only the shoddiness of domestically produced consumer goods.
Then, as the avenues of exposure opened, companies began using traditional methods of advertising to keep their corporate logos fresh in Muscovites' minds.
Among the most visible images around town on billboards and storefronts have been advertisements for Western cigarettes and liquor.
The United States alone accounted for $197.6 million in tobacco exports to Russia last year and $24 million in alcohol exports, according to the Department of Commerce.
Promoting Health
But just as the United States, Italy, Singapore, Sweden and other countries restricted advertising for tobacco and alcohol as a way to promote health and safety, the Moscow City Council passed a resolution this month that would banish such advertisements from billboards, kiosks and bus shelters, as well as from local newspapers, magazines and Russia's national television network.


Gay Soldiers: Half a Loaf
President Clinton's new policy on homosexuals in the military is a disappointment to all who hoped for an end to unfair, career-threatening discrimination.
The President once hoped to lift the ban on gay soldiers, thus liberating gay men and lesbians who have served their country well from fear of discovery and expulsion.
But in the end he yielded to fierce opposition and simply modified the ban, ending its worst abuses but forcing homosexuals to hide their private lives if they wish to serve.
Even so, the policy moves in the right direction and is probably the best that can be wrung from a Congress that is unwilling to go further than the Joint Chiefs of Staff will accept.
So on practical grounds there is little choice but to take half a loaf.
Were Mr.
Clinton to fight to the end the most likely outcome would be a Congressional law even worse for gay soldiers.


Capstead Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sega to Start Review For New Campaign
Sega of America Inc. said yesterday that it was searching for an additional advertising agency to handle a new $8 million to $10 million campaign aimed at children and their parents.


Thrifty Drug Stores Narrows Choice to 3
Thrifty Drug Stores of Los Angeles said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on the creative portion of its account to three agencies from seven.
The account had been at Basso &amp; Associates of Newport Beach, Calif., for nearly two years.
Gary Rocheleau, Thrifty's senior vice president of sales and merchandising, said the finalists were: Asher/ Gould Advertising of Los Angeles; Cohen/Johnson Inc. of Los Angeles, and Heil-Brice Retail Advertising of San Clemente, Calif.
The four agencies eliminated from the review were the incumbent; Chiat/Day of Venice, Calif.; Griffin Bacal of New York, and Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws Advertising Inc. of Los Angeles.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.97
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.00
3.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.11
3.24
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.32
5.32
6.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.54
7.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.27
8.64
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.70
5.69
6.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


On My Mind; The U.S. Smashes A Peril
Americans can rest easier.
Washington has shown it can protect its citizens against at least one great peril from abroad.
No, it is not drugs.
And it is not foreign guns so attractive to American collectors and street killers, not that.
And it is not the laundered money and shadow companies that allow foreign dictators to buy American technology and products that can be turned into weaponry.


GATT's New Chief Rejects Narrow Pact
The man in charge of concluding the world trade talks brushed aside proposals for a scaled-down agreement today, asserting that some countries would back out rather than see certain parts of a broad accord jettisoned.
Peter Sutherland, who became Director General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- GATT -- on July 1, seemed eager to broaden the scope of an accord to liberalize world trade after the Clinton Administration indicated that it might favor a slimmed-down agreement to prevent the talks' dragging on for several more years.


Paperhandlers Ratify Pact
The Paperhandlers and Straighteners Union No. 1, whose members receive newsprint shipments and prepare rolls of paper for the presses, yesterday ratified an agreement with The New York Times that extends to the year 2000, The Times announced.
The agreement was originally reached on Dec. 23, 1992.
The paperhandlers' agreement is the last in a series reached between The Times and its major production unions covering production operations in Manhattan and the new automated plant in Edison, N.J.
Details of the agreement were not released.


By Design; Paris Casual
Sneakers can be spotted all over town here.
Every other Parisian or tourist seems to be sneaker-clad as they sit at sidewalk cafes watching the world go by.
In the bustling ateliers of the grand couture houses like Chanel, Dior and Lacroix, assistants and designers are padding around in sneakers as they ready the collections.
And a good many front-row viewers are wearing sneakers, too.


John Nuveen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Forget Electric Car and Tax the Gas Guzzlers; A Suitable Battery
To the Editor:
George A. Kritzler's July 9 letter on the electric car's feasibility is based on out-of-date information: that electric cars have limited driving range; that they use lead acid batteries that must be replaced every 20,000 miles; that they use environmentally toxic materials; that they will cost $100,000, and that the pollution from generating electricity is analogous to the pollution from gasoline engines.


Profit Jumps at McDonnell Douglas
Despite big declines in military spending and commercial aircraft orders, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation continued to show improvement, today reporting a big jump in second-quarter profit.
Earnings came to $170 million, or $4.33 a share, compared with $11 million, or 29 cents a share, in the comparable period of last year.


Liberty National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Jimmie Holland; Listening to the Emotional Needs of Cancer Patients
FOR a time in the early 1970's, conversations between Dr.
Jimmie Holland, a leading psychiatrist, and her husband, Dr.
James Holland, a leading cancer specialist, often took a familiar course:
Dr.
Holland the oncologist would relay exciting data coming out of the country's first cooperative cancer trial, statistics about white cells and average survival and tumor size.


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Satellite A White Elephant, Some Say
As the Clinton Administration prods the $70-billion-a-year Federal research complex into doing more to help American business devise new technologies, experts say it should heed the muddle surrounding a $600 million Federal satellite.
The craft is expected to be placed into orbit in the next week or so after the delayed mission of the space shuttle Discovery gets off the ground.
The Advanced Communications Technology Satellite, or ACTS, which was under development by NASA for more than a decade, is a 47-foot, high-technology wonder packed with the latest gear.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration hails it as the first of a new generation of lightning-fast communications craft for the 21st century.


Brister Signs With Eagles
BUBBY BRISTER, a free-agent quarterback, signed a one-year contract with the Philadelphia Eagles yesterday.
Brister is expected to fill the void at backup to RANDALL CUNNINGHAM created when JIM McMAHON left the Eagles to sign with the Minnesota Vikings.
Terms of the contract were not released. (AP)


The High Risks of Denying Rivers Their Flood Plains
FOR decades Americans have insisted on settling next to rivers and streams, like moths drawn to a flame, just as people have throughout history.
And to protect their cities and farms, engineers have tried to ward off the inevitable flood waters with levees, flood walls, dams, dikes and diversion channels.
To some extent this ambitious attempt to bend nature to human desires has worked.
But nature still wins often enough, as this month's destructive floods in the upper Mississippi valley vividly testify.
Even the gains have come at enormous cost to the ecology of flood plains, some experts say, and in some cases control measures have perversely resulted in worse flooding.


Benchmark Electronic reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BMC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


America West Airlines (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Acquisition by Olsten May Gain It Some Respect on Wall Street.
AS No. 3 in the temporary office help market, behind Manpower Inc. and Kelly Services, the Olsten Corporation has gotten little respect from Wall Street.
But the company may be on the verge of shedding its Rodney Dangerfield complex.
The company's $525 million acquisition of the Lifetime Corporation in Boston, primarily a provider of home health-care personnel, will catapult Olsten into the nation's leading provider of home health care, the fastest-growing segment of the economy.
The deal, when completed, will double Olsten's revenues to more than $2 billion.


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rockwell International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tweak Without Tears
TO tweak a computer system is to try to squeeze the last possible measure of efficiency out of it -- a few more bytes of memory, another megabyte of disk space, an additional split second of response time.
A certain amount of tweaking is helpful, but it can become an obsession; after a while, you think you can tell the difference between 5 milliseconds and 10 milliseconds.
RAM (random access memory) is all-important.
That vital 640 kilobytes of conventional memory is all too easily reduced by DOS, terminate-and-stay-resident programs and other resources.
The newest version of DOS, 6.0, offers Memmaker, a virtually automatic utility to make the most of the lower 640, and it is almost free since it comes with DOS.


Harland (John H.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Forget Electric Car and Tax the Gas Guzzlers; Just 41 Cents a Day
To the Editor:
It is hard to sympathize with the Colorado motorist who objects to the President's proposed gasoline tax increase of 4.3 cents a gallon (news article, July 6).
He complains that his gasoline cost is now $3,000 a year and that the increase "is a killer" for people from rural areas like him.


TV to Focus On Crown Hts.
New York's Criminal Justice Director, Richard H. Girgenti, will discuss his report on the Crown Heights disturbances at a news conference at noon today.
Channels 2, 4, 5, 7, 11 and 13 and New York 1 News are planning to carry the news conference live, as are radio stations WCBS-AM, WINS-AM and WOR-AM.


Torchmark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Smith Reports to Bills
BRUCE SMITH, the Pro Bowl defensive end, closed his holdout by reporting to training camp yesterday, saying this could be his last season with the Buffalo Bills.
Smith, bitter over the absence of a new contract, is in the last year of a contract that pays him $1.6 million a year.
He is seeking a deal that would pay him $4 million a year.
"As of right now, I feel this will be my last year with the Buffalo Bills, unless they can work something out," he said.


INSIDE
North Korea Yields a Little
The United States and North Korea agreed on some measures to resolve tensions about North Korean nuclear capabilities.
Page A2.
Japan's Premier Holds Reins
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa refuses to step down, despite the results of Sunday's elections, and is confident that he can build a coalition.
Page A3.
U.S.
Aid for Airline Industry
A Government panel recommended tax cuts and regulatory relief to reverse the "abysmal financial condition" of the airline industry.
Page D1.
Harder Than Diamond
They thought it couldn't be done, but researchers have synthesized a material that may be harder than the hardest.
Science Times, page C10.


East German Spy Trader Is Jailed on Tax Charges
Wolfgang Vogel, the mysterious lawyer who arranged exchanges of spies and releases of political prisoners in East Germany from 1962 to 1989, was arraigned in a Berlin court today on charges of perjury and tax evasion on income said to have been received through his connections with the Communist secret police.
Mr.
Vogel, 67, and his wife, Helga, 52, were taken into custody at their home outside Berlin on Sunday morning, said one of his lawyers, Wolfgang Schomburg.
Mrs.
Vogel was charged with abetting tax evasion.


EZCorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Debates and Speeches, Videos and Dramas
Central Park East Secondary School, on Madison Avenue in East Harlem, is a far cry from the type of high school that most Americans remember.
Students study a core curriculum -- no shopping around for that easy course on principles of physical education, no shunting students with poor grades off to auto mechanics.
Classes routinely run two hours, and no bells ring.
To graduate, students must demonstrate a wide range of knowledge in 14 specific areas.
They can do so with videos, dramas, debates, and speeches as well as standard written essays.
This kind of "outcomes-based" education, which has caught on in hundreds of school districts around the nation, is now official policy in Pennsylvania and is under discussion in many other states.


Review/Film; Going Back Home, Again and Again, To Find Vietnam and to Find Herself
"From Hollywood to Hanoi," opening today at Film Forum, is an intense, personal, supremely self-confident feature-length documentary that owes a lot to the cinema journalism of Michael Moore, the man who confronted General Motors in "Roger and Me." Like the Moore film, "From Hollywood to Hanoi" is as much about the film maker behind it as it is about the subject it appears to be exploring.
On the surface that subject is life in Vietnam today, so many years after the end of hostilities.
In fact, "From Hollywood to Hanoi" is the record of one remarkable young woman's efforts to construct a coherent identity out of bits and pieces of lives lived as a series of compromises.


6 Candidates Wrestle for Ground Stein Abandoned
When City Council President Andrew J. Stein abruptly withdrew from the Public Advocate's race three weeks ago, politicians wondered who would benefit the most.
The answer, analysts now say, is that all the remaining six major Democratic candidates will, but to varying degrees.
Clearly, Mr.
Stein's withdrawal has made Mark Green, the city's former Consumer Affairs Commissioner, the front-runner.
Early polls put him ahead even when Mr.
Stein was still in the race.
And his name recognition and a campaign war chest of nearly half a million dollars will only enhance his stature.


Books of The Times; The Rise of the Right (Read Fascism) in Russia
Black Hundred The Rise of the Extreme Right in Russia By Walter Laqueur Illustrated. 317 pages.
HarperCollins. $27.50.
Russia's dark history keeps intruding into the euphoria of glasnost and perestroika.
Toward the close of the 20th century, the 19th century's prejudices and xenophobia remain alive in the republics of the former Soviet Union.
That is the frightening message of Walter Laqueur's revealing new book, "Black Hundred."
To the inchoate groups on the extreme right who are increasingly influential in the political and social life of Russia, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin are considered enemies of the state.
The new nationalistic superpatriots are opposed to rapprochement with the West.
Anti-Americanism is very much present in the anti-democratic language used by leaders of the extremist parties.
Nostalgia for the old order includes a revival of a sect of zealots in the Russian Orthodox Church, modern-day Cossacks in czarist uniforms and virulent anti-Semitism.


CHANGE AT THE F.B.I.: Man in the News; The New Man for the F.B.I.: Louis Joseph Freeh
In nominating Judge Louis J. Freeh to be Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, President Clinton turned yesterday to a man who, the judge's friends say, has been unconsciously training for the job his entire professional life.
Judge Freeh is a former F.B.I. agent and Federal prosecutor whose work on complex and celebrated Government cases led to his appointment, at 41, to a Federal judgeship in Manhattan.


Miscellany
*
NBC News is introducing a promotional campaign for the "Today" show carrying the theme "What a difference 'Today' Makes." The campaign, created and produced by Jeff Kreiner, NBC's vice president of advertising and promotion for the East Coast, uses the 1934 song "What a Difference a Day Makes."


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Food Notes
Whole Foods, Whole
Whole Foods Uptown, that opened in late May with shelves and bins not fully stocked and the prepared-food counter not yet operational, is now in full swing.


Merck Cuts 2,100 Jobs And Takes Huge Charge
Intensifying its cost-cutting to prepare for a riptide of price competition, Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it had eliminated 2,100 jobs and charged $775 million against second-quarter pretax earnings for the cutbacks.
The charge will also cover future reductions.
The reduction of 2,100 jobs was more than double the number that Merck, the world's largest drug maker, had projected only four months ago.


Norman Andersson, Bass-Baritone, 40
Norman Andersson, a bass-baritone who sang at the Metropolitan Opera and with several symphony orchestras, died on Monday at his home in Chatham Center, N.Y.
He was 40.
The cause was AIDS, said a statement from Dorothy Cone, his press representative.


Public Relations Salaries Slip a Bit
The median salary for public relations practitioners decreased slightly last year, to $46,204 from $46,556, according to the eighth annual salary survey by The Public Relations Journal, which is published by the Public Relations Society of America in New York.


Top Chefs Try to Develop Taste for Amazon Fish At Rain-Forest Benefit
FOR the last few years, we've been inundated with rain-forest products, especially fruits and nuts, to highlight the plight of threatened tropical regions.
Now, along come fish.
An exotic contingent consisting of tucunare, filhote, tambaqui, pescada, piramutaba and dourada were recently flown to this country for a benefit that had two goals: to interest chefs in using the Amazon fish, and to alert people that fish, too, are linked to the imperiled ecology of rain forests.


Teheran Journal; Mobilizing Against Pop Music and Other Horrors
The traffic had gradually slowed to a crawl along Africa Street in north Teheran.
Prostitutes who had been on the curbside moments earlier nodding discreetly to male motorists from beneath the folds of black cloth suddenly melted into the side streets.
The Western pop music that had blasted from car stereos was quickly silenced.
Women in cars hastily wiped away lipstick and pulled their scarves down over their foreheads to hide any loose strands of hair.


Summertime and the RV's Are Easy; A Campground Is the Small Town Most Have Never Known
At the Lone Oak campground, people arriving for the weekend set to work at traditional camping chores: securing their recreational vehicles, setting up grills and, in a few cases, actually raising a tent.
The seasonals, the campers who leave their trailers and RV's at Lone Oak all summer, went about their own routines.
Howard Sturges thinned beets in his garden.
Francis Abate worked in his woodworking shed.
Nancy Madore started decorating for the annual Christmas-in-July competition.


Frank A. Scioscia, 71, Bookstore Operator
Frank A. Scioscia, a former publishing executive who ran a popular bookstore in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., died on July 10 at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 71 and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


ResultsPlus
TENNIS  Graf and Germany Out Two weeks after winning her fifth Wimbledon singles title, Steffi Graf returned to competition yesterday in what turned out to be a cameo appearance.
Bothered by an inflamed shoulder tendon, Graf, who has been nursing a foot injury since June, was upset in the Federation Cup in Frankfurt, and her defending champion German team was ousted in the first round by Australia.
Graf, the world's top-ranked women's player, was beaten by Nicole Provis, 6-4, 1-6, 6-1, in 75 minutes.
The German team was beaten, 2-1, and became the first Federation Cup defending champion to lose in the first round of the women's version of the Davis Cup.
The United States advanced to the second round with a 3-0 sweep over Switzerland.
For the fifth-seeded United States, Lindsay Davenport, making her Federation Cup debut, beat Christelle Fauche, 6-4, 6-3, and Lori McNeil rallied to defeat Emanuela Zardo, 1-6, 6-3, 6-3.
Ann Grossman and Debbie Graham completed the shutout by winning the doubles, 6-3, 6-1. (AP) PRO BASKETBALL  Knicks in Winter Form  The Knicks and the Bullets were in midseason rather than midsummer form last night before 2,790 fans at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.
With 1:50 left in the game, following a pair of free throws by Greg Anthony, both benches emptied after Washington's Don MacLean apparently elbowed the Knicks' Irving Thomas.
When the court was cleared, double technical fouls and ejections were assessed to MacLean and Thomas.
The Bullets won, 111-107, and handed the Knicks their first loss of the Doral Arrowwood New York Summer League tournament.


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rebate Offer Should Not Harm G.M.
G.M.'s proposed settlement of lawsuits related to the company's pickup trucks is unlikely to create a huge financial liability for the No. 1 auto maker, analysts said today.
Late Monday, the General Motors Corporation said it would settle 36 class-action lawsuits by giving certificates for a $1,000 rebate on the purchase of a new truck to owners of G.M. pickups equipped with side-mounted fuel tanks from the years 1973 to 1987.
Critics say the trucks are more likely to catch fire or explode in an accident than other vehicles.


Mary Kramer, 56; Led Effort to Save Mills in New Jersey
Mary Ellen Forbes Kramer, who led the campaign to preserve and redevelop the historic mill district in Paterson, N.J., died on Monday at a hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
She was 56 and lived in Little Falls, N.J., and Weston, Conn.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Where School Is More Than Just Showing Up
In this tiny school district in the Philadelphia suburbs, high school students learn at their own pace.
But before they can graduate, they have to demonstrate competence in nine academic areas.
The system is not new.
Indeed, it is something of a throwback to the days before Carnegie units, the 88-year-old system that equates learning with a passing grade and time spent in class.


Eschel Rhoodie, a South African At Center of Scandal, Dies at 60
Eschel Mostert Rhoodie, South Africa's chief propagandist for apartheid until one of his country's worst political scandals brought him down in 1978, died Saturday in Atlanta.
He was 60.
An ace tennis player, he died of a heart attack on an Atlanta court, his family said.
Mr.
Rhoodie, in exile the last 11 years, lived in nearby Smyrna, Ga.


METRO DIGEST
MANHATTAN JUDGE PICKED TO HEAD F.B.I.
President Clinton says he will appoint a Manhattan judge, Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court, to replace William Sessions as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: LEADERSHIP FAILURES ARE CITED A chain of leadership failures by Mayor Dinkins, top City Hall advisers and the city's leading police commanders caused the disturbances in Crown Heights to escalate unabated into a three-day "riot" in which Hasidic Jews were singled out by bands of black youths, according to a state report.
A1.


Temporaries Have to Do Without a Safety Net; Second-Class Citizens
To the Editor:
Your front-page article July 6 implies that most temporary workers, content in their employment status, are not looking for full-time work.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Allegheny Power System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Japanese Politics Moves Into Era of Talk Shows
This has never been Larry King's kind of country.
Political talk shows are usually deadly dull, and the real action has always taken place in Tokyo's most exclusive private clubs, where the $400-a-plate tab pales in comparison to the amount of cash changing hands to make new political alliances.
But even before the votes were fully counted in the election on Sunday, casting the governing Liberal Democratic Party out of power, the deal-making moved to the country's television studios.
Japan's aging old guard and the political rebels who are threatening to topple the old order have discovered the power of the call-in show, and each side is racing to manipulate it.


On the Case Against Lemrick Nelson in the Death of Yankel Rosenbaum
Following are excerpts from the report's conclusions on the case against Lemrick Nelson, the youth tried and acquitted in the slaying of Yankel Rosenbaum during the disturbances: From Executive Summary
Prosecution of Lemrick Nelson
Five questions were central to this review.
*
Why was no one other than Lemrick Nelson arrested and prosecuted when several others were involved in the attack on Yankel Rosenbaum?
* Was a full and thorough investigation conducted?
* Was the case properly prepared and tried?
*
How could the jury acquit Nelson, when it appeared that the case against him was so strong?
*
Was the jury's verdict based on racial prejudice or anti-police bias?
Analysis of Criminal Investigation
Several people were responsible for the stabbing of Yankel Rosenbaum.
Only Lemrick Nelson was indicted, tried and acquitted.
Deficiencies in the initial investigation created problems with the evidence which subsequent efforts did not overcome.
Accordingly, the likelihood that other participants in the attack on Rosenbaum will be held accountable for the murder has been greatly diminished.
. . .
The improper handling of critical physical evidence compromised its probative value at trial.
The bloodstained knife discovered on Nelson, which should have provided persuasive proof in support of the prosecution's case, was not properly handled.
Additionally, Nelson's pants could have provided meaningful evidence of his involvement in the attack on Rosenbaum.
The stains on the pants should have been properly noted and analyzed by the police.
Tests on this evidence were not sufficiently monitored by the prosecution.
The Jury's View of the Case
Considering the problems with the evidence presented by the prosecution, there was an ample basis for the jury verdict finding that the people had not proven their case beyond a reasonable doubt.
The reasonable doubts articulated by the jurors arose, to a greater extent, from the inconsistencies in the witnesses' testimony and deficiencies in the evidence.
. . .
During the course of the interviews with the jurors, two themes emerged for why the jury determined that Nelson was not guilty.
These themes can be characterized as inconsistencies in the witnesses' testimony and as deficiencies in the evidence.
. . .
The jurors found that the inconsistencies in the police officers' testimony were an overriding consideration in undermining the value of all key prosecution evidence, and in finding that Nelson was not guilty of stabbing Rosenbaum.
The prosecution's late discovery of key witnesses exacerbated this problem.
Most significantly, the inconsistencies in the police officers' testimony regarding Nelson's apprehension, Rosenbaum's identification and Nelson's confession seriously compromised the value of this evidence in the eyes of the jury.
The jurors had been instructed by Judge Rappaport to evaluate whether the witnesses were truthful in order to determine the facts of the case.
The jurors stated that, after considering these factors, they determined that they could not reconcile the contradictory evidence and the inconsistencies in the testimony of the witnesses.
As a result, they disregarded the testimony of some of the main police witnesses whose statements were crucial to proving Nelson's guilt.
The manner in which the Judge conducted the trial appeared to have influenced the jury's decision-making.
Although many of the jurors seemed to have a favorable view of the Judge, his remarks and conduct may have adversely affected their view about the credibility of the police witnesses.
He was unable to control the conduct and the comments of the defense counsel, which afforded the jury an opportunity to consider information that was otherwise irrelevant or inadmissible.
Further, by continuously interjecting himself in the questioning of witnesses, the jury had concerns regarding the Judge's impartiality.
Most significantly, the Judge's reaction to Officer Lewis's testimony highlighted the inconsistencies between Lewis's version of the events surrounding Nelson's apprehension and the version of Officers Hoppe and Marinos and Detective Litwin.
The Judge did not remain an impartial arbitrator and instead conveyed to the jury his personal opinions about the evidence.
. . .
From the Findings
*
The failure to record the identities of the individuals present at the scene made it difficult to identify police and civilian witnesses.
*
Interviews with the victim and possible suspects were not conducted promptly or recorded.
*
The improper handling of critical physical evidence compromised its probative value at trial.
The bloodstained knife discovered on Nelson, which should have provided persuasive proof in support of the prosecution's case, was not properly handled.
Additionally, Nelson's pants could have provided meaningful evidence of his involvement in the attack on Rosenbaum.
The stains on the pants should have been properly noted and analyzed by the police.
Tests on this evidence were not sufficiently monitored by the prosecution.
*
The jurors found that the inconsistencies in the police officers' testimony were an overriding consideration in undermining the value of all key prosecution evidence, and in finding that Nelson was not guilty of stabbing Rosenbaum.
The prosecution's late discovery of key witnesses exacerbated this problem.
*
The manner in which the Judge conducted the trial appeared to have influenced the jury's decision-making.


Temporaries Have to Do Without a Safety Net; Japan's Two Tiers
To the Editor:
American industry is imitating the Japanese in a new area: the use of temporary workers who receive less than union contract wages and benefits (front page, July 6).


THE SUPREME COURT: Reporter's Notebook; Hearing Without Strife Brings Joy to Senators
Drama was not much in evidence as the latest Supreme Court confirmation hearing got under way today, but memory was.
That was apparent from the moment the Senate Judiciary Committee's chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr., greeted the nominee, Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
In the midst of extending a formulaic "welcome," he interrupted himself with a heartfelt "believe me, you are welcome here this morning." Mr.
Biden said the lack of controversy surrounding this nomination was "the most wonderful thing that's happened to me" since becoming chairman of the committee in 1987.


Excerpts From Senate Hearings on the Ginsburg Nomination
Following are excerpts from yesterday's hearing by the Senate Judiciary Committee on the nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to become Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, as transcribed by Reuters and the Federal News Service, a private transcription service: STATEMENT BY JOSEPH R. BIDEN JR.
Democrat of Delaware
The nomination of a Supreme Court justice signals the renewal of a national debate over the meaning of our Constitution, a debate, I might add, that's been going on for over 200 years without end, and will go on for another 200 years, I suspect.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Break for Clinton, Nunn Lends Support To Gay-Troop Plan
Pulling back from his insistence that his own, potentially stricter proposal be written into law, Senator Sam Nunn today lent general support to President Clinton's new policy toward homosexuals in the military.
That endorsement, by the Senate's most influential member on military affairs, amounted to a small concession to Mr.
Clinton by a lawmaker who has been the President's chief antagonist on the issue.


Erixon Retires From Rangers
JAN ERIXON, the 31-year-old Swedish-born wing who has played longer for the Rangers and suffered more heartaches -- and backaches -- than any other player on the team, said yesterday that after 10 seasons he had decided not to return to New York.
"It was time to go home," he said.


First Security Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


From the Report: On Police Actions and Commissioner Brown
Following are excerpts from the report's conclusions about the police response to the violence.
From Executive Summary Planning
. . .
The department's Disorder Control Plans provided a solid basis for guiding its response to the disturbance.
However, the plans were not updated annually as required, did not provide an explicit mission statement, nor make clear when they were to be invoked.
These plans were not used until Thursday, when the strategy adopted mirrored the principles of the Patrol Borough Brooklyn South Unusual Disorder Plan.
. . .
Mobilization and Tactics
The mobilization and deployment of officers to the accident scene occurred too slowly to prevent the spread of the disturbance.
Violence erupted at President Street and Utica Avenue soon after the 8:20 P.M. accident.
By 9 P.M., 911 callers had reported a riot in the area and the police began to mobilize.
However, at first, the response was limited to officers responding to radio calls, about 30 officers stationed at a nearby concert, and the Brooklyn South Task Force.
However, 270 of the approximately 400 officers ultimately assigned did not arrive until after 11:30 P.M., and full mobilization was not completed until between 1 and 2:40 A.M.
Because of the slow pace of mobilization, the officers were not in position to control the unruly mob at the accident scene.
The mob began to stream down President Street at 11 P.M., shattering windows and damaging cars.
Lemrick Nelson, who was acquitted of murdering Yankel Rosenbaum, told detectives he was part of that crowd.
Deployment was not completed until sometime between 1 A.M. and 2:40 A.M., at least four hours after the police saw the disturbance at the intersection of President and Utica escalate into violence.
. . .
The officers in Crown Heights lacked a clear understanding of their mission.
While the field commander initially ordered officers to exercise restraint, he was unprepared to alter their tactics when that approach failed.
Initially, Chief Gallagher emphasized restraint, fearing that aggressive action would exacerbate already strong feelings and make the police the focus of the crowd's anger.
This approach failed to spell out proactive steps.
Containment and dispersal were not consistently implemented, and no other tactical options were substituted.
As a result, field supervisors were forced to improvise or remain passive when restraint failed.
The department's response to the first three nights of violence was, consequently, uncoordinated and ineffective.
. . .
Prior to Thursday, most of the police were deployed to fixed posts, an ineffective way to prevent illegal activity by roving bands.
Because the police were deployed at fixed posts, roving bands were able to move through the neighborhood.
These roving bands committed violent acts and moved elsewhere before the police could respond.
The Police Department's failure to control roving bands contributed significantly to the riotous character of the disturbance.
On Thursday, the department supplemented its fixed-post strategy with mobile patrols assigned to cover these roving bands.
Exhibiting a high degree of coordination, the police ordered these bands to disperse when they became unruly and to arrest people who refused to comply.
This approach was successful.
N.Y.P.D. undertook extensive community intervention efforts to mediate hostilities and to thwart rumors contributing to the unrest in Crown Heights.
Community intervention was a significant aspect of the Police Department's response to the Crown Heights disturbance.
Several rumors spread throughout the community shortly after the fatal accident.
They helped to fuel the anger and deepen the division between blacks and Hasidim.
The police repeatedly attempted to dispel the rumors through public meetings and press conferences.
Efforts were made at all levels, from Police Commissioner to the borough commander to community affairs officers, to communicate with the black and Hasidic communities, starting Monday evening.
Commissioner Brown, the Mayor and Deputy Mayors and leaders of the community quickly gathered that night at the 71st Precinct.
They saw the need to work together to try to calm the situation.
Brown requested that community leaders be briefed to help them quell rumors and encourage public order.
. . .
Command and Control
There was no evidence of an affirmative order by the Police Commissioner to prevent the police from responding to criminal incidents in Crown Heights.
The Police Commissioner and other members of the command structure stated that at no time did they order officers not to make arrests.
Commissioner Brown stated: "I know there was no policy from my level, and I haven't heard anyone below me say that they may have ordered a no-arrest policy." Assistant Chief Gallagher, Deputy Chief Gussman and other commanding officers echoed this contention.
Commissioner Brown said his expectation was that arrests would be made for violations of the law where the police were capable of doing so.
Assistant Chief Gallagher said police officers were instructed not to take independent action and to stay on their posts to protect the assigned areas.
The assignment of most officers to fixed posts and the relative absence of mobile patrols, however, made it more difficult to effectuate arrests.
Personnel changes within the department in early August 1991 placed two key officials in positions and weakened the command structure.
Effective Aug. 15, 1991, the chief of department, Robert Johnston, retired.
On Monday, August 19, the new chief of department, David W. Scott, went on a previously scheduled vacation.
Chief of detectives, Joseph Borrelli, was named to assume interim duties as acting chief of department.
Mario Selvaggi was appointed that day to be chief of patrol.
With Selvaggi and Borrelli serving in less than familiar roles, the command structure was weakened.
They were inclined to accept the information and plans they received rather than adopting more assertive roles.
A collective failure by top-ranking N.Y.P.D. officials delayed the implementation of appropriate tactics to control this disorder.
Many of our criticisms of the police response to the disturbances are negative judgments about the performance of high-level N.Y.P.D. officials.
The Police Department clearly had sufficient resources and knowhow to deal more swiftly and effectively with the disturbance.
The individuals who occupied the highest positions in the department must share accountability for its failure to do so before Thursday.
Effective supervision requires that the headquarters command staff insist upon the development of sound tactical objectives, monitor the actions taken by the field commander and judge the effectiveness of those efforts.
Commissioner Brown and others should have intervened when a change in tactics was warranted.
Instead, the department's oversight of field operations was inadequate.
. . .
The Police Commissioner did not effectively fulfill his ultimate responsibility for managing the department's activities to suppress rioting and preserve the public peace.
The Police Commissioner's fundamental responsibility is to manage the department to meet the public need for police services.
Brown asserted that his job was to make sure that his uniformed commanders had the support they needed.
He said the decision how to use the police officers, once they were on the scene, was to be made by those in the field.
The Commissioner, himself, told us that he thought the commanders handling the situation had sufficient experience and knew what to do.
He considered it the responsibility of his staff to identify problems of resources or tactics and bring them to his attention.
He did not closely oversee the police response to the disturbance.
In times of emergency, the public can reasonably expect the Police Commissioner to ask probing questions of key aides on the scene, as well as monitor ongoing developments.
The Commissioner should assess operational effectiveness and demand changes where needed.
There is no evidence that Lee P. Brown provided this kind of leadership during the first three days of disturbances in Crown Heights.
Evaluated against these standards, the Commissioner's leadership and performance were inadequate.
Given the seriousness of the disturbances, it is unfortunate that the First Deputy did not assume a role in coordinating the development and implementation of a different strategy sooner.
As an executive aide to the Commissioner, First Deputy Raymond Kelly was assigned various administrative functions.
In an interview, now-Commissioner Kelly said it was made clear to him following his appointment that he was to have no role in operations and that the chief of department would report directly to the Commissioner.
Kelly had the authority to intervene in emergency incidents according to the Patrol Guide procedures.
However, because he was not formally in the direct chain of command, Kelly had no responsibility for patrol services.
Watching events on television Wednesday, Kelly decided on his own initiative to go to Crown Heights.
After meeting with Commissioner Brown, a decision was made that tactical changes were needed.
Kelly assumed responsibility for devising the new strategy that ultimately restored calm to the area.
It proved to be a critical shortcoming that Commissioner Brown did not call upon Kelly to assume his ultimate role in coordinating the development and implementation of a new strategy.
It is regrettable that, under the circumstances, Kelly did not deem it appropriate to seek an active role prior to late Wednesday.
. . .
Gaps in communication blocked the flow of critical information through the chain of command.
When asked who would have been reporting directly to him about what was going on in Crown Heights, Brown stated that it was Acting Chief of Department Borrelli.
Brown said that he received information from whoever had it during the disturbance, but viewed Borrelli as "the person there who was in charge of everything." However, Chief Borrelli said he had little contact with the Commissioner, except for conversations regarding the Rosenbaum homicide and their mutual presence at meetings with the Mayor.
It appears Brown did not receive a comprehensive account of the events on the streets, nor of the tactics used.
For instance, when we spoke with him, the former Commissioner was unaware that on Tuesday Chief Gallagher had ordered his officers to take cover for their safety along the building line because they were outnumbered when crowds began throwing rocks and bottles.
When we informed Brown about this crucial incident, he agreed that based upon this information, unknown to him at the time, it would have been appropriate for those at the scene to request reinforcements or devise new tactics.
. . .
911
During the disturbance, Crown Heights residents relied on the 911 system to alert the police to imminent danger.
Callers reported attacks on their homes, unruly mobs on the street and assaults in progress.
Many of these callers were not well served by the system.
Many 911 calls reporting large bands of angry demonstrators threatening or engaging in property and personal offenses were erroneously incident-coded as "disorderly group" or "criminal mischief." Consequently, they were handled as low priority calls.
When a call is made to the 911 system, the operator classifies the reported incident.
This generates a priority level, which influences the speed with which the police respond.
In many cases, calls reporting large angry bands of people were incorrectly coded as "disorderly groups," or "criminal mischief." These calls receive a relatively low priority rating.
A more appropriate classification would have been "roving band," which receives a high priority classification.
Despite intense roving band activity, just two calls received that classification.
The erroneous classification of 911 jobs as duplicates denied police services to some callers.
Many calls were also classified as duplicates even though they reported incidents at different locations.
This violated departmental guidelines, which require that calls specify the exact same incident in order to be considered duplicated.
The heavy use of duplicate classifications prevented some calls from receiving a police response.
. . .
From the Findings
*
The mobilization and deployment of officers to the accident scene occurred too slowly after violence began to limit the spread of the disorder that night.
*
The Police Department lacked a clearly defined and articulated mission to guide its response to civil disturbances.
The field commander chose a restraint-oriented approach, but failed to direct proactive measures to end the violence.
*
Until a proactive-arrest policy was announced and the unlawful assembly statute was used, the police did not effectively prevent disorderly crowds from forming and engaging in acts of violence.
*
N.Y.P.D. undertook extensive community intervention efforts to mediate hostilities and to thwart rumors which had contributed to the unrest in Crown Heights.
*
There was no evidence of an affirmative order by the Police Commissioner to prevent the police from responding to criminal incidents in Crown Heights.
*
A collective failure by top-ranking N.Y.P.D. officials delayed the implementation of appropriate tactics to control the disorder.
*
The Police Commissioner did not effectively fulfill his ultimate responsibility for managing the department's activities to suppress rioting and preserve the public peace.
*
Gaps in communication blocked the flow of critical information through the chain of command.
*
Many 911 calls reporting large bands of angry demonstrators threatening or engaged in property and personal offenses were erroneously incident-coded as "disorderly group" or "criminal mischief." Consequently, they were handled as low-priority calls.
*
The erroneous classification of 911 jobs as duplicates denied police services to some callers.
*
The N.Y.P.D. has made significant improvement since August of 1991 to enhance its planning and training for future disturbances.


GINSBURG PROMISES JUDICIAL RESTRAINT IF SHE JOINS COURT
Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, President Clinton's nominee to the Supreme Court, told the Senate Judiciary Committee today that she would be neither a conservative nor a liberal on the Court, but someone who ruled cautiously, without reaching out to write broad principles into the law.
In her opening statement to the committee, which began its hearings today on the nomination, Judge Ginsburg also sought to set a clear boundary on what kind of questions she was willing to answer.
She said she would not discuss specific cases or issues that might come before her.


Tribune Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ex-Detroit Police Officer Testifies He Never Struck Victim of Fatal Beating
A former Detroit police officer charged with murder in the fatal beating of a driver told jurors today that he never struck the victim.
Walter Budzyn, one of three former police officers on trial in the fatal beating of the driver, Malice Green, last Nov. 5, also testified that he had not seen any other officer become violent with Mr.
Green.


U.N., Easing Somalia Issue, Names Italian to Peace Office
In an effort to ease strains between Italy and the United Nations over the Italian role in the peacekeeping operation in Somalia, the Secretary General's office announced today that an Italian officer was being assigned to the Secretariat's peacekeeping operation.
The United Nations spokesman, Joe Sills, said the appointment of the Italian officer, Lieut.
Col.
Salvatore Quarantino, was "not unrelated to the current events." But he said the posting was a normal rotation.


Affiliated Publications reports earnings for 13wks to June 27


Sears Reports Strong Rise In Second-Quarter Earnings
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company took another big step toward repairing its tarnished image on Wall Street today, posting a sharp jump in second-quarter profits.
Sears said the earnings reflected a faster payback than projected on its overhaul of retailing operations, including the recruitment of outside senior managers, closing some stores and renovating others and shutting the legendary Sears catalogue.


Stocks Stage Rebound, With Dow Up 9.50
Stocks moved higher yesterday on rebounds in a number of sectors that recently endured selloffs.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 9.50 points to finish at 3,544.78 in heavy trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 277.4 million shares, up from 216.4 million on Monday.


E-mail Is Becoming A Cheap-Fax Network
The dividing line between paper facsimile documents and electronic mail is vanishing.
Thanks to the volunteer efforts of a group of computer network designers, the network of networks known as Internet now permits users to send an e-mail message to be printed out on fax machines at a growing number of sites around the world.


Optimism Dashed Along Mississippi as River Rises Once More at St. Louis
The Mississippi River rose in St.
Louis again today, dashing some of the optimism that the worst ravages of the historic floods of '93 might be past.
But it is becoming numbingly clear to tens of thousands of weary residents around the Midwest that even if the worst of the flooding is over, the worst part of the flood is just beginning.


'Expert' Babies Found to Teach Others
IT was during the blustery days of last March that 10-month-old Russell Ruud taught the other babies in his day-care group a lesson their parents may have wished he hadn't: how to unzip the Velcro chin straps of their winter hats.
"One day I went to pick Russell up and his teacher told me that the other mothers were complaining that their children had learned from him how to take off their hats," said Dr.
Judith Ruud, Russell's mother and, at the time, an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, just a few blocks from the Trinity Preschool in Manhattan.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If Only Stanley Could Pitch for Yankees, Too
Mike Stanley slugged his second grand slam in three games and third in three weeks last night, but his friends from the Yankees' opponent-friendly bullpen squandered a late-inning lead for the fourth time in 14 games.
The squander was more critical than the slam, and the Yankees fell to the Seattle Mariners, 9-5.
The loss halted the Yankees' winning streak at four games and dropped them out of their first-place tie with Toronto.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bosnian Children's Hospital Cleaned Up by U.N. Troops
A team of United Nations soldiers and aid workers reported today that normal food distribution and sanitary conditions had been restored in a hospital for mentally handicapped children that had been abandoned by its staff when the area had been attacked by the Muslim-led Bosnian Army.
United Nations peacekeeping troops took control of the hospital, near Fojnica, on Monday, saving more than 200 children who had spent three days without food or other care.
One 2-year-old child died in the interim, but United Nations officials said they expected no further deaths.


F.B.I. Chief's Fall From Power
He came to the F.B.I. in 1987 as a figure of integrity; he left Monday under a cloud.
The tumultuous tenure of William Sessions.
Page A10.


Change at the Top for the F.B.I.
President Clinton finally ended the damaging stalemate over the F.B.I.'s leadership when he dismissed William Sessions, the amiable, proud but ultimately ineffective Director.
Mr.
Sessions was only halfway through a 10-year term, yet his departure was overdue.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is in urgent need of secure, forward-looking direction at a time of rapid change in the threats it faces.
Terrorism and crime are making increasingly heavy demands.
And, with the end of the cold war and growing domestic violence, the bureau will need to establish up-to-date global and domestic missions and priorities.
Mr.
Sessions, beset by opposition within the agency's ranks and weak in political and managerial skills, had lost the bureau's rudder.
He was in no position to meet the challenge.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW JERSEY NETS -- Waived Jerry Walker and Jayson Williams, forwards, and Steve Worthy and Charles Thomas, guards.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Tony McGee, tight end.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Waived Bo Campbell, wide receiver, and David Walker, fullback.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Announced Jan Erixon, forward, will not return to the club next season.
American Hockey League  AHL -- Named Dave Andrews president, effective July 1994.
College
BOSTON COLLEGE -- Named Robin Garrett women's assistant basketball coach.
Announced the resignation of Wes Emmert, strength and conditioning coach.
BOWDOIN -- Named Michael J. Fair offensive line coach and John Campanale receivers coach.
CLEMSON -- Named Tim Match assistant athletic director for public relations.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Christina Schutz Brownell men's and women's squash coach.
DREXEL -- Named Scott Pennewill women's volleyball coach.
DUQUESNE -- Named Mike Wilson baseball coach.
LOYOLA, NO -- Named Darren Laiche men's assistant basketball coach.


Commonwealth Edison Co.  reports earnings for 12mo June 30


Racing Asks Lukas to Set Pace
Wayne Lukas considered the irony of it, and said: "No, I'm not going to ride up on a white horse and save the racing business. But I'll be there. I'm not broke. I'll be a factor."
So, here he was, striding around the world's most prestigious horse auction, the July sale of selected yearlings at Keeneland.
The Maktoum brothers of Dubai, with the oil fortunes that poured $400 million into horse auctions at Keeneland in the last dozen years, weren't here.


Sales Higher, Philip Morris Widens Cigarette Price Cuts
The Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday that Marlboro cigarettes have sold well enough at lower prices during its current promotion to justify making the cuts permanent, and said it would extend lower prices to the company's other premium brands.
At the same time, the company said it would equalize the wholesale prices of all other Philip Morris cigarettes -- discount brands, deep-discount brands and private labels -- thus moving the front lines of cigarette price wars directly to the retailer.


CHRONICLE
JONATHAN DEMME, the film director, was involved with the fight to win freedom for the 264 Haitians held at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba.
A Federal judge ordered them released last month.
A member of the board of directors of the National Coalition for Haitian refugees, Mr.
Demme marched, demonstrated and spoke out for the Haitians who were detained for about 20 months because they had H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Tonight, he will be in attendance at a happier occasion, a benefit show and sale of their art at the Cavin-Morris Gallery, 560 Broadway at Prince Street.
The exhibition of some 100 paintings, created by five of the refugees during their internment, will benefit the refugees and three organizations that worked for their release and resettlement: the Center for Constitutional Rights, Doctors of the World and the Coalition for the Homeless.


Daniels's Theme: The Sidewalks of New York
Lloyd Daniels played a pick-up game on a playground court yesterday, and you could not help but think that he was home.
If there was one place he belonged, this was it.
At one point Daniels, a former New York City street player who hit rock bottom before turning his life around and reaching the sport's pinnacle, the National Basketball Association, was being guarded by a friend at the Cage, a storied public court on West 4th Street in Greenwich Village.


2 Men Linked To Strangling On Park Ave.
New York City police detectives have flown to Reno to question two men they believe were responsible for the killings last April of an Indian prince and his wife in their Park Avenue apartment, the police said yesterday.
The men, identified as George Cobo, 56, and Tony Lee Simpson, 21, are being held by the authorities in Reno on outstanding warrants in unrelated cases.
The police said the men may be returned to New York this week to face charges in the deaths of Prince Chitresh Rao Khedker, a 57-year-old financier and industrialist from Khed Anjanvel, India, and his wife, Nenescha.


A Corporate Campaign Tries Selling Toyota's U.S. Presence.
IN the old days, the words "economy car" in advertising carried an unambiguous meaning.
They described a vehicle that was small, affordable and efficient.
These days, it's more complicated.
Clouded by lopsided trade balances, a troubled economy and issues of protectionism, a sales pitch is not necessarily what it seems.
For example, a current ad for Toyota appearing in news magazines shows a spiffy new four-door Camry in profile below big red and black letters that say, "economy car," which it may well be, at a base price of $14,000.


Disney Going for the Long Haul
In 2093, Mickey Mouse will be 165 years old and probably traveling the cartoon circuit on electronic paths not found on any computer drawing board today.
That will also be the year that the 100-year bond that the Walt Disney Company plans to sell today will mature.
As interest rates have fallen, a few borrowers, including the Tennessee Valley Authority and Conrail, have decided it is prudent to lock in these low rates for a long time.
In fact, the T.V.A. is selling a second 50-year bond issue this week.
But so far, these borrowers, and a few others, have asked only for a 50-year commitment.


U.S. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


I.R.A. Deserves Place At Ulster Peace Table
To the Editor:
Your July 12 news article on Northern Ireland says that "the peace talks sponsored by the British Government seem to have collapsed beyond any chance of resumption this year." That's for sure.


Temporaries Have to Do Without a Safety Net
To the Editor:
Re your July 6 front-page article on the increased use of temporary workers in America's factories:
I am a temporary worker by choice and of necessity, though not in manfacturing.
As a freelance artist, I have no consistently reliable source of income, but must be able to devote my full attention to any freelance assignment that comes my way at a moment's notice.
This makes conventional employment impractical.


Becton Dickinson &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Henry Stern, Jr., 80, Ex-Insurance Chief Of New York State
Henry Root Stern Jr., a former New York State Insurance Superintendent and trial attorney, died on July 7 at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 80 and lived in Glen Cove.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, the former Sarah Hamlin.


For a Korean Merchant, Holding On to Dreams
IN the bright sunlight of morning yesterday, in the week before his 40th birthday, Sang Han stood in his store in Brooklyn, feeling good.
The neat display of brazenly colored sneakers, T-shirts and pants in Sneaker King at 298 Utica Avenue gave no hint of the chaos that engulfed him almost two years ago when his store was looted and almost forced out of business during the Crown Heights disturbances.
Mr.
Han is an immigrant from South Korea who came here 13 years ago propelled by the same dreams as most immigrants.
A better life.
A chance to make it on raw energy and talent.
His dreams have not changed, he said, and neither has his faith.


Risk of Hereditary Breast Cancer Is Reduced
In recent years, support groups for women at increased risk for breast cancer have proliferated, filled with terrified women who have a mother or sister who succumbed to the disease.
Now a new study suggests that such women, while somewhat prone to breast cancer, are not as susceptible as was previously thought.
While some prior studies had found that women with breast cancer in their immediate family were three times more likely to develop breast cancer than other women, the new research indicates that their risk is probably only about twice that of those without a family history of the disease.


Senate Votes to Allow Civil Servants To Engage in Much Political Activity
The Senate voted today to allow most Federal workers to participate in a wide range of off-duty partisan political activities, all but insuring enactment of the first significant change in civil servants' political status in more than half a century.
Most Republicans said the bill would politicize the Federal work force of three million people and arm its pro-Democratic unions.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said Federal workers opposed the change, while "the people who want this bill are the union leaders here in Washington, the Beltway boys, those at the top of the union ladder, those who have the power and who want more."


In Iraq, Hunger Wins
Nearly three years after the United Nations Security Council imposed an economic blockade on Iraq, the soaring prices and grinding shortages inflicted on ordinary people finally seem to be influencing Iraq's decision makers.
Diplomats and Iraqi officials say it was the hard times, more than anything else, that finally forced President Saddam Hussein to swallow his pride this week and, after resisting for a year and a half, agree to indefinite monitoring of military industries to ensure that he does not manufacture more major weapons.


Clinton Names New York Judge As F.B.I. Chief
President Clinton finished assembling his roster of top crime fighters today with the announcement that he would appoint Judge Louis J. Freeh of Federal District Court in Manhattan to replace William S. Sessions as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In making the expected appointment of Mr.
Freeh, who ended up as the only member on the Administration's short list for the F.B.I. job, Mr.
Clinton also sought to lay to rest an issue that has hung like a cloud over his Administration for six months: the turmoil within the F.B.I. as Mr.
Sessions fought to stay in his job.
Mr.
Sessions was dismissed on Monday, after he had refused to resign.


Bridge
When the American Contract Bridge League's Summer National Championships begin Friday in Washington, the most confident players will surely be Michael Becker, Ron Rubin, Russ Ekeblad, Ron Sukoneck, Bob Levin and Peter Weichsel.
They will be defending the Spingold Knockout Team title they won in Toronto a year ago, and they are fresh from victory in the team trials in Memphis last month, a victory that gives them a chance of world honors in Chile in September.
Careful preparation is a key to bridge success, and in Memphis this squad arrived two days early and went into training.
On the diagramed deal Becker, as South, brought home a part-score by careful attention to the spot cards.


SouthTrust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Personal Health
CATARACT surgery today is a far cry from the procedure of decades past.
Back then, patients waited until their vision was nearly totally obscured by a cloudy lens and were then hospitalized for 10 days or more, their heads immobile with sandbags while their eyes healed.
They were then sent home with Coke-bottle spectacles that restored their sight but greatly enlarged and distorted visual images.
Today the surgery is usually an outpatient procedure under local anesthesia, with a rapid return to normal activities and excellent vision correction with ordinary lenses.
It is often done as soon as the cataract begins to interfere with normal activities.
Nearly everyone, regardless of medical history, can have the surgery.


Humana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yearling Sales Rise
For the first time in four years, the horse market showed signs of stabilizing last night when the prestigious July sale of selected yearlings in Kentucky ended with a gain of about 3.5 percent over last year.
The average price declined somewhat for the fourth straight year.
But the gain in total sales was greeted with cheer in the horse country because it was achieved even though the Maktoum family of Dubai continued to reduce its purchases, which in the past have accounted for one-third of the sales at the Keeneland auction.


CHRONICLE
Last Saturday evening, as fireworks lit up the skies in East Hampton, L.I., during the annual benefit there for Boys Harbor, GEORGE PLIMPTON asked boaters in Three-Mile Harbor to toot their horns and spectators on land to applaud in honor of the 75th birthday of ANTHONY DREXEL DUKE.
Scion of several socially prominent families, Mr.
Duke is the founder and president of Boys Harbor, the New York-based educational center for inner-city children that has a summer camp in East Hampton.
It was a wonderful tribute, his wife, LULY DUKE, said yesterday, with "1,200 boats honking and people cheering. He was so pleased and surprised."


Lewis and Bowe Camps Duke It Out With Words in Regard to Possible Matchup
The heavyweight boxing division degenerated into one of its periodic battles royal yesterday with just about everybody but the boxers in the ring and swinging wildly.
By day's end, the various managers, lawyers and promoters were bruised but standing, still able to point accusing fingers at one other.
The battle began with a roundhouse from Riddick Bowe's manager, Rock Newman, who has been repeatedly accused of ducking a fight with Lennox Lewis, the British inheritor of the World Boxing Council title that Bowe trashed after winning the undisputed championship from Evander Holyfield last year.


Dhaka Donates To Flood Relief
The offers of relief continued to arrive this week in the flooded Midwest.
Just as the victims of Hurricane Andrew sent fresh water, the people of Bangladesh, subject to annual monsoons, offered what they could -- jute sacks, like those used for sandbags, and tea.
The Foreign Minister, Mustafizur Rahman, conveyed his country's offer to the American Embassy in Dhaka.
Jute and tea are the main sources of foreign exchange for Bangladesh, where monsoons have killed more than 230 people since mid-June.


Accounts
*
Information Synthesis, Minneapolis, to Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis, as the first agency to handle the software company's account.
Billings were not disclosed.


That Show Can't Be Sold Out Already


Blue-Chip Park Plan On Shaky Foundation
If George Steinbrenner considers New Jersey a serious bargaining chip in his threat to abandon Yankee Stadium and New York, he probably shouldn't be so quick to take a free ride across the George Washington Bridge.
New Jersey officials have suggested that they could finance a stadium for the Yankees with gambling revenues from Atlantic City casinos, but baseball officials long have been uncomfortable with any link to casinos.


The Mayor Responds: 'Mistakes Were Made'
Following are excerpts from Mayor David N. Dinkins's statement yesterday in response to the Crown Heights report:
Regrettably, whatever we say and whatever we do today cannot bring back the two who suffered most in August 1991 -- one, Gavin Cato, the victim of an accident, the other, Yankel Rosenbaum, the victim of a murder.
Our agony is the greater because no one has been brought to justice for the death of Yankel Rosenbaum.
His lynching was horror enough.
The lack of a conviction only adds to the outrage.


Wine Talk
"ONLY the dead know Brooklyn," Thomas Wolfe once wrote.
It's a safe bet that even they don't know Bordeaux.
To most wine enthusiasts, Bordeaux is a legendary landscape of chateaus, perfectly trained vines and cellars brimming with two centuries worth of rare and expensive wines.


CHEMICAL BANKING CORP. (N)
Successful trading activities and fewer bad loans helped the Chemical Banking Corporation increase second-quarter profits by 59 percent.
The earnings of $1.35 a share were much higher than the $1.02 a share expected by Wall Street analysts.


Review/Film; Amid Gay Diversity, A Singleness of Purpose
Sadness, sensuality and a defiant militance infuse "Boys' Shorts: The New Queer Cinema," a program of six short films that opens today at the Village East Cinema.
Of the film makers, two (Marlon Riggs and Michael Mayson) are black Americans, and one (Mark Christopher) is a white American.
The remaining three are Australian (Stephen Cummins), Canadian (Laurie Lynd) and English (Christopher Newby).
Despite their diversity of backgrounds and style, their overlapping concerns with AIDS, homophobia and sexual liberation suggest an underlying commonality of spirit.
Mr.
Cummins's film, "Resonance," deals with a gay-bashing and its psychological aftermath.
A handsomely photographed essay in body language featuring three dancers (Mathew Bergan, Chad Courtney and Annette Evans), it follows the man who was beaten when he goes to a martial arts class.
As it proceeds, its choreography systematically blurs the line between macho posturing and erotic expression.
The most striking scene, a male pas de deux in a boxing ring, thoroughly confuses the rites of combat with those of love.


Both Heavy Talk and Weighty Talk
Two key Giants' regulars who are no-shows at camp have drawn attention in reports circulating around the National Football League.
One is linebacker Pepper Johnson, who has been the subject of trade talk, according to several N.F.L. general managers, though the Giants deny it.
The other is the Pro Bowl running back, Rodney Hampton, who several people close to the situation said may be eating himself out of shape.
What's going on here?


Diamond Shamrock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Hungarian minority in Romania misstated the position of a political party representing them.
The party, called the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania, does not demand Hungary's annexation of the Transylvania region in Romania; some of its allies in Budapest do.


A Pasta Sauce With a Middle-Eastern Flavor
SMALL pasta shapes combined with bite-size pieces of vegetables is one of those generic dishes that can use almost any assortment of vegetables and any small pasta that is readily available.
The mixture can be paired with a variety of sauces, though tomato-based ones are most commonly used.
The vegetables in the version here are not unusual; the sauce is.
It calls for tahini, a thick paste of ground sesame seeds.
Usually, tahini is mixed with lemon, but for this recipe, balsamic vinegar is used instead, providing a sharp and slightly sweet contrast to the richness of the tahini.
Cumin reinforces the Middle Eastern accent.


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Get Serious About Chinese Prison Labor
It's illegal for American companies to import goods made by prison labor.
But according to human rights groups, China continues to make products for the export market in its prison factories, and U.S. companies continue to buy them.
While the Chinese authorities say they have stopped the practice, there is strong evidence that they have not.
The human rights group Asia Watch testified before a Congressional committee earlier this year about conditions in prison factories.
A recently imprisoned student told The Times's Nicholas Kristof last weekend of his experiences in a prison factory that made Christmas tree lights (not a popular item in China) and a mine producing fine clay for export to Western countries.


Packers Aim to Revive A Winning Tradition
During his first visit to Green Bay, Reggie White was treated by Ron Wolf, the Packers' executive vice president and general manager, to the same tour through Lambeau Field as all the other free agents who came through.
Wolf played the perfect tour guide, pointing out the names of the Packers' legends that ring the stadium.
And he talked to White about possibilities.


Cincinnati Milacron reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Crown Heights: Shared Failure
The portrait of incompetence is breathtaking.
There is no other way to read the new state report on the riots in Crown Heights two summers ago.
Every level of New York City government failed to recognize the degree of violence, to deal with it at the time, to effectively apprehend and prosecute the lawless afterward.
Mayor David Dinkins failed.
Former Police Commissioner Lee Brown failed most egregiously.
Top police officers and commanders failed.
The Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles (Joe) Hynes, failed.
Their respective advisers and aides failed.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
It is 8:30 A.M. when I begin yet another sticky, suffocating wait for the No. 2 express train at 96th Street.
But the usual monotony of my daily trek to the office is shattered when, minutes later, I find myself face to face with techno-train.
A computerized voice greets me at the door and pleasantly announces the stops ahead.
Inside, electronic bulletin boards blink the time and inform me of my whereabouts.
In awe, I sit back to watch similar reactions from my otherwise impenetrable fellow passengers.


Prescription for Airline Industry: Tinker Just a Bit
With Congress making noises about stanching the airline industry's financial hemorrhage and President Clinton going out of his way to lend a sympathetic ear to the industry's pleas for help, free marketeers have been on the defensive.
At best, they figured, the commission set up to advise the President and Congress on how to solve the industry's problems would merely be a soapbox for complaints about unbridled competition.
At worst, they thought it would rally a coalition of interest groups that would lobby for reregulation of fares and routes.


PNC Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Warhol Estate Value Settled
Andy Warhol's estate was put at $220 million, far below an earlier estimate, settling a bitter dispute.
Page C13.
Lifting Limits on Politicking
The Senate voted to allow political activities for most Federal workers for the first time since 1939.
Page A8.
Slime, Smells and Sewage
As the Midwest's rivers show signs of retreating, flood victims have started to deal with the results.
Page A15.


Old Kent Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taylor Isn't Putting Around as Career Wanes
Over the last year, Lawrence Taylor has played more golf than football.
He will never make any golf hall of fame, but he is destined to make a trip to football's.
To many, he is the greatest linebacker in the history of the game.
The twilight years of an athlete's life, especially a great athlete like Taylor, can either be painful or glorious to watch.
Pain comes if the player is the only one who doesn't seem to notice that it is over and stumbles on.
Glory comes if the player, for one last time, is his or her brilliant self again.
For Lawrence Taylor, this season might dictate which way the career will end.


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cuomo Aide and 40 Experts Behind the 600-Page Report
The two-volume, 600-page report on the Crown Heights disturbances released yesterday was painstakingly pieced together by a team of 40 state lawyers, analysts and investigators, many of whom worked full-time on the project for eight months.
The investigation was headed by Richard H. Girgenti, the state's Director of Criminal Justice, who was the report's principal author and will be held accountable for its methods and conclusions.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pepsico Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Finding Profit
Trimble Navigation Ltd., a maker of satellite-based navigation products, gained attention during the Persian Gulf war by providing more hand-held positioning receivers to the military.
Yesterday it reported second-quarter earnings of 4 cents a share, in contrast to a loss a year earlier.
Since late last month, Trimble stock has soared about 50 percent.


Star Banc Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to month 00


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Park Is Classroom but Turtle Is Truant
Henry Luce 3d thinks children should know about natural science.
Not only is he giving $1.3 million for an education program in Central Park, he gave the first class as well yesterday for a few of the 30,000 children that the program is intended to reach.
The lesson: how to nab a turtle in the murky pond outside Belvedere Castle in Central Park.


As Baseball Owners Go, O'Malley Wasn't Mr. Nice Guy Either
To the Editor:
While I harbor no fondness for George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, Bob Herbert's giving the Dodgers' Walter O'Malley a favorable view by comparison is misplaced ("Dodgers Deja Vu Again," column, July 14).
Walter O'Malley established the benchmark for greed and cynicism in professional sports.
Here was a man who had grown wealthy through the hospitality of the local community -- as an executive of a Brooklyn bank and owner of the New York City subway's advertising contractor.


Angrily, Clinton Defends Record
As reporters questioned him by satellite hookup today, President Clinton angrily declared that he had built a record of uncommon success in his first six months and accused the news media of blocking his message.
Mr.
Clinton's satellite interviews were intended to spread his economic message without going through the filter of Washington press coverage.
But when the reporters in Louisiana and Wisconsin questioned him closely about his commitment to the energy tax he has proposed and his ability to keep promises, Mr.
Clinton grew impatient.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Overview; CROWN HEIGHTS STUDY FINDS DINKINS AND POLICE AT FAULT IN LETTING UNREST ESCALATE
A chain of leadership failures by Mayor David N. Dinkins, top City Hall advisers and the city's leading police commanders allowed the disturbances in Crown Heights to escalate unabated into a four-day "riot" in which Hasidic Jews were singled out by bands of black youths, according to a state report released yesterday.
In a scathing portrait of ineptitude and miscommunication that extended from police deployment on the Crown Heights streets to the upper reaches of City Hall, the report also found that serious lapses by investigators, prosecutors and the presiding judge had contributed to the acquittal of a black youth in the killing of a Hasidic scholar on the first night of violence.
Analysis of Decisions
The report, commissioned by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and overseen by Richard H. Girgenti, the state's Director of Criminal Justice, determined that there was no evidence to support the most extreme charges that have dogged the Mayor since the Crown Heights violence in August 1991: that he or his Police Commissioner at the time, Lee P. Brown, had instructed the police to let marauding youths "vent" their rage after a 7-year-old black child was killed by an out-of-control car driven by a Hasidic man.


Trustco Bank Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Excerpts From the State Report: On the Role of Mayor Dinkins
Following are excerpts from the report to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo by Richard H. Girgenti, the state's Director of Criminal Justice, on the disturbances in Crown Heights.
Passages printed in boldface type appear that way in the original report.
From Executive Summary City Hall:  Oversight and Intervention


Kelley Oil Downsizes Gas Find
The Kelley Oil Corporation, whose stock soared since April on excitement about a natural gas and oil find, announced yesterday that the first well's daily production of gas was a fraction of what analysts had anticipated.
But in a conference call, David L. Kelley, the chairman and chief executive of the Houston-based company, did not rule out the possibility that the discovery, in Louisiana's Ouiski Bayou field, could still prove to be a major find, potentially reaching Wall Street's estimates of as much as one trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
Kelley has not provided any estimates of its own of the size of the find.
Investors Warned
In its announcement, Kelley said the well, called Goldsby 2, produced 5.8 million cubic feet of gas each day.
Earlier this month, some analysts were expecting the well to produce at least 20 million cubic feet of gas daily.


Rallying the Democrats on Clinton's Budget


U-Boat Didn't Sink in Waters Off Cape Cod
To the Editor:
One hates to dampen the enthusiasm in Chatham, Mass., about a claim by Edward Michaud and others that a sunken World War II German submarine that had spies on board lies four miles off the coast in 41 feet of water ("Sunken U-boat You Say? Out There?", Chatham Journal, July 10).
If indeed it is a U-boat, the submarine cannot be U-1226.
The last radio message from U-boat Command Headquarters to U-1226 on Oct. 23, 1944, was dispatched to the submarine's given position 375 miles south of Iceland at 20 degrees longitude and 56 degrees latitude.
It instructed the submarine to return to base and maintain the defective 26-foot-high snorkel mast in the upright position.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a protest by Orthodox Jews concerning the special school district in the village of Kiryas Joel, N.Y., referred incorrectly to the protesters.
They were opposing the school district, saying that its secular nature compromises their religious beliefs.


No Phone? New Stores Filling Gap
Miguel Santos manages to call his wife in the Dominican Republic each day, even though he has neither a phone at home nor a credit card to use at a sidewalk pay phone.
Instead, he ducks into a private cubicle at a phone parlor, a storefront business that offers discounted long-distance rates in an age of cash-and-carry communications.


Sports of The Times; High Stakes; Low Sense Of Values
IN launching an investigation into Michael Jordan's gambling habits, the National Basketball Association has embarked, or rather, has been taken on a far-reaching ride across revealing, occasionally treacherous landscape.
The investigation has taken the league to a bail bondsman in the Carolinas who was murdered and a drug dealer who was convicted.
To Monte Carlo for an Olympic tuneup and late night-early morning visits to betting parlors.
To Atlantic City, where Jordan and his father went out on the town the night before a Knicks playoff game.
To San Diego, where Richard Esquinas -- Jordan's golfing partner turned tell-all author -- alleged that high-stakes golf matches left Jordan hundreds of thousands in debt.


Cincinnati Bell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nagle Hoping a Contract Is First '93 Completion
In a sign that Browning Nagle wants to make a serious push for the starting quarterback job, his agent, Leigh Steinberg, said yesterday that he would meet with the Jets' president, Steve Gutman, in New York today in an effort to get a new contract for Nagle before the start of training camp tomorrow.
"I'm going to stay until we get it done," Steinberg said.
"We're determined to see that Browning gets in camp on time in order to build on what he started last year." The Esiason Factor
Nagle, who started for the first time last season as a second-year player, earned a base salary of $355,000 last season, but he had several incentives that increased the amount.
He had a poor season, throwing for more interceptions (17) than touchdowns (7) and eroding some of his leverage on a new contract.
He signed a two-year deal as the Jets' second-round pick in 1991 and Steinberg said there were no similar deals for comparison this year, which could complicate negotiations for a new contract.


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about President Clinton's new policy governing homosexuality in the military referred incorrectly in some copies to Fort McNair, where he spoke.
It is in Washington, not Virginia.


Greenspan Is Upbeat On Growth
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, gave a surprisingly upbeat assessment of economic growth today but said the news on inflation was disappointing, signaling that the central bank was poised to raise interest rates if inflation accelerated.
Testifying before a House subcommittee, Mr.
Greenspan said he was disappointed that inflation "has at best stabilized, rather than easing" as might be expected when the unemployment rate hovers near 7 percent.


Eaton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Eating Well
LAST Wednesday, the White House chef, Pierre Chambrin, was learning how to make sauces without cream and desserts without butter.
Is this a sign that beef Wellington and vichyssoise, on the menu at a small dinner given recently by the President and the First Lady, will be banished, replaced by chicken breasts stuffed with mushrooms and fresh tomato consomme?
What has got into the White House kitchen, one of the last bastions of old-fashioned French cooking, the kind that goes directly to your hips and thighs -- and arteries?


General Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; Previn Sits In With the Tokyo String Quartet
The second movement of Mozart's String Quartet in E flat is astonishing with its passing dissonances.
Brahms's String Quartet in C minor combines rigorous concentration with unsettling rhythms and gestures.
And Schumann's Piano Quintet is intoxicating fun, full of swerves and exclamations.
Yet in Monday night's Mostly Mozart concert at Avery Fisher Hall, these disparate works seemed far less urgent and far too gracious.
As played by the Tokyo String Quartet, assisted by Andre Previn at the piano, they took on a uniformly warm character and an overly lush tone.
The music itself began to seem dull and repetitive, interesting but not particularly compelling, free from eccentricity and conflict.


General Public Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dinkins Plans No Challenge on Innis Petitions
Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign has decided not to try to knock Roy E. Innis off the Democratic primary ballot by challenging the signatures on Mr.
Innis's nominating petitions.
The Mayor's decision assures that there will still be an active Democratic mayoral primary, which under the city's campaign finance rules will let Mr.
Dinkins spend more money on his own campaign.
But the move also risks allowing Mr.
Innis to draw a sizable protest vote that could embarrass Mr.
Dinkins as he moves into the November general election against his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Real Estate; After a Long Battle, Three Office Buildings Are Scheduled For Construction at a Los Angeles Site.
A SEVEN-YEAR legal battle has preceded the scheduled start of construction next month of three office buildings on a site known as Warner Ridge in the Woodland Hills section of this city.
The buildings, with 412,000 square feet of space, are leased to one tenant, 20th Century Industries, parent of the 20th Century Insurance Company, an auto insurer.


State Street Boston (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


School Year Ends Early as Death Toll Rises in Japanese Earthquake


Gay Groups Denounce the Pentagon's New Policy
Military leaders today described the new policy on homosexuals in the military as an honorable compromise.
But leaders of gay groups and homosexuals who have served in the armed forces are casting the directive issued Monday as an overwhelming defeat, a disheartening capitulation by President Clinton and a painful rebuke over an issue that some said they never expected or wanted to become an important rallying cry.
"Until now we could claim the existing policy was simply an anachronism that had escaped review by the Federal Government," said Thomas B. Stoddard, the director of the Campaign for Military Service, a coalition of groups fighting to allow openly gay people to serve.
"But with this new policy, the Government has re-examined and reaffirmed a discriminatory policy. This is a terrible result in a profound political and legal sense."


East Germans Occupying Mine They Seek to Save
A mine that nobody seems to want but the men and women who work in it has become a symbol of the bitter mood of betrayal that has soured the joy of German reunification, three years after capitalism came here to the eastern part of the country.
A collection of weather-beaten brick buildings clustered at the foot of a mountain of red tailings that dwarfs the half-timbered houses of the town below, the Thomas Munzer Mine is now occupied by its 700 employees.
Only that many remain of the 1,900 who had worked here until Communism collapsed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  UNNATURAL SELECTION IN CHINA  Ultrasound technology is influencing the ratio of the sexes in China, giving parents in even the most remote villages information that some are using to abort female fetuses.
A1  DON'T TOUCH THAT DIAL  When politicians appeared on the television screen, Japan used to tune out.
This time, the public is calling in as the fallout from parliamentary elections is played out on audience-participation talk shows.
A6


Majkowski Signs With Indianapolis
DON MAJKOWSKI, who passed for almost 11,000 yards and 54 touchdowns in six seasons with Green Bay, signed a one-year contract with the Indianapolis Colts yesterday, General Manager JIM IRSAY said.
Terms weren't given, but reports indicated it was for less than $1 million and included several incentives.
Majkowski, hampered by injuries the past three seasons, was paid $1.7 million by the Packers last season.


NATIONSBANK CORP. (N)
The Nationsbank Corporation, the fifth-largest bank in the country, said its profit grew by 22 percent on strong loan growth and a decline in the amount of bad loans.
The bank, based in Charlotte, N.C., said earnings for the second quarter rose to $306 million, compared with $251 million for the comparable period a year earlier.
Its earnings of $1.20 a share were slightly higher than the $1.17 analysts had expected.
In a time when many banks had slow loan growth, Nationsbank was able to increase its lending by $2.8 billion during the second three months of the year to a total of $75 billion.


West One Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
"It would be wrong for me to say or preview in this legislative chamber how I would cast my vote on questions the Supreme Court may be called upon to decide. A judge sworn to decide impartially can offer no forecasts, no hints, for that would show not only disregard for the specifics of the particular case, it would display disdain for the entire judicial process." -- JUDGE RUTH BADER GINSBURG.  [ A1:3. ]


Nets Cut Four Players
The Nets have cut four players, including two players who played college ball locally, JERRY WALKER and STEVE WORTHY.
Walker, a 6-foot-7-inch forward from Seton Hall, and Worthy, a 6-4 guard from Rutgers, are both rookies.
Also cut late Monday from the team's summer camp roster were CHARLES THOMAS, a 6-3 guard from Eastern Michigan, and JAYSON WILLIAMS, a 6-7 forward from the University of New Haven. (AP)


Still a Pigmentocracy
The place of race in distributing electoral power is one of the hottest issues that Ruth Bader Ginsburg and her colleagues will face when, as expected, she becomes a Supreme Court Justice.
One reason is that of the 16 blacks elected to Congress in 1992, 13 represent districts purposefully designed to have a majority of black voters.


Review/Fashion; Three Cheers for Couture, With Ungaro Leading the Way
In a triumphant collection of quiet distinction, Emanuel Ungaro proved that delicacy and luxury can coexist in couture.
Karl Lagerfeld showed fashion can happen anywhere, in the elegant couture salons as well as in the street.
And Hubert de Givenchy provided the stable factor: clothes in agreeable shapes guaranteed to flatter.
At a time when couture designers are struggling to preserve their turf in the face of growing onslaughts from ready-to-wear, today's shows supported the validity of made-to-order clothes.


Aerospace Gets Down to Earth
University researchers and a group of companies including Du Pont and Lockheed hope to beat swords into infrastructure by building a bridge in San Diego made of lightweight composite materials similar to those originally intended for the B-2 bomber.
Quadrax, a small Rhode Island company, hopes to migrate from military service to power serves by supplying a Taiwan maker of tennis racquets with carbon-fiber materials like those used on the Seawolf submarines.


Value Put On Estate Of Warhol Declines
A prolonged and bitter dispute over the value of the late artist Andy Warhol's work was settled yesterday when his estate was valued at approximately $220 million.
That amount, agreed upon by the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, the New York State Attorney General's office and Frederick W. Hughes, Warhol's executor, is significantly less than an estimate of between $600 million and $700 million that Edward W. Hayes, the lawyer for the estate until earlier this month, had placed on the Warhol holdings in a battle over what he would be paid by the estate.


Martin Marietta Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Golf Report
New York State Open  Darrell Kestner, in his fourth year as the head pro at Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., was in first place by three shots yesterday after the first round of the $65,000 Michelob New York State Open.
He shot six-under-par 66 on the 6,768-yard Albany Country Club course in Voorheesville.
"I hit the ball kind of average, but I drove it well and took advantage with some good putting," said Kestner.


Baxter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


I.R.A. Deserves Place At Ulster Peace Table; North Isn't Occupied
To the Editor:
In a July 8 news article, you write about John Le Carre and his latest book (National Edition, July 9).
In analysing the book's theme, you portray the background of one of the characters as "a veteran of the British occupation of Northern Ireland."


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sons Killed Parents; Why Is Only Issue
Two wealthy Beverly Hills brothers now admit that they walked into their living room almost four years ago, leveled shotguns at their parents seated in front of the television set and fired.
But they contend they did so only in self-defense after years of sexual and psychological abuse.
The murder trial of the brothers, Lyle and Erik Menendez, began today in Los Angeles Superior Court after three years of legal debate over the admissibility of a psychotherapist's tape-recorded notes of a session in which Erik Menendez confessed to the killings.
The State Supreme Court ruled the tapes admissible.


Nellie I. Teale, 92; Naturalist Assisted In Acclaimed Books
Nellie Imogene Donovan Teale, a naturalist who collaborated with the Pulitzer Prize-winning nature writer Edwin Way Teale, her husband, died on Sunday at the Abbey Manor Convalescent Home in Windham, Conn.
She was 92 and until a few weeks ago lived at Trail Wood in Hampton, Conn.
The cause was colon cancer, said Dr. John A. Woodworth, a family friend.


Thomas R. Wilcox, 76, a Banker Who Rose From Page to Chairman
Thomas Robert Wilcox, who started out as a page at First National City Bank in New York and retired 47 years later as chairman of Crocker National Bank in San Francisco, died Monday at his home in Dering Harbor on Shelter Island, L.I.
He was 76.
He died of cancer, his family said.


WARNER-LAMBERT CO. (N)
The Warner-Lambert Company yesterday reported lackluster second-quarter results as it continued to await final regulatory approval to market Cognex, its new treatment for Alzheimer's disease.
The company said worldwide pharmaceutical sales fell by 6 percent, to $532 million in the quarter, compared with the previous year.
Consumer products, including Halls cough drops, Trident gum, and the Schick and Wilkinson Sword brands, increased by 14 percent, to $918 million.
But all the growth was abroad.


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Union Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Game Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Remembering Nikolais and His Many Gifts
Alwin Nikolais's multi-media dance works have been so strongly predicated on abstract design that his own physical presence always seemed relegated to that of a behind-the-scenes magician.
Yet barely two months after his death at the age of 82, his personality is felt more strongly than ever.
Choreographer, electronic composer, foremost designer of formal light-play, he created a distinctive brand of total theater that was a signature unto itself.
Nikolais's individuality is inseparable from his artistic vision.


Standard Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Rivers, Before and After


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coastal Corp. Chief Resigns In Dispute
James R. Paul resigned yesterday as president and chief executive of the Coastal Corporation in an apparent disagreement with the company's chairman over the pace of restructuring the refineries division.
The Houston-based oil and natural gas company's founder and chairman, Oscar S. Wyatt Jr., will become president and chief executive, the company announced.


On The Run With Florence Griffith Joyner; Still Racing Around, But for the Long Haul
"Florence can probably do lunch Wednesday, unless she has to give a press conference. Then she'll have to reschedule lunch for Thursday, but that's contingent on whether she's lunching at the White House with the President."
Kathy Campanella, the publicist for Florence Griffith Joyner, the newly appointed co-chairwoman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, sounded flustered as she politely explained her client's frenetic schedule.


Risk of Hereditary Breast Cancer Is Reduced
In recent years, support groups for women at increased risk for breast cancer have proliferated, filled with terrified women who have a mother or sister who succumbed to the disease.
Now a new study suggests that such women, while somewhat prone to breast cancer, are not as susceptible as was previously thought.
While some prior studies had found that women with breast cancer in their immediate family were three times more likely to develop breast cancer than other women, the new research indicates that their risk is probably only about twice that of those without a family history of the disease.


'Goodbye Girl' Closing
"The Goodbye Girl," the Broadway musical adaptation of the 1977 movie written by Neil Simon, is to close after the matinee on Aug. 15 at the Marquis Theater (1535 Broadway, at 45th Street).
The show, which stars Bernadette Peters and Martin Short, opened to mixed reviews on March 5 after a tryout in Chicago.
The Aug. 15 matinee will be the 188th regular performance; the show had 23 previews.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRITISH PETROLEUM P.L.C., London, signed an agreement with Hong Leong of Singapore and Fuzhou Gas Corp. of China to develop a $15.5 million liquefied petroleum gas plant in China's southeastern province of Fujian.
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, Houston, a waste services company, announced that its jointly owned affiliate, Swire BFI Waste Services Ltd., had been awarded a contract for the Sha Tin waste transfer station in Hong Kong.
Terms were not disclosed.


MEIKO SCIENTIFIC IS AWARDED LIVERMORE CONTRACT
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory said yesterday that it had awarded the Meiko Scientific Corporation of Waltham, Mass., a $17.5 million contract for a Meiko CS-2 Massively Parallel Processor computer system.
When the decision was first disclosed in March, concerns were raised over national security and economic competitiveness because Meiko was a subsidiary of Meiko World of Britain.
And the company had been criticized for the sale of a supercomputer to Israel.
But a Livermore official said yesterday that the same precautions were being taken with respect to Meiko as with other computer contractors who have foreign ownership or foreign sales.


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


(Or, You Can't Eat It if You Can't Read It)
In the restaurants of Manhattan's Chinatown, the Chinese seem to eat food very different from that offered to non-Chinese.
This is not a paranoid fantasy.
It's true.


Campus Journal; Sex Accusations Roil a Liberal Enclave
She was a freshman and a little homesick when she went to a dormitory party last December.
She became ill after drinking Cisco, a cheap wine.
As she recovered on a bed, several male students approached her throughout the night.
Although she willingly had sex with one, she told the authorities a month later, two others raped her.


In America; That Weird Day
As one public official recalled, "I had never seen anything like the fear that was in this city that afternoon. It was like Godzilla was in New Jersey and was coming into New York."
Many New Yorkers remember it as "that weird day." It was Friday, May 1, 1992.
Rioting had erupted in Los Angeles two days earlier and that city was still in flames.
The image of Reginald Denny being dragged from his truck and beaten almost to death was seared into the nation's psyche.
Serious disorders had broken out in other cities.
Tear gas had to be fired into a crowd in Atlanta.
The National Guard was activated in Las Vegas.
San Francisco was under a state of emergency.
By Friday, much of New York was in a panic.


Forlorn, Not Four Straight, For Mets
The Mets had their electric razors revving in the clubhouse, but now must shut them down.
A simple bet during a steak dinner had temporarily lifted this team out of its season-long stupor, but, in the end, old habits died hard.
On the line here this evening was the hairline of Jay Horwitz, the Mets' publicist.
He had promised Frank Tanana last Thursday night at Ruth's Chris Steakhouse in San Francisco that he would shave his size eight-and-a-half head if the team won four straight, and heading into tonight's game against the Padres, the streak was miraculously at three.


A&amp;W Brands (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


White House Aide Found Dead; Close Associate of the Clintons
The deputy White House counsel, an Arkansas native who was recruited for the job by Hillary Rodham Clinton, was found dead of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound Tuesday night at a park in northern Virginia.
Vincent W. Foster Jr., 48, who like President Clinton, was a native of Hope, Ark., was a senior partner at the Rose law firm in Little Rock, Ark., until earlier this year when he moved to Washington to join the Clinton Administration.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Events; From Earliest Hours, Calls Were Ignored
As rocks and bottles rained down from buildings and as his own car was pelted by demonstrators, Robert Brennan, a member of City Hall's Community Assistance Unit, realized that a "big problem" was brewing.
It was 10:30 P.M. on Aug. 19, 1991, a Monday night, and violence had been raging in Crown Heights for several hours.
As tensions rose, he informed the City Hall police desk.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Mayor; For Mayor, a Harsh Light
Ever since the Crown Heights disturbances two years ago, Mayor David N. Dinkins has been fending off critics by challenging their most extreme charges.
Repeatedly he said that he did not order the police to allow angry black youths to rampage through the Brooklyn neighborhood; that he was not anti-Semitic, and that he was not responsible for the death of Yankel Rosenbaum, the Hasidic scholar killed on the first night of violence.


Contract Expires on Islanders Sale
After two years, the deal to sell the Islanders appears to have lost steam.
Yesterday, the owner, JOHN PICKETT, said that the contract for the planned sale of the team to CHARLES DOLAN, a Long Island-based cable television executive, had expired with both parties unable to reach an agreement.
Though Pickett said he expected the Dolan family to be involved in future team ownership, the partnership of Walsh, Greenwood &amp; Company and First Long Island Investors will continue to run the team.


Prosecutors Reported Seeking to Widen Inquiry on Rostenkowski
As Capitol Hill buzzed about the news that one of its most powerful members had been accused of embezzlement, Federal officials said today that prosecutors were trying to broaden the case against Representative Dan Rostenkowski.
Officials and defense lawyers involved in the long-running investigation of Mr.
Rostenkowski said prosecutors had been gathering evidence against him about a series of transactions in Chicago in an effort to link separate accusations of wrongdoing into a single, more serious case.


Lab Backs Police On Death
A state investigator looking into the case of a robbery suspect whose death after a police chase earlier this month touched off unrest in this city's black neighborhoods said today that the man apparently committed suicide.
The results of the preliminary inquiry by the state's top forensics specialist agreed with the accounts of the Norwalk police officers who pursued the man, Keith Sumpter, 21, on July 1.
They were responding to a report of a gold-chain snatching in South Norwalk.


Integra Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Monsanto Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.13
2.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.02
3.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.13
3.24
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.39
5.32
6.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.55
6.54
7.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.27
7.27
8.64
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.73
5.70
6.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Challenger; Giuliani Lets His Supporters Do the Talking
After months of using the anger of Crown Heights to torment Mayor David N. Dinkins at every turn, Rudolph W. Giuliani kept silent yesterday -- at least publicly -- and left the talking to his surrogates and supporters.
Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Mayor, has branded the interracial violence in Crown Heights a "pogrom" and appeared at a recent rally outside City Hall to call for justice in the slaying of Yankel Rosenbaum.
But yesterday after the official state report on the case portrayed Mr.
Dinkins as a manager out of touch with the troubles on his streets and with his own aides, Mr.
Giuliani had nothing to add.


Germany Will Free Muslim Who Seized Two in Beirut as Hostages
German prosecutors announced today that they would soon release a Shiite Muslim kidnapper who has served half of his 13-year jail sentence here, and deport him to his native Lebanon.
The man, Abbas Hamadi, 32, was convicted in 1988 of kidnapping two German businessmen in Beirut.
He had planned to hold them as hostages to force the release of his brother, Mohammed Hamadi, 28, who is serving a life term here for an airplane hijacking in which a United States Navy diver was beaten to death.


Risk of Hereditary Breast Cancer Is Reduced
In recent years, support groups for women at increased risk for breast cancer have proliferated, filled with terrified women who have a mother or sister who succumbed to the disease.
Now a new study suggests that such women, while somewhat prone to breast cancer, are not as susceptible as was previously thought.
While some prior studies had found that women with breast cancer in their immediate family were three times more likely to develop breast cancer than other women, the new research indicates that their risk is probably only about twice that of those without a family history of the disease.


Foundation Health Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; When It Comes to High Tech, the Valley Says the Street Is Myopic.
SOMETIMES it seems like the technology wizards of Silicon Valley and the investors of Wall Street live on different planets.
The Valley's refrain is that the Street doesn't see past the latest quarter and frequently misses the reality of high technology: Spending on product development generally pays off many quarters down the road.


Historic Town Waits Out Crest
Newly heightened levees protecting Ste.
Genevieve, Mo., held today, but the long-awaited flood crest of the Mississippi River was late in coming to this historic French settlement.
City officials worried that the river's crest, predicted all day Monday, had still failed to arrive, their fourth such disappointment.
New readings were anxiously received by the hour at City Hall.
This evening, the river reached its predicted crest of 47.1 feet twice, but it was possible that it would go higher because of rain upriver.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Prosecution; Investigation Of Stabbing Was Fiasco, Report Says
From beginning to end, the investigation into the death of Yankel Rosenbaum during the racial disturbances in Crown Heights was a protracted exercise in how not to solve and prosecute a crime, according to the state report released yesterday.
The report concluded that the police investigation into the stabbing of Mr.
Rosenbaum, a Hasidic scholar, and the District Attorney's subsequent prosecution of Lemrick Nelson, a 17-year-old black youth acquitted of the crime, were so thoroughly riddled with flawed procedures and bungling of the most fundamental nature that it is unlikely that anyone will be convicted of the murder.


The Pop Life; 500 Bands, 5 Nights, 7,000 People And a City
Mark Josephson recalled setting up a couple of hundred chairs in a rehearsal studio in 1980 for what became the first New Music Seminar.
Back then it was a gathering of people from the margins of the music industry who were, as Mr.
Josephson, the executive director of the seminar, put it, "campaigning for our kind of music, campaigning for a place for ourselves in the business."
More than 500 bands and about 7,000 delegates are expected this week at the yearly seminar, which has evolved into a music-business convention with live performances, educational panels, provocative discussions, networking and deal making.


SPRINT CORP. (N)
Bolstered by a strong turnaround in its long-distance business and torrid demand for cellular telephones, the Sprint Corporation yesterday reported that operating profits jumped 55 percent in the quarter that ended June 30.
Net income grew more modestly because last year's earnings were strengthened by a one-time gain from the sale of several local telephone properties, and revenues climbed 6 percent over all.


60-Minute Gourmet
ANYONE who has traveled through the herb-perfumed countryside of Provence is familiar with one of the region's great delicacies: seafood soup.
The ingredients vary from village to village -- some have more shellfish than others, some a greater variety of finfish -- but all are as fresh and uplifting as a Mediterranean dawn.
If your main ingredients are indisputably fresh and the seasonings on target, you can't miss.
If you use finfish, choose nonoily varieties like monkfish, blackfish, cod or tilefish.
Mussels are a cheap and delicious addition.


Crazy Eddie Founder Guilty of Fraud
Eddie Antar, head of the Crazy Eddie discount electronics chain, was convicted yesterday by a Federal jury in Newark of running an $80 million stock fraud that ultimately produced his business's collapse.
Mr.
Antar and two brothers were accused of organizing a scheme that skimmed cash and inflated the value of the company before it went public in 1984.
Mr.
Antar eventually sold out for a large profit, but stockholders lost huge amounts of money when Crazy Eddie filed for bankruptcy in 1989 and then went out of business.


Deposit Guaranty (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the legal problems of Robert V. Rota, a former House Postmaster, misstated his resignation date in some editions.
Mr.
Rota, who was the subject of an investigation into corruption in the House Post Office during his two decades as Postmaster, resigned in 1992, not 1991.


At Fort Bragg, Reaction to Gay Policy Is Largely Ho-Hum
Around the fast-food restaurants, pawnshops and convenience stores near this military community, soldiers said today that President Clinton's decision to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military would change little in their lives -- and that suited most of them just fine.
In the civilian world, gay-rights advocates and traditionalists alike are faulting the President's "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" policy, which was issued on Monday.
The policy will allow homosexuals to serve in the armed forces as long as they stay quiet about their sexual identity and do not engage in homosexual behavior.


The Chosen Sex -- A special report; Chinese Turn to Ultrasound, Scorning Baby Girls for Boys
Half a dozen barefoot peasants took a break during a fierce storm the other day, and as the rain pounded on the rice paddies outside, they lounged in a crude stone cottage and marveled at 20th-century technology.
"Last year we had only one girl born in the village -- everybody else had boys," Y. H. Chen said in a tone of awe, as the others nodded agreement.
He explained that for a bribe of $35 to $50, a doctor will tell whether a woman is pregnant with a boy or a girl.


Helping the Hungry With Hoes, Not Handouts
OVER the last few years, a powerful alliance has been forged as celebrity chefs, restaurateurs and relief organizations have joined forces to help the hungry.
At fancy fund-raising dinners, chefs have dazzled contributors with their latest culinary creations and in the process raised millions of dollars.


Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clinton Rallies Party Around Budget
His economic program on the line, President Clinton gave a rousing speech today to a group of Democratic lawmakers who are crucial to the success of his plan, demanding that they exercise the political courage necessary to raise taxes and cut spending.
"Yes, it is painful," the President declared.
"Yes, it is difficult. But it is progress. It is change. It will make a difference. We have come this far. This is no time to turn back. We have been bold. This is no time to be timid. We have faced this crisis squarely. This is no time to blink."


Television Coverage Of Senate Hearings
The Senate Judiciary Committee's confirmation hearings on Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg's nomination to the Supreme Court will be covered live today, beginning at 10 A.M., Eastern daylight time, by the Public Broadcasting Service.
The service will provide gavel-to-gavel coverage to its affiliates, which have the option to carry the hearings in their entirety or break away for other programming.


Signet Banking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Marshall &amp; Ilsley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Fed's chairman gave a surprisingly upbeat assessment of economic growth but said the news on inflation was disappointing.
Alan Greenspan's remarks in Congress signaled that the central bank was poised to raise interest rates if inflation accelerated.
His comments jarred the bond markets.  [ Page D1. ]
The commission looking into how to solve the airline industry's problems did not come anywhere near recommending a radical departure from open competition in the preliminary report it issued on Monday.
Economic Analysis.  [ D1. ]


Book Notes
New View of Modigliani
When the Italian artist Amedeo Modigliani was struggling and infirm in Paris in the early part of this century, his greatest patron was his doctor, Paul Alexandre, who treated his ailments and kept him afloat financially by buying hundreds of his drawings.
Until his own death in 1968, Dr.
Alexandre held on jealously to the works, always hoping to write a definitive biography of Modigliani.


Decay Threatens Discoveries at Edison's 'Invention Factory'
On the upper floors of the Thomas Edison Invention Laboratories, beyond the places tourists go, phonograph records sit in musty darkness, dusty and warping as the seasons change.
The records, along with sketches, documents and stacked crates of the unknown, are believed to be worth millions of dollars.
Their neglect over the last 60 years has thrust the entire site onto a national foundation's list of "America's 11 Most Endangered Historic Places."


Final Act for the F.B.I.'s Director Is Painful and Almost Mute
In the end there was little left to say.
On Monday evening shortly after 7:30, the suddenly former F.B.I.
Director, William S. Sessions, dispatched a brief farewell teletype to the agency's 56 field offices and legal attaches overseas.
Mr.
Sessions had confidently assured his 10,000 agents in an earlier all-points message last year on Election Day that he planned to serve to the end of his 10-year term in 1997.
This time, he merely noted the precise times of President Clinton's two telephone calls dismissing him: 3:59 P.M. and 4:03 P.M.


Lee Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Citicorp's Income Posts Sharp Gain In Quarter
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, posted sharply higher second-quarter earnings yesterday, continuing its recovery from a disaterous run-in with bad real estate loans.
In what is turning out to be a very good period for America's banks, several other large banking companies also reported increased earnings yesterday, including the Chemical Banking Corporation and the Nationsbank Corporation.


Carmichael Lynch Given Score Account
The Score Group Inc. of Grand Prairie, Tex., said yesterday that it had moved its Score and Pinnacle brands of sports trading cards to Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis from Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano in New York, without a review.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Out of the Corners: Letterman-Leno Preliminary
Although they won't face each other on the air for six weeks, David Letterman and Jay Leno got a chance to compete this week in the networks' never-ending publicity match.
CBS and NBC staged news conferences here, 15 hours apart, for the two stars.
Both men, polished from years of dishing out jokes to hungry crowds, used the occasions to banter with about 100 reporters gathered for the networks' annual press preview of the fall television season.


Meridian Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Seeking Data To Find Rate Of Graduates
When Congress passed the Student Right to Know and Campus Security Act three years ago, it was hailed as the most consumer-oriented legislation ever to benefit parents and their college-bound children.
But now the law, which requires institutions to report campus crime and graduation rates, is mired in a regulatory nether world.
Although colleges and universities are reporting on-campus crimes like robbery and assaults to the Education Department, data on graduation rates are proving much harder to come by.


N. H. Bronner, 79, Atlantan Who Led Cosmetics Company
Nathaniel H. Bronner Sr., whose success in selling products from his sister's beauty salon led to the creation of an international cosmetics company, died Monday at a hospital in Atlanta.
He was 79 and lived in Atlanta.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


As Baseball Owners Go, O'Malley Wasn't Mr. Nice Guy Either; Revitalize Stadium Area
To the Editor:
I can't believe that New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo would seriously suggest tearing down Yankee Stadium.
Not only is the stadium a living piece of baseball history; it is also a great place to enjoy the game.
The facilities are excellent, there's hardly a bad seat in the place, and if you want to see shades of the past, don't bother with some Iowa cornfield.
They're all in the Bronx -- in the bleachers, hollering, scarfing down hot dogs and beer.


Cultural Climate Teaches Boys Violence
To the Editor:
Your July 11 front-page article on abusive rituals of youthful courtship will no doubt surprise and shock many readers.
Having spent five years researching how antisocial and violent behavior is encouraged in American boys, I am not surprised that many boys prove their manhood to their peers by insulting, grabbing and in some cases raping girls.


Ismail the Younger Has Pact With Vikings
The first Ismail to join the National Football League reported to the Mankato State campus yesterday.
QADRY (MISSILE) ISMAIL,younger brother of RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL, signed a three-year pact with the Minnesota Vikings.
Unlike his older brother, who defected to the Canadian Football League after leaving Notre Dame, Qadry, a 6-foot, 192-pound receiver from Syracuse, is ready for the N.F.L.


Pride of the Cowboys: 'Winning Is What We Do'
Michael Irvin snatched a quick out pass from quarterback Hugh Millen, spun, and sped upfield before turning back to an official.
"See, when we run that play," said Irvin, flashing his unmistakable, sly grin, "you got to get ready to go. You ready? I'm going that way, right to the end zone. Keep up now."


Campus Journal; Sex Accusations Roil a Liberal Enclave
She was a freshman and a little homesick when she went to a dormitory party last December.
She became ill after drinking Cisco, a cheap wine.
As she recovered on a bed, several male students approached her throughout the night.
Although she willingly had sex with one, she told the authorities a month later, two others raped her.


Banc One Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Television; Spying and Prying at Work
"It's a brave new world of data rape," says Maria Shriver, summing up tonight's accounts of people who say their privacy has been violated at their places of work.
The prying pried on in "Big Brother Is My Boss" takes the form of mandatory psychological tests, cameras hidden all over the place, scrutiny of what employees punch into their computers and urine examinations, ostensibly for drugs but potentially for all manner of intimate information.
Such goings on warrant attention, and the reporting, particularly the demonstrations of the workings of cameras hidden in flower pots and sprinkler systems, is graphic.
But as with many television exposes, hyperbole gets in the way of analysis.


Dodgers Pressing Fight on Brooklyn Bar's Name
The attack of the Los Angeles Dodgers on a little bar in Brooklyn is continuing.
The baseball club and Major League Baseball Properties on Monday filed a formal notice that they were appealing Federal Judge Constance Baker Motley's ruling that a bar in Bay Ridge could call itself The Brooklyn Dodger Sports Bar and Restaurant.


Times Co. Paper in Spanish
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it would introduce a Spanish-language weekly in California in September.
The newspaper, El Nuevo Tiempo, will be printed and distributed by The Santa Barbara News-Press, which is owned by the company.


Ameritech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McGinniss Adds Explanation to His Book
In a newly added note to the reader at the end of "The Last Brother," his forthcoming book on Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Joe McGinniss attempts to explain his somewhat unorthodox style of biography and to mollify early critics by saying that the book is "at least as much a 'rumination' as a biography."
"I would contend that when an individual is as encrusted with fable and lore as is Teddy Kennedy," Mr.
McGinniss writes in the five-page note, "a writer must attempt an approach that transcends that of traditional journalism or even, perhaps, of conventional biography." Reaction to Excerpt
Mr.
McGinniss's book, which follows the Massachusetts Democrat's life through the deaths of his three brothers, to the end of the 1960's, has already generated a tremendous amount of advance publicity, most of it adverse.
At the end of May, the publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, released an 123-page excerpt containing the assertion -- extraordinary in a book labeled nonfiction -- that some of the book's dialogue and thoughts had been "created" by the author.


A Sense of Judicial Limits
After two days of her Supreme Court confirmation hearing, Ruth Bader Ginsburg has emerged as something of a rare creature in the modern judicial lexicon: a judicial-restraint liberal.
As one who believes that the judiciary should ordinarily take a back seat to the elected branches of government, she made easy conversation with the conservative Republicans on the Senate Judiciary committee, who have spent years exhorting judicial nominees to interpret the law and not make the law.


Protecting Children's Eyes From the Sun
FOR many adults, summer means wearing sunglasses.
And many parents, concerned about the effects of ultraviolet radiation on the eye, are seeking to protect their children's eyes, too.
As a result, the market for children's sunglasses has exploded, reaching even into baby carriages.
Ophthalmologists say that while it is a good idea for infants and toddlers to wear sunglasses at some times, parents should not be overly influenced by advertisements for them -- or overly concerned by some manufacturers' suggestions that a child's eyesight will be damaged by not wearing sunglasses.


Grief Over Shooting Death of Palestinian Boy


Panhandle Eastern reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Excerpts From Senate Hearing on the Ginsburg Nomination
Following are excerpts from yesterday's hearing by the Senate Judiciary Committee on the nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to become Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, as transcribed by the Federal News Service, a private transcription service: ON ABORTION
Senator Hank Brown, Republican of Colorado, asked Judge Ginsburg about her article suggesting that the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment might better protect women's right to abortion than the privacy rights invoked in the 1973 Supreme Court decision Roe v.
Wade.


Gabbers
Three out-of-towners boarded a Manhattan bus one morning last week, and asked a nearby passenger where they should get off to go to Port Authority.
She told them.
She also gave them her thoughts about the old Penn Station, the proposed new Penn Station, Grand Central Terminal and urban transportation in general.
The peroration ended with "I'm a train person myself."
That's the way it goes in New York City: Ask a little question and you're apt to get a big, big answer.


Michigan National (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Doremus Accounts To Rossin Greenberg
Rossin Greenberg Seronick of Boston said yesterday that it had acquired the general advertising and public relations businesses of the Boston office of Doremus &amp; Company.
Doremus will keep its financial corporate accounts in Boston.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
"This is consistent with our strategic plan to focus our efforts on our financial services business," said Carl Anderson, Doremus's president.


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Protest Sends President on Retreat From Sofia
A noisy band of his former backers prevented President Zheliu Zhelev from entering his office for nearly three weeks in June by setting up a tent camp in front of it.
They caused him to move the presidency from the heart of the capital to a suburban mountain retreat, until a lawmaker called off a protest hunger strike and Mr.
Zhelev raised the possibility of early parliamentary elections.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BCE INC., a Canadian telecommunications holding company, said it sold Case-Hoyt Corp., a printing company based in Rochester, to Avanti Press Inc., Miami.
Terms were not disclosed.
LONRHO P.L.C., London, said it would sell its 50 percent stake in the international trading group, Krupp Lonrho G.m.b.H., to its joint venture partner, the steel group Fried.
Krupp G.m.b.H., Essen, Germany, for $166.2 million cash.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CLAPBOARD siding has been used on houses for centuries and can last the life of a house if maintained regularly and repaired promptly.
Clapboards, which are arranged in an overlapping horizontal pattern, were originally split from tree trunks rather than sawed, and splitting produced the characteristic wedge-shape profile, thicker at the bottom than at the top.
As a result, clapboard siding is sometimes called bevel siding.
Cedar or redwood clapboards have a natural resistance to decay and need not be painted, particularly if the house is near a seacoast, where salt air acts as a preservative.
But it is best to coat the unpainted wood with clear sealer every three to five years, because all unfinished wood exposed to the outdoors eventually shrinks and cracks and moisture can penetrate behind the siding and damage the building's framework.


U.N. IS KEPT BACK
As fighting raged today on a strategic mountain overlooking Sarajevo, the commander of the advancing Serbian nationalist forces stood in a clearing amid the thick stands of pine and fir and spoke genially to Western reporters about his troops' latest successes.
To the accompaniment of Serbian artillery fire, Gen.
Ratko Mladic said his troops had advanced 20 miles in a week and were close to capturing two key roads that would cut off the retreat of the Muslim-led Bosnian force defending the western approaches to the Bosnian capital.
Tightening the Noose
After that, the general said, it would not be long, possibly only days, before Butmir and Hrasnica, two Muslim strongholds that stand at the gates of Sarajevo, would fall, significantly tightening the noose that has been around the Bosnian capital for 15 months.


First Virginia Banks. (N)
COMPANY REPORTS ** First Virginia Banks (N)
Qtr to June 30
1993
1992
Net inc
29,156,000
23,804,000
Per share
.90
.74
6mo net inc
58,271,000
45,325,000
Per share
1.80
1.41
Per share earnings are restated to reflect a 3-for-2 common stock split paid on July 27, 1992.


Indian Effort On 88 Acres Has Setback
The Golden Hill Paugussetts' efforts to reclaim lands they once occupied in Fairfield County were dealt a severe blow today by a Federal judge who ruled that the claims cannot be heard until the Indians win recognition as a tribe from the Federal Government.
The judge, Peter C. Dorsey of the Federal District Court in New Haven, dismissed the first of several lawsuits filed by the Paugussetts, which laid claim to much of the land that is now downtown Bridgeport.


How to Donate To Flood Relief
Several American charities have established special funds and sent disaster teams to the Midwest.
Here is a list of organizations seeking donations:
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256. (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


Before the Next Flood or Heat Wave Hits
To the Editor:
The connection between our extreme weather events -- heat in the East, flooding in the Middle West -- and findings that climate stability can change more rapidly than previously appreciated must do more than raise eyebrows.


Valley National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.T.C. Stays Deadlocked On Microsoft
The Federal Trade Commission remained deadlocked today over whether to charge the world's biggest software publisher, the Microsoft Corporation, with engaging in anticompetitive business practices, according to executives familiar with the outcome of the commission's meeting.
The meeting in Washington, which was held in an attempt to break a February deadlock vote by the four commissioners taking part, lasted more than three hours.
After it ended today, Donald Elder, an F.T.C. spokesman, said that no decision had been reached in the matter.
The F.T.C. has refused to acknowledge publicly that it is conducting an investigation of Microsoft's business practices, even though the company itself has said an inquiry has been taking place.


Swedish Conductor Joins Manhattan School
The Swedish conductor Sixten Ehrling has been appointed chief conductor and musical adviser to the three orchestras at the Manhattan School of Music, the school's president, Marta Istomin, has announced.
In addition to his work with the Symphony, the Philharmonia and the Chamber Sinfonia, he will work with opera productions at the school.
Starting in 1994, he plans to accept a limited number of graduate students in conducting.


M.T.A. Plan Is Held Up By Albany
A fight in the State Legislature over the distribution of transportation money is holding up a $9.5 billion plan to improve mass transit in the New York City area and causing cash-flow problems for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, officials say.
The delay in final approval of the M.T.A.'s capital plan for subways, buses and commuter railroads has already added $1.5 million to the capital plan's cost, M.T.A. officials say.


METRO DIGEST
THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: CALCULATING THE POLITICAL IMPACT Firing the first shot at Mayor David N. Dinkins across the shifting ground of New York City's mayoral race, Rudolph W. Giuliani used the Crown Heights report to turn the electoral debate away from ethnic politics to competence and civic stewardship.
A1.
HOW ROUGH THE DRAFTS OF HISTORY WERE The state report told a story different from the one told by New York City news organizations as the crisis unfolded two years ago.
A1.
The neighborhood's streets were calm, but the talk was tense and filled with anger and hurt.
B4.


Barnes Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hi-Lo Automotive Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Somalia, Machiavelli Vs. Rambo
The United Nations has been painting Italy as a troublemaker, a disobedient child who thinks it knows better than its elders.
When Rome dared to raise its concerns about the increasingly bloody course of the humanitarian mission in Somalia, it was quickly and publicly slapped down by U.N. officials from ground commanders to the Secretary General.
Such high-handed behavior does little for the U.N.'s image and, worse still, it risks obscuring the real issue: that the methods and scope of the peacekeeping operation need to be reviewed.
The criticisms voiced by Rome, after three of its soldiers were killed in an ambush by followers of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, are based on its heavy military presence in Somalia, its belief in dialogue to reach a settlement and its colonial links to Somalia.


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Football  National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Agreed to terms with Thurman Thomas, running back, on a four-year contract.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Mark Duper, wide receiver.


Dinkins Requests Reports From Wary School Board
Mayor David N. Dinkins has asked the New York City Board of Education, an independent agency, to report to him regularly on basic issues from tightened school security to the opening of 34 small high schools.
The request has set off a dispute with board members, who are wary of surrendering their autonomy.


Mercantile Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Ask yourself this question: What is the most unusual contract in bridge, disregarding doubles and redoubles?
One answer is five no-trump.
Another is one club, which is of course impossible if the one club bid is strong and forcing.
Impossible?
Well, not quite, as the diagramed deal shows.
It occurred in the Green Point Pairs at the Eastern Regionals in Manhattan in May.
This was played with table screens, and the West player, David Berkowitz, could see South but not the other two players.
He doubled the strong one-club bid, in is his methods showing two suits, either both black suits or both red suits.


Some Jewelry for the Home
ROBERT LEE MORRIS, the jewelry designer, makes objects for the home that are sensuous and organic.
A bowl (left) looks like petals unfolding.
A platter is a gentle undulation.
On Aug. 3, he will introduce these and other objects of aluminum and pewter at Bloomingdale's nationwide.
They are not his first metal home accessories, but, at $35 to $80 each, they are the first priced to reach a market larger than two.


Cullen/Frost Bankers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Northrop Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Crimean Question: Whose Navy Is It, Anyway?
The marching melody of "Moscow Nights" blared from ships docked at harborside here as young sailors hoisted and then saluted the pale-blue-and-white naval ensigns, emblems of the Russian czars.
The early morning ceremony on support vessels of the Black Sea Fleet appeared routine enough.
But the raising of Russian flags on ships berthed in Ukrainian territory has become a symbol of one of the most provocative issues in the volatile relationship between the two strongest and most competitive countries of the old Soviet Union, Russia and Ukraine.


Private Town Guards Angering New Jersey
Detractors around town belittle Sussex's private security guards as "rent-a-cops." That makes Julia Devine bristle.
"Don't call them rent-a-cops," she said.
"That's degrading. They're polite and courteous. They're well dressed. They're immaculate. They're professional and they're doing the job."


Arrow Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Stravinsky's 'Sacre' as a Ritual for the New Age
Those who think a banana is a phallic symbol will have no trouble with Marie Chouinard's choreography.
Three years ago, she broke a ram's horn off her forehead and pasted it on her body as a penis.
The effect was as provocative as intended.
But it was a solidly archetypal image that took Miss Chouinard's version of "L'Apres-midi d'un Faune" into the realm of the fantastic and the primal.
On Tuesday night at Alice Tully Hall, the Compagnie Marie Choui nard from Montreal tackled still another celebrated ballet initially choreographed by Vaslav Nijinsky: "Le Sacre du Printemps." Performing to both taped rhythmic sound and the original Stravinsky score, the dancers echoed the past image of Miss Chouinard's faun as part centaur, part unicorn.
When her sun-seeking tribe poured onto its mating ground at one point, men and women all sported two crescents, at the forehead and as a phallus.


Lazaro Cardenas Journal; A Mystery for Mexico: Was Acid Spilled at Sea?
Where the long, white beaches slip down from groves of coconut palm and by the weathered wooden shacks that line the Balsas River, the fishing boats are all pulled up idle.
The fishermen, insisting that a tanker dumped 4,000 tons of sulfuric acid just off the Pacific Coast, ask what's the point?
The toxic discharges of industrial plants had made the fish scarce enough before.
Now, they say, no one will buy those they can catch.
Just getting in the water could be dangerous.


Charter One Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South Africa Envoys Reflect Apartheid's End
They cannot vote in national elections in South Africa and are still classified as a black, a colored and an Indian in South Africa, but the three officials at the South African Embassy here emphasize that they are the visual signs abroad of the end of white rule at home.
South Africa's governing National Party and the African National Congress, the once banned anti-apartheid organization, have yet to work out the mechanics of ending the system of institutionalized racial separation.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: A Rebuttal; Dinkins Aide Disputes State Report
Bill Lynch, the former deputy to Mayor David N. Dinkins, has denied a state report's assertions that he was given dramatic accounts of the police losing control of the Crown Heights unrest more than 24 hours before the Mayor ordered a tougher strategy.
The report, released Tuesday, strongly questions the credibility of Mr.
Lynch, a man who has long been Mr.
Dinkins's closest political adviser and is now his campaign manager.
It suggests that Mr.
Lynch and two other high-ranking aides were less than forthright with the investigators about what they knew and when.


Advo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Thomas Signs $13.5 Million Bills Pact
THURMAN THOMAS became the National Football League's highest-paid running back, agreeing yesterday to a four-year, $13.5 million contract with the Buffalo Bills.
Thomas's agent, LEIGH STEINBERG, said that Thomas would earn approximately double the amount in the previous top pact for a running back, that of Detroit's BARRY SANDERS, who makes approximately $1.7 million a year.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.00
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.05
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.18
3.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.50
5.39
6.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.63
6.55
7.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.34
7.27
8.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.77
5.73
6.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lakers Won't Give Scott New Contract
BRYON SCOTT, who teamed with MAGIC JOHNSON in the backcourt during the glory years of the Los Angeles Lakers, won't be re-signed by the team and is an unrestricted free agent.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association is offering $300 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 5.27 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is callable in one year. *
Pacific Gas and Electric Co., San Francisco, is offering through Goldman, Sachs $1.25 billion of debt securities in three parts.
The first, which is not callable, consists of $400 million of 5.375 percent first- and refunding mortgage bonds due in 1998 at 99.635 to yield 5.459 percent.
The second part, which is also not callable, consists of $400 million of 6.25 percent first- and refunding mortgage bonds due in 2003 at 99.892 to yield 6.264 percent.
The third part, which is callable in 10 years, consists of $450 million of 7.25 percent first- and refunding mortgage bonds due in 2026 at 99.181 to yield 7.315 percent.
The three issues are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Yearling Sales Provide An Optimistic Attitude
Sighs of relief and perhaps even cheers were heard across Kentucky yesterday when officials of the horse business reported the end of a four-year tailspin in prices at Keeneland's annual July auction of selected yearlings, the most prestigious sale in the industry.
"The Keeneland sales have always been a barometer of things to come," said James E. Bassett 3d, chairman of both the Keeneland Association and the Breeders' Cup.
"The signal that the sales sent this week is that the market is stabilizing."


Fleet Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Arkansas Best (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: Covering the Unrest; Press Had Blind Spots, Too
The state report this week on the Crown Heights violence two years ago told a story about the crisis different from the one told by New York City news organizations at the time.
With its details of official inattention and miscalculation that virtually escaped press notice as the events were unfolding, the report provided a reminder of both the functions and the limitations of news reports, which are sometimes called a first draft of history.


Beijing Olympics Opposed
Beijing should not be allowed to hold the 2000 Olympic Games because of China's human rights violations, a House committee resolved today.
The House Foreign Affairs Committee voted in favor of a resolution, drafted by Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, which declares "that the Olympics in the year 2000 should not be held in Beijing or elsewhere in the People's Republic of China." The resolution, which will now be sent to the full House for consideration, cites the 1989 massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square and other violations of free speech and civil liberties.


Marsh &amp; McLennan reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Provident Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Prosecutor; Brooklyn District Attorney Defends Handling of Crown Heights Prosecution
District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn yesterday attacked a state report that said lapses by his office had contributed to the acquittal of the lone youth prosecuted in the slaying of a Hasidic man during the 1991 Crown Heights violence.
Declaring that he had been "involved in all phases of the case and made the key decisions," Mr.
Hynes said that his office's work had been "diligent, competent and professional" and that the state report "displays a misunderstanding of trial tactics."


Mubarak Is Nominated Again Amid Mounting Discontent
Parliament nominated President Hosni Mubarak for a third six-year term today despite growing opposition demands for political changes and mounting discontent.
"There is no renewal," a longtime diplomat, Tahseen Basheer, said, "and a lot of boredom. A cloud of boredom hangs over Cairo. We have ministers that have been in office for 16 years."


NORDSTROM PLANS TO ISSUE VISA CARDS
Nordstrom Inc., the retailer based in Seattle, announced yesterday that it planned to issue Visa bank cards through its affiliate bank, Nordstrom National Credit Bank.
The company already has its own Nordstrom credit card.
But use of the Nordstrom card has declined because customers have increased their use of bank cards with incentive programs, like the Citibank Visa card that awards holders points in American Airlines' frequent flier program based on their purchases, a company spokeswoman said.


Thomas Campbell; Scholar, 57, Wrote On Foreign Policy
Thomas Moody Campbell, a scholar and author on 20th-century American foreign policies and relations, died on July 11 at a hospital in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was 57 and lived in Tallahassee, where he taught at Florida State University for 30 years.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Farms Abandon the Oats Once Sown
There is no historic site marker on the shady dirt driveway down to Harold Hoppe's farmhouse here in western Minnesota, but perhaps there ought to be.
Mr.
Hoppe, who is 72, is the last farmer in this region who is betting heavily on a crop of oats.
Neighbors of Mr.
Hoppe (pronounced HOP-ee) are not the only farmers to all but abandon the grain.
Production of oats, the gasoline of the 19th century, when American commerce ran on horsepower, has fallen to the point where the United States, a leading exporter of oats in the 1980's, is the largest importer.


Fearful of Bullpen, Yanks Take a Loss Anyway
Even Jimmy Key is allowed a dreadful performance every two months.
Even Jimmy Key surrenders a crushing three-run homer once or twice a season.
Even Jimmy Key loses.
But the manner in which Key and the Yankees faltered in a 10-3 loss to the Seattle Mariners at Yankee Stadium yesterday was quite disturbing.
In his worst outing of the season, Key stumbled in the eighth inning after the Yankees had erased a 3-1 deficit in the seventh, then Steve Farr compounded the sloppy affair by giving up two home runs and verifying the growing reputation of the bumbling bullpen.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about technological changes at the Cahners Publishing Company omitted part of the role of Reuters in the newly formed Reuters/Variety Entertainment News Service.
Besides distributing information for the service, Reuters will supply information, along with Variety.


Federal-Mogul Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Issues Guidelines to Protect Nonsmokers
The Environmental Protection Agency today announced guidelines on smoking in public buildings to help curb illness from secondhand tobacco smoke.
The agency asked all companies and agencies operating public buildings to ban smoking or use ventilation to assure that people are protected from the smoke of others.


A survey shows that Tina Brown's New Yorker is attracting more, and wealthier, readers.
ONE might reasonably contend that The New Yorker's Valentine-week cover illustration of a black woman and Hasidic man kissing was a little too provocative.
Or that this week's cover, showing an Arab boy at the beach jumping into sand figures shaped like lower Manhattan, might perpetuate a stereotype.
But the results of a new survey show that most of Tina Brown's decisions as editor in chief have been well received.


Washington Federal Savings &amp; Loan (Seattle)(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


M. Birnbaum, 48; Leader in Financing Independent Films
Malcolm A. Birnbaum, a leader in the financing of independently produced movies, died on Tuesday at his summer home in Old Greenwich, Conn.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Long-Term Debt Rules the Day
Investors seemed to be hungry for higher yields and willing to take more risk to get them yesterday as they opened up and swallowed one of the largest mouthfuls of long-term debt ever.
On the same day, the Walt Disney Company sold $300 million of 100-year bonds, up from $150 million in the initial proposal, while the Tennessee Valley Authority sold $750 million of 50-year bonds, up from $500 million in its initial plan.


A Judicious TV Image, With a Flair for Detail
It was, finally, a one-woman performance.
After the canned tributes and lame jokes, the flourishes of gallantry and strained bonhomie among the senators, all that mattered was the image being sent forth by Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
If there is such a thing as a judicial temperament and it can be recognized on the screen, Judge Ginsburg surely has it.
The unshowy mien; the moderate language; the carefully focused answers; the disinclination or inability to break into arias, even when lured in that direction by the friendly Senator Edward M. Kennedy's insistent inquiries into how she was "sensitized" to what she calls gender-based inequalities, and, especially, a determination to stick with specifics when all around were goading her on to generalizations: all bespoke a woman with a vocation.
As she instructed Senator Strom Thurmond, "Judges work from the particular case, not the general proposition."


Japan's Leader Steps Down As New Battle Lines Form
Under intense pressure to quit or face ouster from office, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said this afternoon that he would resign to take responsibilty for the Liberal Democratic Party's loss of control over Parliament in Sunday's election.
Mr.
Miyazawa's move, which had been rumored in Tokyo for several days, cleared the way for the old guard within the party to battle with a younger generation over party leadership.
Mr.
Miyazawa attempted to remain in office in apparent hopes of influencing the selection of his successor.
He is expected to stay on as a caretaker until the end of a struggle now underway between the Liberal Democrats and a coalition of opposition parties for the right to name the nation's Prime Minister.


Review/Pop; For Whitney Houston, Showy Doesn't Count: The Show Is the Voice
Whitney Houston is one of the few contemporary pop stars of whom it might be said: the voice suffices.
While almost every performer whose albums sell in the millions calls upon an entertainer's bag of tricks, from telling jokes to dancing to circus pyrotechnics, Ms.
Houston would rather just stand there and sing.
When not standing still, she either paces back and forth across the stage or sits on a stool.
She doesn't tell jokes.
When she talks, her patter has the clunky ring of predigested interview responses.
What largely makes up for the dearth of entertainment values in Ms.
Houston's shows is a voice made of steel and smoke that can send chills through an audience.
And at Tuesday's opening-night performance of a Radio City Music Hall engagement that extends through Monday, that voice rang magnificently through the auditorium.


Sumitomo Bank-Calif. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Group Approves Use of Derivatives
A group of leading financial experts gave a relatively clean bill of health yesterday to the rapidly growing set of financial products called derivatives that some have suggested make the global financial system vulnerable to a widespread crisis.
These risk management products, such as interest rate swaps and options on commodities, can solve a wide range of financial problems, from helping pension funds invest in Latin American stocks to protecting airlines from rises in jet fuel prices.
Concern Over Risk
Commercial and investment banks here and abroad have built these products in recent years into a billion-dollar business that generates some of their biggest profits.
One concern is that banks that have issued a large volume of these contracts may not be aware of the risks they are taking and could be pushed to the brink of failure.


Trial on Tax Evasion Opens For Ex-Kingmaker in Tokyo
At the opening of what could prove the most explosive political trial in the post-war era, the former political kingmaker Shin Kanemaru pleaded not guilty to tax evasion charges this morning.
He also said that the $50 million in gold bullion, bearer bonds and cash that investigators had found in his home and offices was for political, not personal purposes.
The 78-year-old, stony-faced Mr.
Kanemaru was thronged by hundreds of journalists as he entered the Tokyo District Court in a wheelchair.
He then read slowly from a written statement, asserting his innocence to the charges that he evaded nearly $10 million in taxes.
He said he had collected the $50 million to achieve his "dream," a realignment of the corrupt Liberal Democratic Party he all but controlled for the past decade.


Charles W. F. Smith, 88, Author, Educator and Episcopal Minister
The Rev.
Charles W. F. Smith, an Episcopal minister, educator and author, died on Sunday at a daughter's home in Belleair, Fla.
He was 88 and lived in Bridgewater Hill, N.H.
His daughter Ann Lee S. Bugbee said the cause was congestive lung failure.


Bothered and Bewildered
Murphy Brown's baby apparently has a lot of real-life company.
A just released Census Bureau report tells us that among white women and women with some college education, the percentage who have become mothers without marrying has more than doubled in the last decade, to 14.6 percent and 11.3 percent, respectively; among women with professional or managerial jobs, it has almost tripled, to 8.3 percent.
While the numbers are small -- most unwed mothers are poor and thus disproportionately black or Hispanic -- they show that single motherhood cannot be explained by words like "inner-city," "welfare dependency" and "pathology."
Nonetheless, you can virtually hear the hum of word processors as family-values advocates labor through the hot summer nights, turning out articles and speeches bemoaning the new statistics and rounding up the usual suspects: feminism, promiscuity, the media, the 60's.


Hershey Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Iraq Justly Rejects Surveillance Cameras
To the Editor:
A front-page article July 13 summarizes the two basic cease-fire resolutions the Security Council passed when the Persian Gulf war ended.
You get one right: No. 687, which required Iraq to destroy its weapons of mass destruction.
Iraq complied.


Fuqua Changes Its Name To Actava in Revamping
Fuqua Industries announced today that the company was changing its name to Actava Group Inc. in line with the restructuring of the company from a diversified holding company to focus entirely on the recreational sports industry.
Charles R. Scott, president and chief executive officer, said the company had sold the Fuqua name back to its former chairman, J. B. Fuqua, for $1 million and would change its current New York Stock Exchange ticker symbol from FQA to AG beginning on July 28.


Queens Jury Awards Record Judgment in Suit on a Turnpike Accident
An accident on the New Jersey Turnpike on a rainy night in 1987 has produced the largest judgment for a case of its kind in New York State history: $163.9 million for a plaintiff who was almost completely paralyzed in the accident.
Legal experts and lawyers for the plaintiffs agreed that the award, decided on Tuesday by a jury in State Supreme Court in Queens, is all but certain to be slashed by appellate courts.
Still, critics of the laws governing suits in New York criticized the award as excessive and said it points up the need for reform, particularly limits on damages for pain and suffering.


Comes a Home, Upstate, For an Indian Collection
IN two years, 500 outstanding pieces of American Indian art dating to 500 B.C. will have their first home as a collection.
They include a mask for a horse with a beaded American flag motif and a pair of beaded cowboy boots for a child (shown).
Donated by Eugene V. and Clare E. Thaw, they will be exhibited in a new 18,000-square-foot American Indian wing at the New York State Historical Association's Fenimore House in Cooperstown.
The wing will extend from the rear of the 1932 Georgian-style house and face Lake Otsego, whose surface is so serene that James Fenimore Cooper named it Glimmerglass in his book "The Deerslayer." Ground was broken on July 8.


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday listing box-office receipts for the top films across the country last week misstated the number of weeks "The Firm" has been No. 1.
It is three weeks, not two.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  U.S.
Wins and Advances to Gold Cup Final  Cle Kooiman's goal 13 minutes into overtime last night gave the defending champion United States a 1-0 victory over Costa Rica and a spot in the finals of the CONCACAF Gold Cup soccer tournament.
Kooiman took Roy Wegerle's crossing pass seven yards from the Costan Rican goal and knocked the ball over the head of goaltender Eric Lonnis with his right foot.
The United States will meet the winner of today's semifinal between Mexico and Jamaica in Mexico City's Aztec Stadium, also the site of Sunday's final.
The United States had a scoring opportunity in the 73d minute when Eric Wynalda went in alone on goal, but Lonnis covered the point-blank shot to keep the game scoreless.
Wynalda had another opportunity in the 21st minute, but his shot from 15 yards out skidded past the left goal post. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Bubka Returns to Form and Clears 19-5 1/2  Sergei Bubka returned to form yesterday, winning the pole vault at 19 feet 5 1/2 inches in the Nikaia Grand Prix meet in Nice, France.
Bubka made three attempts at a world-record 20-1 3/4.
He was able to get his legs over the bar on each attempt but hit it hard with his body.
Bubka had been in a slump lately, winning only one of his last four meets before Nice and had a jump of only 18-4 3/4 on Monday at Barcelona, Spain.
The Ukrainian has broken the world record 16 times outdoors and 18 times indoors.
Igor Potapovich of Kazakhstan was second with Olympic champion Maxim Tarasov of Russia third. (AP)


No Headline
I saw a glimmer of light a while back, but that's only turning out to be a pause.
At this point there's no light at the end of the tunnel. -- FRED GADOMSKI, a Penn State meteorologist, on prospects for the Midwest.  [ D22:5. ]


White House Aide Leaves No Clue About Suicide
Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, spent Tuesday morning at his desk in the West Wing.
Later, he watched the President name a new F.B.I.
Director in the Rose Garden and gave a friendly wave to reporters.
Then he returned to his office for an upbeat chat with his boss and lunch alone at his desk.
Shortly after 1 P.M., he left the White House, telling his secretary he was going out.
Sometime between then and 6 P.M., he drove to a secluded bluff across the Potomac River from Washington, pulled out a vintage Colt revolver and, a few yards from an old Civil War cannon, shot himself in the mouth.


Coca-Cola Names Marketing Officer
The Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta said yesterday that it had named Sergio Zyman to the new position of chief marketing officer.
He will assume responsibilities of Peter Sealey, who announced that he was resigning as senior vice president and director of global marketing to open his own marketing consulting business, effective Aug. 20.
Mr.
Sealey, 52, who has been with Coca-Cola on and off for 24 years, assumed his last position nearly three years ago and is known for his work on Coca-Cola's "Always" campaign.
Mr.
Sealey will open his new shop, Peter Sealey &amp; Associates, in Atlanta and San Francisco.


Dow, in 10.62 Rise, Reaches a High
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at an all-time high yesterday on a day when all other market indicators moved in the opposite direction.
Relying primarily on a combination of rebounding stocks and some companies that reported decent earnings, the blue-chip indicator rose 10.62 points, to 3,555.40, edging above the previous high of 3,554.83 established on May 27.


Winners Are Named For Package Design
Three innovative packages for three different products were named "best of show" at the second annual award competition for package design.
One of the International Brand Packaging Awards, sponsored by Graphic Design U.S.A. and Murray J. Lubliner Associates, both of New York, was given to a New York-based designer.
Cato Gobe &amp; Associates won for its packaging of a new men's product line for Gillette.


Ariel Rubstein Dead; Operatic Soprano, 41
Ariel D. Rubstein, a soprano who performed throughout the United States and Europe, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 41.
The cause was AIDS, her family said.


GINSBURG AFFIRMS RIGHT OF A WOMAN TO HAVE ABORTION
Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg today offered a strong and unambiguous defense of a woman's right to abortion, saying it was based on the Constitution's explicit guarantee of equal protection as well as an unstated right of privacy.
"It is essential to a woman's equality with man that she be the decision maker, that her choice be controlling," Judge Ginsburg told the Senate Judiciary Committee on the second day of her confirmation hearing for the Supreme Court.
"If you impose restraints, you are disadvantaging her because of her sex. The state controlling a woman would mean denying her full autonomy and full equality."


Berman Leaves Day Job at WFAN
Len Berman, the WNBC-TV/Channel 4 sports broadcaster whose tenure as a sports talk show host at WFAN Radio started rancorously in April, was released amicably from his one-year deal on the noon-2 P.M. time slot.
Today is his last show.
Berman claimed, even before starting at WFAN, that the radio job would deprive him of time with his family.
To accommodate him, the station changed plans to pair Berman from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. with Mike Lupica by placing Lupica in the 10 A.M. to noon slot.


Comdisco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pakistan's Pas de Trois
Pakistan appears to be staggering toward the resolution of a five-month crisis.
Politics in that country is intensely personal, as strongly spiced as the national cuisine.
Incompatibility has been nearly total between President Gulam Ishaq Khan and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
So both have now resigned, thus opening the way for Pakistan's sixth election in as many years, a consummation devoutly sought by the opposition leader Benazir Bhutto, who threatened to paralyze Islamabad with protest demonstrations.
This means that until October, a big, important Islamic country will be under a weak caretaker government, with the likelihood that neither Mr.
Sharif nor Ms.
Bhutto will emerge with a parliamentary majority.


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Bluntly Tells Zairian President to Yield
After two days of talks with a top Zairian official, the United States today accused President Mobutu Sese Seko of risking the lives of millions and threatening regional stability.
The State Department issued the tough statement after talks Monday and today between Assistant Secretary of State George E. Moose and Mr.
Mobutu's envoy, Ngbanda Nzambo-ko-Atumba.


Review/Television; A Private Eye Returns, This Time on Cable
Television series are increasingly finding that there is life of various sorts after network cancellation.
The latest example can be found tonight at 9 on Lifetime in "Spenser: Ceremony." Spenser is the private eye created in 1971 by the novelist Robert B. Parker.
His adventures have been riding best-seller lists just about ever since.
From 1985 to 1988, "Spenser: For Hire" was a weekly ABC series starring Robert Urich in the title role and Avery Brooks as Hawk, Spenser's tough, oddly menacing buddy.
Mr.
Parker wrote some of the episodes.
Filmed in Boston, the show had a solidly respectable run.
The perpetually employable Mr.
Urich went on to other series; his co-star in a new one coming up in the fall, "It Had to Be You" on CBS, is Faye Dunaway.


INSIDE
The C.I.A. and the Sheik
C.I.A. officers reviewed all seven applications by Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman to enter the United States and only once turned him down.
Page B1.
Japan's Prime Minister Quits
Kiichi Miyazawa's resignation under pressure set the stage for a leadership battle between a younger generation of reformers and the old guard.
U.S.
Offers Help for Haiti
Washington has offered to send 350 troops and military engineers to Haiti to help retrain its army and work on construction projects.
Page A5.


Flaw Is Discovered In Crucial Research On AIDS Treatment
Three months into a national trial of a combination of three drugs that experts have called the best hope for treating AIDS, new laboratory findings have cast serious doubt on the validity of the scientific premise of the studies.
In addition, the principal researcher in the original studies that led to the trial said yesterday that his team had found a flaw in them.
The trial is being conducted on 400 volunteers at medical centers across the country and is being paid for by the Federal Government.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Strawberry-Jar Blues
Q.
I've failed abysmally at growing anything in a strawberry jar.
Watering floods the top, while the bottom stays bone dry.
What can I do? -- Doreen J. Curtis, Richmond.
A.
I had an equally frustrating time coping with plants in strawberry jars, pots with pocketlike openings around the sides, until I read the suggestions in "Artistically Cultivated Herbs" by Elise Felton (Woodbridge Press, $14.95).
Ms.
Felton's seemingly fail-safe system is based on the creation of a central drainage core down the middle of the pot, using a polyvinyl tube 2 or 3 inches in diameter.
Cover the jar's bottom drainage hole with a wire screen.
Cut the tube 3 or 4 inches shorter than the jar's height.
Drill small holes in the tube to correspond roughly with the holes in the jar.
Fill the tube with pebbles, tie a screen over the top with string, and place the tube in the center of the jar.
Add several inches of soil to the jar, to a level just below its lowest holes, then use a chopstick to coax the root balls of small plants into the lower holes of the jar.
After adding soil around the roots, repeat the procedure up the length of the jar for each planting pocket, tier by tier.
I skipped the tubeand developed a central core of pebbles at the same time I added the soil into the jar.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Fallen; Friends and Family, Lost to Mean Rivers
A month later, people here still talk about how suddenly the storm came up that mid-June afternoon, and how hard it rained: Three inches in 30 minutes.
The volunteer fire chief, Steve Meyer, was in his basement lifting weights when his wife, Teresa, returned from grocery shopping, soaked and shaken.
"You wouldn't believe what I just drove through, how torrential the rains were," she said.


A survey shows that Tina Brown's New Yorker is attracting more, and wealthier, readers.
ONE might reasonably contend that The New Yorker's Valentine-week cover illustration of a black woman and Hasidic man kissing was a little too provocative.
Or that this week's cover, showing an Arab boy at the beach jumping into sand figures shaped like lower Manhattan, might perpetuate a stereotype.
But the results of a new survey show that most of Tina Brown's decisions as editor in chief have been well received.


Cincinnati Milacron reports earnings for 12wk to June 19


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture by The Associated Press showing Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg and supporters at a hearing on her nomination to the Supreme Court misstated the relationship of an audience member, Lisa Brauston, to Judge Ginsburg's son, James.
She is a friend, not his wife.


Republic New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kukoc Woos Jordan and Pippen
Unforgettable for Toni Kukoc was the first time he played against the Dream Team in Barcelona, Spain, last year -- which consisted, in this case, primarily of him trying to play one-on-two against Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen, a feat that even Hercules might have found taxing.
Kukoc, in that first-round game, was a marked man, and he knew it.
Jordan and Pippen, angry, irritated, their noses out of joint, vexed and also not terribly pleased, had decided to gang up on Kukoc, the 6-foot-10-inch Croatian star with the short hair and the long legs.


'Another Great Lake'


'Jail' for Pakistan Politicians Isn't So Rough
Muzaffar Sial Khan flipped the tails of his kameez, the traditional knee-length baggy pajama top worn by Pakistani men, and patted his stomach.
"Twenty pounds," he mourned. "I gained 20 pounds here."


Scott Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Where the Allure of Camping by Car Has Led
THEY were declarations of independence, the American dream at 22 cents a gallon.
Today, when Motel 6's and Holiday Inns are interchangeable emblems of the Interstate, it is difficult not to be enchanted by the dawn of American autocamping when the names of early recreational vehicles -- Covered Wagons, York Ramblers, Shasta Airflytes, Va-Ka-Shun-Ettes -- spoke the poetry of the open road.


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pierce to Drop Father as Coach
MARY PIERCE said yesterday that she isn't interested in having her father, Jim, coach her anymore.
"We'll still keep our relationship, we'll be together, " the 18-year-old said yesterday at a news conference for the Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J.
"As far as tennis is concerned, we were just fighting a lot."


General Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Baker Has Catching Up to Do
Stephen Baker has been the Giants' leader in average reception yardage every season of his six-year career.
But to the new coaching staff, he might as well be Donald Duck.
Currently Baker is probably ranked sixth on the depth chart.
That is unusual for the wide receiver, entering his seventh season, who for most of his career with the Giants has been a steady performer.
But this season he showed up in horrible shape, almost passing out on the first day of camp when the team ran sprints.


American Stems Tide Of Losses
American Airlines yesterday reported its first quarterly profit in almost two years, and a top executive took the occasion to invite the airline's unions to discuss an equity stake.
It coupled the invitation with a threat to eliminate service in less-profitable markets.
The AMR Corporation, the airline's parent, said that in the second quarter it earned $47 million, or 39 cents a share, in contrast with a loss of $183 million a year ago.
Revenues rose 17.4 percent in the quarter to $4.21 billion.


When Crime Invades a Backyard, a Neighborhood Is Shocked
It was a setting that any family in America would be comfortable with: children playing house in a fenced-in backyard on a Sunday afternoon, within earshot of their parents inside the home.
But in the space of a few minutes, one of the children, 6-year-old Latisha Goodman, would be enticed to the fence by a man who promised to give her money and spirited away to her death.
Her partly clothed body would be found hours later under the porch of an abandoned house nearby.
An autopsy would show she had been raped and strangled.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: On the Streets; After Report, the Talk Of Residents Is Tense
The streets of Crown Heights were calm yesterday, but the talk was tense and filled with anger and hurt.
The day after a state report sharply criticized Mayor David N. Dinkins, top City Hall aides and the police leadership for their handling of the Crown Heights violence, the thoughts and emotions of blacks and Hasidic Jews seemed as divided as when the neighborhood erupted in disturbances two summers ago.


Amphenol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Agassi Is Named to Davis Cup Team
ANDRE AGASSI and MALIVAI WASHINGTON in singles and PATRICK McENROE and RICHEY RENEBERG in doubles will make up the 1993 United States Davis Cup team that will face the Bahamas at the Olde Providence Racquet Club in Charlotte, N.C., Sept. 24-26.
In announcing the lineup for the qualifying-round match for 1994 World Group play, the United States captain, TOM GORMAN, played down the absence of top-ranked PETE SAMPRAS and No. 2-ranked JIM COURIER, Wimbledon's finalists this year.
"This is a very strong team," Gorman said.
"I'm happy with the composition and the personality of this team.


Taking a Spill
Stock of Bell Sports Inc., which makes bicycle helmets, set a 52-week high of $36.25 on Tuesday.
But yesterday, its stock fell after it was removed from the recommended list at Goldman, Sachs.
Traders said the ratings adjustment was largely because the stock had done so well and might have become too expensive.
Higher sales are still expected, as several states move to require bicycle helmets for children.


Woody Allen Leaves Tri-Star
Woody Allen, whose personal life has overshadowed his film-making career over the last year, is leaving Tri-Star Pictures to make his next three films with private funds, Tri-Star said today.
Mr.
Allen's new arrangement involves Sweetland Filmscoei, a company founded in 1991 by Jean Doumanian, a former producer of "Saturday Night Live" and a longtime friend of Mr.
Allen.
Mr.
Allen's sister, Letty Aronson, has been a vice president of the company for nine months.


Bill Would Exempt Navy From Environment Law
Three weeks after a Federal judge barred the Energy Department from storing any more spent fuel from the Navy's nuclear-powered vessels at an atomic reservation in Idaho, the Senate Armed Services Committee yesterday began considering a bill that would override the judge's order by exempting the Navy from one of the nation's leading environmental laws.
The exemption, if enacted by Congress, would give the Navy broad discretion to transport, store and handle spent nuclear fuel in Idaho and elsewhere without the prior reviews that are mandated by the National Environmental Policy Act.


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grand Metropolitan Names New Chief for Burger King
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. yesterday appointed James B. Adamson, who has extensive retail and marketing experience, as chief executive officer of its Burger King Corporation.
He succeeds Barry J. Gibbons, who will remain as chairman.
Based in Miami, Burger King is the second-largest fast-food chain in the United States, behind McDonald's, with 5,846 outlets.
It has a total of more than 6,800 restaurants worldwide in 48 countries, 370 of which opened last year.


Events: Art Tours, Crafts, Gardens
Art Tours  Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street at Central Avenue, Newark; (201) 596-6550.
There will be a day trip to two collections in Long Island City next Wednesday: the Noguchi Garden Museum and the Fisher-Landau Center, which features works by Georgia O'Keeffe, Jean Dubuffet, Piet Mondrian and Pablo Picasso.
Fee is $61.
On Sept. 18, there will be a trip to the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y.
Fee is $47.
Each tour, which includes lunch, will leave from the museum at 9 A.M. and return in the early evening.
Reservations are required for both trips.
Flora, Far and Near  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
On Sunday, there will be a tour of plants from China at the garden, followed by a concert.
Future programs include plants native to Brooklyn and a dance performance (Aug. 1), and the Japanese Hill and Pond Garden and a concert (Aug. 8).
Tours are at 1 P.M. and performances are at 2:30 P.M.
No charge.
Staten Island History  Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place (off Richmond Terrace), St.
George, S.I.; (718) 727-1135.
On Saturday, from 1 to 3:30 P.M., there will be a walking tour of the Tompkinsville neighborhood, including Horton's Row, Staten Island's oldest attached housing; Fort Hill Park, and the Schoverling mansion, a Second Empire house built around 1880.
Fee is $8; members, $5.
Reservations are recommended.
Water Gardening Symposium  Rye Town Hilton Hotel, 699 Westchester Avenue (near Purchase Street), Rye Brook, N.Y.; (201) 327-0721.
The International Water Lily Society is holding its annual symposium from next Wednesday through Aug. 1.
The fee is $480 for the five-day series of events, including a trip to New York City area gardens on July 28, receptions and dinners.
Some of the tours, talks and dinners on each of the five days are available for fees ranging from $60 to $140.
On Aug. 1, there will be a series of programs for beginners to water gardening.
Call for information and registration form; same-day registration is also available at the hotel.
Crafts in New Jersey  Peters Valley Craft Center, 19 Kuhn Road (near Route 615), Layton, N.J.; (201) 948-5202.
A crafts fair, featuring woven clothing, wooden furniture, leather accessories, ceramic vases and tiles, silver jewelry and artwork by 150 artists, will be held Saturday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
There will be crafts demonstrations and entertainment.
Admission is $5; those 60 and older, $4; children under 12, no charge.
On Saturday at 6:30 P.M., there will be a country supper and auction of 50 crafts works to benefit Peters Valley educational programs.
Tickets are $15; children under 12, no charge.
Reservations are required before Saturday for the dinner and auction.


Cardinal Distribution (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Robert M. Estes, 81, G.E.'s Chief Lawyer
Robert Mason Estes, who retired in 1976 as a senior vice president and general counsel of the General Electric Company, died Monday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 81 and lived in Rye, N.Y.
He had suffered a long illness, the company said.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Water Police; Mark Twain Would Understand the Water Crisis That's Corrupting Iowans
Though Mark Twain traveled the world, he understood Midwestern river towns best of all and would have grasped perfectly the wounded pride now of Iowa's capital.
In one of his most famous short stories, "The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg," Twain wrote of a town renowned for its honesty.
But when each of its 19 leading families was offered a dishonest chance to acquire a 160-pound sack believed to be full of gold, all of them succumbed to temptation.


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Southern National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Uncovered Short Sales Decline a Bit on Big Board
The number of shares sold short declined slightly at the New York Stock Exchange in the last month but rose to another record at the American Stock Exchange, the exchanges reported yesterday.
Merger activity, rather than pessimism about stock prices, appears to have caused some of the largest increases.
The Big Board reported that the overall short position for trades through July 7 was 1.039 billion shares, down three-tenths of a percent from a month earlier, when a record of 1.042 billion was set.


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Rebellion Flares Anew in Northeast of India
When guerrillas ambushed a military convoy in the Northeast of India recently, killing more than 25 soldiers, they signaled a resurgence of their 40-year campaign for independence.
After decades of guerrilla war by a dozen ethnic-based insurgencies that has left thousands dead and tied down an estimated 40,000 troops in the Northeast, officials say the rebels are widening their activities, extorting money from businessmen in major towns, and kidnapping and killing officials.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Motion For Jets On Key Contracts
It looks as if the Jets will open training camp today without their first-round draft pick, linebacker Marvin Jones, and fifth-round pick, running back Adrian Murrell.
But they could have an agreement with last year's starting quarterback, Browning Nagle, before all the players are due to report to Hofstra University at 6 P.M.
The absence of the two rookies or even of Nagle does not figure to alter the course that training camp will take.
There aren't going to be any major overhauls of the offensive and defensive systems, so much of the time will be spent incorporating recently signed veteran free agents and rookies into the schemes.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Overview; Sodden Midwest Is Bracing For More Rain and Floods
Like an unwanted sequel to a bad horror movie, forecasters are predicting more heavy rain over the upper Midwest, raising the prospects of new flooding and the likelihood that the gradual receding that has begun on most of the Mississippi River will be slowed or halted.
The National Meteorological Center said today that five inches of rain could fall in the next five days over much of the upper Midwest.
Forecasters at the center, a branch of the National Weather Service, said some parts of Iowa, northern Missouri, southern Minnesota, eastern Kansas and Nebraska could easily get twice that amount.


National Commerce Bancorp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Schlumberger Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


St. Paul Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13 SERBIAN MOVES TOWARD SARAJEVO
The Serbian commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, said his troops were close to capturing two key roads that would cut off the retreat of the mainly Muslim force defending the western approaches to Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital.
After that, perhaps in two days, he said, two Muslim strongholds at the outskirts of Sarajevo would fall.A1


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Southwestern Bell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FirstFed Michigan (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bishop Germanos Polizoidis, 95; Held High Greek Orghodox Posts
Metropolitan Germanos Polizoidis, the senior Metropolitan Bishop of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, died on July 13 at Astoria General Hospital in Queens.
He was 95 and lived in the Lyden Nursing Home in Astoria.
Bishop Germanos was the last living signatory of the articles of incorporation of the archdiocese, which covers the Western Hemisphere and was established in 1922 under the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate in Istanbul.


No, America Won't Forget Tiananmen Sq.; Open Door Essential
To the Editor:
Having just returned from a tour of Chinese cities and having spoken to foreign and security analysts at Chinese think tanks, universities and government agencies, we second Kenneth Lieberthal's motion to rethink American policy toward China and offer a friendly amendment ("Forget the Tianamen Fixation," Op-Ed, July 14).


General Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
A few years ago, VINCENT SARDI Jr. had to tell ROBERT GOULET that a caricature of him, drawn in 1960 by Don Bevan when Mr.
Goulet first opened in "Camelot," had disappeared from the walls of Sardi's.
After the actor finishes tonight's performance in the current Broadway production of "Camelot" at the Gershwin Theater, the restaurant will present him with a new portrait by Richard Baratz, who has been the resident caricaturist at Sardi's for the last 17 years.
Then, said Max Klimavicius, the general manager of the restaurant, according to Sardi's tradition, Mr.
Goulet will sign it and his portrait will hang once again.


FoxMeyer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Man Facing Eviction Attacks 2 in Family, Then Kills Himself
On the brink of eviction from his home in Rumson, N.J., a 56-year-old man used a shotgun to shoot his mother and to fracture the skull of his daughter yesterday before shooting himself, the police said.
The man, John Sweeney, was found dead when police officers entered his home after trying to communicate with him from outside for four hours, said State Trooper John Trout of the New Jersey State Police, though they knew that Mr.
Sweeney's mother lay injured inside.


Two Traders Indicted In Board of Trade Fraud
Two traders who rattled Treasury bond markets and nearly bankrupted an old-line clearing firm at the Chicago Board of Trade in October were indicted today on Federal wire fraud charges.
The indictment accuses Darryl Zimmerman, 30, of Chicago, and Anthony Catalfo, 29, of Bayside, Queens, of misleading two clearing firms and entering orders for tens of thousands of contracts in a 30-minute trading spree.


PFIZER INC. (N)
Pfizer Inc., showing strength at a time when most drug companies are struggling, reported yesterday a robust 21 percent increase in earnings from continuing operations for the second quarter, compared with the comparable period a year earlier.
Pfizer's chairman, William C. Steere Jr., said sales from continuing operations rose 10 percent, with only 2 percent of the gain attributed to price increases, reflecting the company's success in dealing with growing public concerns about drug costs.


First Virginia Banks. (N)
COMPANY REPORTS ** First Virginia Banks (N)
Qtr to June 30
1993
1992
Net inc
29,156,000
23,804,000
Per share
.90
.74
6mo net inc
58,271,000
45,325,000
Per share
1.80
1.41
Per share earnings are restated to reflect a 3-for-2 common stock split paid on July 27, 1992.


First Bancorp of Ohio (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Von Stade Cancellation
The mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade has canceled her scheduled appearance with the Waterloo Festival Orchestra on Saturday evening because of illness, and the concert program has been changed.
Yoav Talmi will conduct an all-orchestral program of Dvorak's "New World" Symphony, Bizet's "Arlesienne Suite" and Ravel's "Daphnis et Chloe" Suites Nos. 1 and 2.
Tickets are $15 and $20.
The concert is at 8:30 P.M. in Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J.
Information: (201) 347-4700.


Central Hudson Electric &amp; Gas Corp. reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


National Medical Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Strong Surge In Earnings For Compaq
The Compaq Computer Corporation proved yesterday that it was the personal computer maker doing best in the industry price war, reporting that its profit tripled in the second quarter.
The surge in Compaq's earnings comes as other leading personal computer makers, including Apple Computer Inc. and the Dell Computer Corporation, have suffered losses.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BB&amp;T Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Time Warner Audio Book Plan
Time Warner Inc. plans to set up an audio book operation, to be known as Time Warner Audiobooks, the company announced this week.
The new company will be a joint venture of two Time Warner divisions, the Atlantic Group and Time Warner Trade Publishing.
It will acquire titles from other publishers as well as prepare audio versions of books published by Time Warner's trade book companies, Warner Book and Little, Brown.


Oce-Van der Grinten NV (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Get Albany Legislature To Legislate Rationally
To the Editor:
Once again the New York State Legislature has shown that it is unable to manage its legislative responsibilities in a rational fashion.
Sixty percent of the 953 bills passed this session by the Assembly were passed during the last month, which was characterized by tumultuous activity but little meaningful action.


Arvin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Amid Gaffe, Mets Get Last Laugh
Outfielder Joe Orsulak came up throwing a sandwich bag this afternoon.
The Mets can smirk about it, considering that they beat the Padres and their four-victory road trip qualifies as a relative rampage.
But Orsulak trying to throw plastic to home plate provided one more reel for their 1993 blooper highlights film.
New York ended up pocketing today's game, 5-2, behind Dwight Gooden's hardy pitching and Anthony Young's remarkable relief, but the Mets rarely make it nine innings without committing some sort of gaffe.


Albank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nominee for Surgeon General Is Divisive
To the Editor:
"Candor, Conscience and Dr. Elders" (editorial, July 13) states in reference to Concerned Women for America's news conference against President Clinton's nomination of Dr.
Joycelyn Elders to be Surgeon General of the United States:


Airlines Clash in Court on Fares
With videotapes, flip-charts, enlargements of once-secret memos and thousands of documents, armies of lawyers in Federal District Court here are re-enacting the airline fare war of 1992.
In an elegantly restored courtroom with carved wooden panels and silk drapes, Continental Airlines and Northwest Airlines are trying to draw blood, demonstrating that American Airlines engaged in "predatory pricing." That means setting fares so low that American would lose money, but so would its weaker rivals, who might be forced out of business.


Rate Rules Won't Hurt Cable Giant
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's biggest cable television company, said today that new Federal rate regulations would cut no more than $160 million from its annual revenues -- a smaller bite than many industry experts had been expecting.
The Denver-based cable giant estimated that it would lose about 4 percent of its $4.1 billion in sales, and said the reductions would cut deeply into its operating profits.
But Wall Street analysts said the company appeared to be emerging with relatively little pain, mainly because Tele-Communications has tended to have lower rates than the industry as a whole.


Synovus Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Independence Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ingersoll Rand Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Real Rostenkowski Problem
A front-page picture yesterday showed President Clinton lunching amiably with Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, just a day after the powerful chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee was linked in court to an embezzlement scandal at the House Post Office.
The smiles on their faces masked the awkwardness of the moment.
Don't worry, say Democratic lawmakers, Mr.
Rostenkowski's troubles won't affect the President's deficit-reduction program.
It's hard to believe that Mr.
Rostenkowski's legendary legislative skills won't be hurt.
But his skills are not the issue; the issue is the cloud that hovers over his head.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: Covering the Report; Reporting So Constant, Recovery So Distant
The news deluge began at noon Tuesday, on schedule.
As soon as Richard Girgenti, the state's director of criminal justice, stood to share his conclusions in the Crown Heights Report, any New Yorker with a remote control could start clicking from one news station to another and see, over and over, the fires, the rock throwing, and the general mayhem that so often have been called, collectively, Crown Heights.


Buhner Hits a 5-Spot To Haunt Old Team
It is hard for any former Yankee to pull into Yankee Stadium and not have memories that either singe the ego or tickle the funny bone.
Take the expatriates who wear the uniforms of the Seattle Mariners, for instance.
When the Yankees were about to shortchange the Mariners out of about 10 minutes of batting practice yesterday, the ex-Yankee outfielder and current Mariners hitting coach, Ken Griffey Sr., was reminded that maybe it was just another attempt to keep his kid from playing around at Yankee Stadium.


For the 'new Eve,' a very short skirt:


Joys of Summers Past
To The Home Section:
What a delight to read your writers' memories of summer childhoods.
Mine (circa late 1940's, early 50's) was special, too.
We lived in a 1747 house in Connecticut with tall maples outside and a bevy of fans inside.


White House Aide Leaves No Clue About Suicide
Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, spent Tuesday morning at his desk in the West Wing.
Later, he watched the President name a new F.B.I.
Director in the Rose Garden and gave a friendly wave to reporters.
Then he returned to his office for an upbeat chat with his boss and lunch alone at his desk.
Shortly after 1 P.M., he left the White House, telling his secretary he was going out.
Sometime between then and 6 P.M., he drove to a secluded bluff across the Potomac River from Washington, pulled out a vintage Colt revolver and, a few yards from an old Civil War cannon, shot himself in the mouth.


Review/Fashion; In Couture, Strong Views, Boldly Stated
Now it's official.
The miniskirt emerged as the fashion of the hour in the fall shows of the couture houses here.
Gianni Versace started to unwrap the leg on Saturday.
Karl Lagerfeld used the micro-miniskirt as the partner of the new Chanel jacket he presented on Tuesday.
Today, Yves Saint Laurent threw his scissors on the side of short clothes.
In doing so, he reinstated his position as a fashion leader, not a follower.
His clothes, which had been on the conservative side for some time, now have a fresh new spin.


More Ways to Stay Cool
To The Home Section:
I'm one of your air-conditionerless readers still challenged by sleeping in the heat.
Here's my solution:
My fuse blew several years ago during a heat wave.
I couldn't reach the super till the next day.
I weathered the afternoon immobile on the couch, reading a murder mystery, a wet washcloth on my forehead.
At night I soaked my top sheet, wrung it out and rolled up in it.


Price Tag: Quitting Smoking
In 1965 about 40 percent of adults in the United States smoked cigarettes; today the figure has dropped to 25 percent.
A study by the Centers for Disease Control found that in 1990 and 1991, 42 percent of daily smokers tried to quit for more than one day.
Eighty-six percent of them failed.


Gordon Gray, Scottish Cardinal Influential in Rome, Is Dead at 82
Gordon Cardinal Gray, the spiritual leader of Scotland's 800,000 Roman Catholics since 1969, who was influential over the years in the liturgical policy of the Roman Catholic Church and its press relations, died Monday in Edinburgh.
He was 82 and lived in Edinburgh.
The Associated Press said Gardinal Gray entered Edinburgh Royal Infirmary last week suffering from a heart ailment.


Executive Changes
BLOOMINGDALE'S, New York, named Christine Miller executive vice president of marketing.
MICROSOFT CORP., Redmond, Wash., named Nathan Myhrvold, vice president of advanced technology and business development, as senior vice president of the group.


On-the-Spot Hearings for Aliens Are Considered
As part of its effort to crack down on illegal immigration, the Clinton Administration is expected to announce a plan this week to create a kind of night court for aliens, dispensing instant justice for those who arrive without proper documents and request political asylum.
The plan calls for an on-the-spot administrative hearing -- and then a quick appeal, if requested -- at all ports of entry.
It also calls for the speedy deportation of those who do not demonstrate a "credible fear" of persecution in their home country.
Major international airports, especially John F. Kennedy in New York, would have a special staff, while other ports of entry would rely on "circuit riders" who would go where needed.


Kestner Is Leading State Open By 6 Shots
The moment Darrell Kestner, the head pro at Deepdale (L.I.) Golf Club, walked away from the scorer's tent today, fellow golfers approached him to shake his hand.
He had broken 70 in each of the first two rounds of the Michelob New York State Open, accomplishing what no one else has in this field of 144 players.
After engineering a six-under-par 66 on opening day, the 39-year-old Kestner carved a three-under 69 in today's second round of the $65,000 tournament on the Albany Country Club course, which had the players baffled because of a swirling wind and tough pin placements.


Consolidated Rail reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Earnings Rose for Times Co. in 2d Quarter
The New York Times Company yesterday reported second-quarter earnings of $22.4 million, or 28 cents a share, up from $14 million, or 18 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1992.
The 1992 results were depressed by a labor disruption at The New York Times and an operating loss at The Gwinnett Daily News in Georgia, which was later closed.
Adjusting for those items, the 1992 profit would have been 27 cents a share.


Stadium Safety Questions Addressed in Wake of Fire
Safety procedures covering the possibility of fires at baseball parks are left to the individual clubs, the man in charge of major league baseball said yesterday.
"The parks have been built in so many different eras under so many different building codes," Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers said in a telephone interview.
"All clubs have their own procedures and the parks are covered by city ordinances. Adherence would have to be to the local codes."


Military Praises Gay Policy For Ambiguity and Caution
As lawmakers, lawyers and generals haggled over the details of President Clinton's policy toward homosexuals in the military, it became clear today that the Administration's plan was purposely ambiguous and differed only slightly from the current policy.
The policy led lawmakers today to push for more clarity, urging Pentagon officials to give precise definitions of the homosexual conduct and conditions that would prompt an investigation.
But commanders urged Congress to resist spelling out guidelines in too much detail.
They warned against limiting the discretion commanders need to judge individual cases on their own merits.


The Home of Gilbert and Sullivan Reopens After a Fire. With a Ballet.
The Savoy Theater, built by Richard D'Oyly Carte as a home for Gilbert and Sullivan's operettas and opened in 1881, was gutted by fire in February 1990.
On Monday night, lovingly restored, it reopened with a black-tie gala, complete with free Champagne for all and a banquet afterward in the Savoy Hotel, overlooking the Thames.
The only oddity was that the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company was nowhere in sight.
The company's absence has something to do with the faded fate of Gilbert and Sullivan in the modern, Andrew Lloyd Webberish world.
But it has even more to do with the perilous state of British arts finances, both in the commercial West End theater, of which the Savoy would again like to be a part, and in publicly supported arts institutions.


Ulster Talks Are Moribund; Growing Violence Is Feared
Eight months after the suspension of the British-sponsored talks to end the civil strife in Northern Ireland, British and Irish officials say the negotiations to end the violence that has killed 3,066 people since 1969 are moribund and quite unlikely to resume this year.
In Northern Ireland the attacks by the Roman Catholic Irish Republican Army and Protestant paramilitary groups continues, while the mood in Dublin, London and Belfast is of mistrust and ideological rigidity.


BUDGET HAGGLING BEGINS IN EARNEST
Some of the chief Democrats shepherding President Clinton's budget through a Congress thick with wolves met in a handful of ornate Capitol backrooms today, occasionally throwing out their staffs and abruptly slamming doors in reporters' faces.
This was a sign that discussions over the final form of Mr.
Clinton's five-year package of tax increases and spending cuts had started in earnest, ending several days of political cameos on television talk shows and speeches about party unity and sacrifice.


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
EMANUEL UNGARO, 60, finished showing his latest fashion collection in Paris Tuesday night, then entered the American Hospital there for a heart bypass operation.
He had learned of his condition while working on the collection but had postponed treatment until after the show.
He told friends he expected to be out of the hospital at the end of next week.


Woman, 84, Found Slain
An 84-year-old woman, her throat slashed, was found dead in a bathtub in her Brooklyn apartment yesterday, the police said.
A mattress was on top of the woman, Anna Bernstein, who was lying fully clothed in a small amount of water, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
There were no signs of forced entry or robbery in the apartment, on 85th Street in Bensonhurst, and the police said they did not know why the mattress had been placed on her.
Mrs.
Bernstein's son, who lives out of state, became concerned when his mother did not answer her phone for more than two days.
He called a cousin, who found the body.
The police had no suspects or motives for the killing.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE HARRISON has gone to court in Hawaii to prevent people from traipsing by the house he built on Maui, The Associated Press reported.
The former Beatle said he was unaware when he bought the land that it included a right-of-way so others could get to the beach.


Fruit of the Loom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Apache Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Women's Groups Protest the Handling of Violence Against Prostitutes


At The Office With Brian Sietsema; Man of Many Words, Each One Overheard
DR.
BRIAN SIETSEMA isn't the only 30-year-old who could pass for a college senior.
But chances are he's the only one whose doctoral thesis was on the metrical structure in Tanzanian tone languages, who can read 10 languages including Greek, Hebrew and Ugaritic, and whose idea of relaxation is studying and "caterwauling" (his word) Byzantine chants.
What has this to do with his present job?
Not a lot and quite a lot.
Tanzanian tone languages are not an essential qualification although, he says, language works on the same principle as music, with intonation governed by different meters.


'Dead Ringers': Final Twist in Sex Assault on Stepmother
When the police arrested a youth named Jesus yesterday and charged him with sexual assault and attempted murder, the suspect who was originally accused of the crime may have had mixed emotions about being cleared.
He was Jesus's identical twin, Eddie.
Adding to the crime's cruel oddity, the victim was the 16-year-old twins' stepmother, who could not tell them apart.
Under state law, the stepmother was not named, and The New York Times is withholding the youths' surname to shield her identity.


Old-Fashioned Heat Relief
To The Home Section:
"Remembering When Cool Heads Had to Prevail" (July 8) brought back memories of summers spent on my grandmother's farm in upstate New York -- where even fans were considered a luxury.
My grandmother's solution to the heat was to mix up a large pitcher of Kool-Aid, adding bits of ice chipped from the large block that cooled our wooden icebox.


Next Israeli Skirmish: Breaking Bureaucratic Grip
A traveler at Ben-Gurion Airport stood as a symbol last week of the distance some Israelis will go to evade the tangle of Government regulations, tariffs and penalties that rule their lives.
With customs inspectors on strike, he had wasted no time becoming a smuggler to get around the high taxes and protectionist import duties that make appliances here cost several times what they do in the United States.
Unfortunately for him, the inspectors returned to work with a vengeance just before he arrived, and they found 17 fax machines in his bags.


Brother of Bomb Suspect Held In Case Tied to Fake Passport
The brother of a man charged in the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets has been arrested for using a fake passport and will be moved from Brooklyn to Virginia to face trial, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
William M. Kunstler, the lawyer for the man, Mohamed Aly Abdu, also known as Mohamed Elgabrowney, said the arrest of Mr.
Abdu may be intended to put pressure on his brother Ibrahim Elgabrowny, a suspect in the foiled plot and the bombing of the World Trade Center.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings Qtr to June 30


2 Expected To Leave I.B.M. Board
Two veteran I.B.M. directors have decided to resign, clearing the way for the company's new chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., to reshape the composition of the board, according to a person close to the board.
The two directors resigning are J. Richard Munro, 62, former co-chief executive of Time Warner Inc., and Stephen D. Bechtel Jr., 68, chairman emeritus of the Bechtel Group Inc.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Campaign; Competence Is Campaign Focus After the Crown Heights Report
Firing the first shot at Mayor David N. Dinkins across the shifting ground of New York City's mayoral race, Rudolph W. Giuliani used the Crown Heights report yesterday to turn the electoral debate away from ethnic politics to competence and civic stewardship.
"New Yorkers will decide whether this was an isolated instance of failed leadership by the Mayor or whether it was part of a pattern which has serious implications for the city with regard to the budget, schools, health care, jobs, crime, drug control and many other components of our life," Mr.
Giuliani said in his first comment on the report, a prepared statement issued in Manhattan while he was in Washington for a fund-raising event with Republican Congressional figures.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Grunfeld Gets a Promotion
The Knicks made official today what everybody has known for days: Ernie Grunfeld has been promoted to vice president and general manager of the team.
As vice president for player personnel since 1991, Grunfeld, 38, had been responsible for player decisions, trades and the draft.
He will keep those duties along with becoming more involved in contract negotiations.


Books of The Times; Learning Better How to Link Up Computers and Education
The Children's Machine Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer By Seymour Papert Illustrated. 241 pages.
Basic Books/HarperCollins. $22.50
How do giraffes sleep?
A 4-year-old asked Seymour Papert this question when she learned that he had grown up in South Africa.
"My dog cuddles her head when she sleeps and so do I," the child said, "but the giraffe's head is so far away."
Although Mr.
Papert doesn't seem to have been able to answer the question, it prompted him to think about what he calls a Knowledge Machine, which would permit a curious child to explore an entire world of learning.
Such an instrument will not be long in coming, Mr.
Papert predicts in "The Children's Machine: Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer." We must only begin to teach children a form of nonprint literacy that he defines in contrast to what he calls letteracy.
We must only make better use of computers.
This message will not exactly start fingers rapping and toes tapping.
As the author himself admits, computers in most schools have so far served as expensive flashcard systems.
These schools have tended to confine the machines to computer labs, using them as objects of study instead of as tools for learning.
But Mr.
Papert has a vision.
He is a former colleague of the Swiss child-development theorist Jean Piaget and an expert on artificial intelligence and learning theory who teaches at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and he believes that more learning is involved in the playing of video games than educators have begun to acknowledge.
What is needed is a new theory of learning, or what he calls mathetics (from the Greek mathematikos, or "disposed to learn"), a word he introduced in his earlier book, "Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas." Mathetics, Mr.
Papert believes, will show that most struggling children, far from having learning disabilities, simply learn in different ways.
Like the subjects of Claude Levi-Strauss's anthropological study "The Savage Mind," children when learning practice bricolage, an almost untranslatable French word meaning roughly the art of tinkering or making do with materials at hand.
Mr.
Papert illustrates this point by relating his own experience of using an interest in etymology to overcome a block against learning the names and identities of flowers.
By a similar process of tinkering with disparate ideas, he invented the now-well-known computer language Logo, which he has used in elementary-school classrooms to study how children learn and think.
His experience has convinced him that many children, particularly girls, learn kinesthetically rather than abstractly.
Computers, he believes, can support this tendency by supplying feedback and building confidence.
Computers can fight what he calls androcentrism, or a male bias in technological culture.
All we have to do now is decentralize our top-heavy educational system, and redesign it from the bottom up.
Now, some readers who lived through the 1960's will no doubt flinch at the echoes here of a revolution that largely failed.
And Mr.
Papert's own program appears flawed in a several respects.
Most tantalizingly, he often fails to illustrate precisely how Logo helps children to learn.
Although he introduces many concrete examples, they sometimes trail off into vagueness.
For instance, he rhapsodizes about how a mathematically inclined boy collaborated with a physically graceful classmate to make Logo-programmed figures move more fluently, but he doesn't give us the dimmest clue to how this teaming up worked in practical application.
And for an educator concerned with the logic of thought, he has a scary disrespect for precise and succinct language.
"Why is there no word in English for the art of learning?" he asks at the beginning of the chapter in which he eventually introduces the word mathetics.
He then goes on in three 200-word paragraphs to pose the same question in several different ways and to conclude with this sentence: "The how-to-do-it literature in the constructivist subculture is almost as strongly biased to the teacher side as it is in the instructionist subculture." Such prose lulls the mind to sleep.
Maybe it's not quite time to rename literacy letteracy and relegate print culture to left field.
Still, "The Children's Machine" is often bold and adventurous.
Mr.
Papert's point is not that the map of computer education has been drawn and laid out to follow, but rather that the possibilities have been glimpsed in a way comparable to the 59-second flight at Kitty Hawk, N.C., and that imaginative teachers should now be asking, "How high the moon?"
If some of Mr.
Papert's examples are vaporous, others are wonderfully concrete.
In a section called "Kitchen Math," he describes the inventiveness of nonabstract thinkers like a cook who measures out two-thirds of a cup and a half of flour by forming a pie of the latter amount, dividing it into thirds, returning one of them to the flour bag and using what's left over.
Similarly inspired is Mr.
Papert's comparison of President George Bush's master plan on education to the Soviet Union's command economy: "His remedies were the remedies the bureaucratic mind proposes indiscriminately for every situation: Issue orders; tighten controls. Weakness in results can mean only that people are lazy and that a good system of tests will expose them."
Just think: Mr.
Papert's solution to America's educational ills lies in breaking down the centralized bureaucracy and holding a market-economy competition.
Hackers of all schools, start your engines!


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


NBC Says CBS Stole A Show For Spite
The sniping between CBS and NBC over the rights to David Letterman's previous comedy material escalated here yesterday as NBC executives said CBS had snatched a show from the NBC lineup "out of pique" over the Letterman dispute.
CBS executives said NBC, reacting to newspaper reports that were making NBC's stand on the Letterman issue look petty, was deliberately misinterpreting CBS's motives.


Racial Remark Stalls Job Seeker
A finalist for the presidency of Michigan State University has run into trouble over a remark he made in 1989: "A black athlete can actually outjump a white athlete."
The candidate, Dale W. Lick, president of Florida State University in Tallahassee, was named on Friday as a finalist for the Michigan State position, which has been open since John DiBiaggio left in August to become president of Tufts University in Boston.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 16
July 9
July 17
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.1
Gasoline stocks
217.3
222.0
220.8
Distillate stocks
117.1
114.6
108.4
Crude imports, daily
7.9
7.1
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.8
1.6
Crude stocks
360.0
353.8
323.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
95.6
96.9
92.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Chair Woman For the Bored
ALIDA MORGAN, a Manhattan artist, gives hand-painted furniture an urbane twist.
Gone are the classic cabbage roses, hearts and vines.
"Painted furniture dates back to the Venetians, whose gold treatments were sophisticated yet whimsical," Ms.
Morgan said.
"That's what I'm after." Her designs are bold: speckled trout in a butter-yellow stream, oak and maple leaves on a scarlet lawn, the Queen of Hearts and Ace of Spades.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet President Ascends to Chief Executive
The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation said yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, Robert E. Weissman, would become chief executive on Jan. 1, a planned succession that was generally praised by industry analysts.
Charles W. Morris, currently the chairman and chief executive, will remain as chairman, the company said.


Colgate-Palmolive reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chubb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Test Week Every Week For Yankees
IN George Steinbrenner's new career as a slumlord, this is "test week" for Yankee fans.
If the Yankees some day desert the Bronx, the principal owner apparently will transfer the blame to all those who don't rush to Yankee Stadium for the weekend series with the California Angels that begins tonight.
Or to those who wisely missed yesterday's 10-3 rout by the Seattle Mariners.
In other words, if the Yankees move to the Meadowlands or to Mars, it will be on your conscience, not his.


Destec Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Scene; Japan's powerful civil servants resist a dose of deficit spending.
"WHAT the world needs from Japan is a sustained period of domestic demand-led growth," Lawrence H. Summers told a group of movers-and-shakers from the Japanese business community.
The lecture, delivered by the Under Secretary of the Treasury on the eve of the Tokyo summit meeting, was not the first the Japanese had heard on this theme.
Nor, with President Clinton gearing up for his international "jobs summit" and Congress itching to shove some Toyotas off the pier, is it likely to be the last: Most Western economists believe a big tax cut would be the best way -- perhaps the only practical way -- for Japan to get Washington off its back.
But even if the executives wholeheartedly agreed, they would probably not be able to make their opinions felt.
For in contrast to virtually every other modern democracy, the inner circle of Japanese economic policy-making is dominated by deeply conservative civil servants adept at resisting interest group pressure.
"They are pre-Keynesians," concludes John Makin of the American Enterprise Institute, bureaucrats who would rather "risk a 1930's-style depression" than use deficit finance to stimulate the economy.
There is still a chance, though, that the better-than-expected electoral showing of the Liberal Democratic Party -- and the relative failure of the splinter Japan Renewal Party that was not-so-quietly backed by the Ministry of Finance -- will lead to changes previously beyond the reach of big business.
Ironically, suggests Jan VanDenBerg, an economist formerly at Merrill Lynch who is now writing a book about Japan, the old line L.D.P. that lost its credibility as servants of the commonweal "is on the side of good sense."
Japan's economic growth slowed to a crawl in 1991 and actually slipped into reverse in the second half of 1992.
By no coincidence, imports fell sharply, reopening the yawning trade gap that had largely been closed in the late 1980's.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development forecasts that Japan's current account surplus, the broadest measure of its financial balance with the rest of the world, will reach a record $150 billion next year.
What's more, unemployment will continue to creep up.
The Western medicine of choice would be a dose of fiscal stimulus, increasing demand for both domestic products and imports.
Cutting taxes, particularly on consumer goods, would be the speediest means to that end.
And it would probably be the most popular, giving Japan's involuntarily ascetic citizenry a chance at a better life.
But Shafiqul Islam, an economist at the Council on Foreign Relations, points with considerable sympathy to the ideological barriers to opening the fiscal spigot.
During the 1970's, Japan's ruling politicians fell into habits of deficit spending not unlike America's in the 1980's.
And the hard-won success of the bureaucracy in wrestling the budget back into the black, he notes, has left a deep mark on the Ministry of Finance: "They now feel it's their responsibility to keep the budget balanced." Robert Z. Lawrence, an economist at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, is less reverent about what he sees as a power grab in the face of a weakening government: "The Ministry of Finance gets its jollies by saying no," he concludes.
Two big fiscal packages, announced with fanfare by the Miyazawa Cabinet in August 1992 and April 1993, were both trimmed back by the bureaucrats.
Mr.
Makin estimates they will ultimately deliver one-third of the promised punch.
Ms.
VanDerBerg thinks the effective stimulus could be even smaller, reflecting an idiosyncrasy of Japanese Government finance.
Since the deficit debacles of the 1970's, she points out, the Ministry of Finance has refused to issue bonds to cover operating budget deficits; only "construction" bonds used to finance public works, are permitted.
Thus a shortfall in tax revenues, stemming from the unusually slow recovery, is almost guaranteed to cause a cutback in nonconstruction outlays by Tokyo.
The reversal of fortune of the Liberal Democratic Party in the wake of one too many financial scandals might be expected to strengthen the bureaucrats' capacity to resist calls for any change in economic policy.
But this time the Ministry of Finance may have outsmarted itself.
By most reports, the economic bureaucrats were banking on the total collapse of the L.D.P., with the void to be filled by a coalition led by their ally, former Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata.
Now it appears that the L.D.P. will once again be able to cobble together a government -- one that will have strong incentives to punish the mandarins for playing power politics.
It is unclear whether the Japanese Parliament would be able to marshal the expertise, let alone the will, to manage economic policy without the advice and consent of the bureaucracy.
But, then, many things about post-election Japan are unclear.
This time, at least, the L.D.P. could publicly reconcile its inclination to old-style patronage finance as the solution to Japan's very new problem of Western-style slow growth.


C.I.A. Officers Played Role In Sheik Visas
Central Intelligence Agency officers reviewed all seven applications made by Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman to enter the United States between 1986 and 1990 and only once turned him down because of his connections to terrorism, Government officials said today.
The disclosure reveals far more extensive C.I.A. involvement than has previously been known in granting the radical Egyptian cleric an American visa on as many as four separate occasions.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman's followers include central suspects in the World Trade Center bombing, and his entry into the United States followed what Clinton Administration officials have described as an appalling series of Government blunders.


A Little Ceiling In Your Coffee?
AS coffee bars proliferate, so does a design trend for these tiny spaces: minimalism.
The Jonathan Morr Espresso Bar, which opened July 9 at 1394 Avenue of the Americas (57th Street), is not only spare but also futuristic.


Newell Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gap Shuffles Its Management Team
The Gap Inc., the first specialty retailer to make fashion statements of blue jeans and T-shirts, yesterday announced several management changes.
The moves reflect the effort by the company to give its four divisions distinct identities and streamline its corporate office.
Millard Drexler, the Gap's president and top merchant, was given the additional post of chief operating officer.
The appointment gives a formal title to Mr.
Drexler's job of overseeing the four divisions and clearly defines his position as second only to Donald G. Fisher, founder, chairman and chief executive.


Victims of the Storms
For more than a month now, the Mississippi, the Missouri, the Des Moines, rivers all over the Midwest, have been bursting levees, drowning crops and entire towns, shutting down roads and bridges, and forcing thousands of people from their homes.
The losses are staggering: 16 million acres of farmland under water, property damage estimated at $10 billion.


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Offers 350 Troops to U.N. Force for Haiti
The United States has offered to send about 350 troops and military engineers to Haiti as part of an international force to help retrain Haiti's army and work on military construction projects as the country returns to democracy, senior American officials said today.
Clinton Administration and United Nations officials had made the pledge of military assistance in conversations with Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and with the country's ruling military leadership during the recent negotiations that led to an agreement on a political settlement early this month.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Curtiss-Wright Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No, America Won't Forget Tiananmen Sq.
To the Editor:
Kenneth Lieberthal suggests that America should now forget the students of Tiananmen Square and befriend Beijing's Communists diplomatically and economically, because "China is too important" not to ("Forget the Tiananmen Fixation," Op-Ed, July 14).


Bruno Agrees to Oct. 1 Bout With Lewis
Passing up a chance to make far more money by facing a more renowned champion, FRANK BRUNO, the popular British heavyweight, has agreed to fight LENNOX LEWIS, the World Boxing Council champion, in Cardiff, Wales, on Oct. 1.
According to his manager, MICKEY DUFF, Bruno, who will make a reported $1.5 million or so, turned down an offer of "considerably more" money to fight RIDDICK BOWE, holder of the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles, in the United States.


First Small Steps to Being Captains of Their Ships


FirstFed Michigan (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO. (N)
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that declining sales of Capoten, its banner heart drug, led a 1 percent decline in pharmaceutical sales in the second quarter, compared with a strong showing in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The company said overall sales were up 2 percent in the quarter, reflecting sales increases for consumer products, led by Clairol hair coloring, and gains in the sales of medical devices and infant formula.


Where Once Only Garbage Grew, a Secret Garden
There's a new buzz coming to a Bronx neighborhood that stands on the cusp between urban disaster and revitalization.
It is not the buzz of summers past, the sound of windows shaking with the violent vibrations of a passing car's stereo at full blast, or the buzz teen-agers feel from the marijuana sold openly in their streets.
This time, it is the gentle sound of honeybees drawn to a patch of climbing hydrangea nestled in Manhattan euonymus and honey locust, all freshly planted in a triangular lot behind a towering tenement in Morris Heights.


U.S. Won't Act in Bosnia Until the Europeans Do
With Serbian forces advancing near the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, the Clinton Administration has decided to do nothing more to help Bosnia and has blamed the Europeans for the mounting crisis .
Today Secretary of State Warren Christopher called the deteriorating situation in Bosnia "the world's most difficult diplomatic problem," but added, "The United States is doing all that it can consistent with our national interest."


Yanks' Fans Give Bronx A Cheer
Two surveys commissioned by George Steinbrenner over the past four years demonstrate that the Yankees seriously risk alienating their New York fan base if they abandon the Bronx for a new ball park in New Jersey.
In a 1989 poll of 971 season and non-season ticket-holders that was obtained by The New York Times, 77 percent of New York City residents and 79 percent of residents from Westchester, Putnam, Rockland and Orange Counties said they would attend fewer or no games in a New Jersey Meadowlands ball park.


THE MIDWEST FLOODING: The Fallen; Friends and Family, Lost to Mean Rivers
A month later, people here still talk about how suddenly the storm came up that mid-June afternoon, and how hard it rained: Three inches in 30 minutes.
The volunteer fire chief, Steve Meyer, was in his basement lifting weights when his wife, Teresa, returned from grocery shopping, soaked and shaken.
"You wouldn't believe what I just drove through, how torrential the rains were," she said.


Television Coverage Of Senate Hearings
The Senate Judiciary Committee's confirmation hearings on Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg's nomination to the Supreme Court will be covered live today, beginning at 10 A.M., Eastern daylight time, by the Public Broadcasting Service.
The service will provide coverage to its affiliates, which have the option to carry the hearings in their entirety or break away for other programming from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
The service will not cover the hearings after 7 P.M.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Airlines reported its first quarterly profit in almost two years, and a top executive invited the airline's unions to discuss an equity stake.
The company coupled the invitation with a threat to eliminate service in less-profitable markets.  [ Page D1. ]
The airline fare war of 1992 is being retraced in a Federal courtroom, where Continental and Northwest accuse American of "predatory pricing" to put them out of business.  [ D1. ]


Long and Straight at Crooked Stick
More than its male counterpart, the United States Women's Open is about power.
In recent years, its winners have included exceptionally strong hitters like Laura Davies and Betsy King.
And even though the defending champion is the moderately long hitting Patty Sheehan, the grueling Oakmont Country Club course near Pittsburgh that she won on last year featured several par-4 holes that much of the field could not reach in two shots.
At the Crooked Stick Golf Club in Carmel, Ind., where the 48th Women's Open begins today, power will again be at a premium.
Crooked Stick is where John Daly gripped it and ripped it to win the 1991 PGA Championship in Bunyanesque style.
And this week, it might be where another long hitter emerges.


Anchor Away: Elliott Is Still Unsigned
One could easily argue that Giants lineman Jumbo Elliott may be the most critical player on the offense.
Anchored at left tackle, he protects quarterback Phil Simms from defenses that are trying to blindside him.
Running back Rodney Hampton has had back-to-back 1,000-yard seasons and Elliott is a big part of the reason why.
The Giants desperately need him in camp.
But when will they get him?
Elliott's agent, Marvin Demoff, had thus far been silent throughout his client's absence.
Elliott has been silent, too.
But today Demoff spoke out.
And while Demoff didn't put a timetable on when his client would rejoin the team, it didn't sound like it would be soon.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many children and adolescents, experimenting with petty crime is a part of growing up.
It may be a way to fit in with a group or to test the limits of acceptable behavior.
To the child, taking a "five-finger discount" on some makeup at the drugstore or spray-painting a name on a wall may seem relatively harmless, especially when compared with violent crimes.
But psychologists and criminologists urge parents to pay close attention to such incidents, for they may be the child's cry for help with other issues.
There are patterns of behavior that predict which children treat delinquency as a passing phase and which graduate to more serious crimes as adolescents and adults.


THE CROWN HEIGHTS REPORT: The Overview; Reno Seeks Quick Inquiry On Civil-Rights Charges
As pressure arrived at her doorstep yesterday, Attorney General Janet Reno said her department would decide "as expeditiously as possible" whether to seek Federal civil-rights prosecutions stemming from the four days of violence in Crown Heights two years ago.
One New York Representative, Nita M. Lowey, said that at a meeting with the Attorney General yesterday morning, Ms.
Reno had promised a detailed investigation that would be concluded as rapidly as possible.
She said she won the same assurances in a lengthy telephone call with Zachary W. Carter, the Federal prosecutor in Brooklyn.


Utility's Rate Rise Is Limited
The State of Arizona has decided to grant the Citizens Utilities Company a $2.6 million rate increase for electricity; the company had requested $7.7 million.
The decision on Tuesday, which becomes final when Arizona's three commissioners sign it later this week, disallows several expenses that the company had included in its rate application and is less generous than the $3.1 million compromise suggested by a hearing officer, Lyn Farmer, on July 2.
An Arizona consumer group had sought a $1.3 million reduction.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


The Wet-Sheet Trick
To The Home Section:
I enjoyed reading the ways various families coped with the heat before air-conditioning.
My mother's method was different.
She dunked a bed sheet in cold water, barely squeezed out the water and then hung it on a cord, which she strung across the bedroom.
The sheet took the heat out of the room as it dried, we were told, and we woke up refreshed.
ADELAY LISS Brooklyn


Lassoing the Nuclear Renegades
The Clinton Administration is making painstaking progress toward a crucial post-cold-war objective: shutting down nuclear arms-making in North Korea and Iraq.
It has sensibly decided that stripping two dangerous outlaws of the capacity to blow up the rest of the world is far more important than satisfying each and every technical doubt along the way.
Critics focus impatiently on two questions: Will North Korea accept special inspections of two nuclear waste sites that could show how much bomb-making plutonium it already has?
Will Iraq yield the names of those who supplied its nuclear technology?
Until Pyongyang and Baghdad say yes to those questions, neither will have lived up to its international obligations.


Washington Heights Violence Has Deep Roots
To the Editor:
We are writing in response to news media coverage of the "night of violence" in Manhattan's Washington Heights section on July 10.
We do not condone the attack on firefighters.
Yet, as with last summer's riots, these events reflect deep, longstanding problems in the community and cannot be dismissed as irrational.


Report Says Traffic Increased Plane Crash Toll
The massing of emergency vehicles was partly to blame for hours of delays in getting survivors of a 1990 airplane crash to hospitals, which may have raised the death toll by 20 percent, according to a report by Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Of the 158 people on the Avianca Airlines plane coming to Kennedy International Airport from Bogota, Colombia, in January 1990, 73 people, including 8 of the 9 crew members, died.
The report said the deaths of 17 of those were caused in part by loss of blood.


Racing Off To New Athletic Titles
Able-bodied people look at a wheelchair and see confinement.
Mike Savicki sees the road race ahead.
"Racing is like a simplified version of life," Savicki said.
"It's you and the chair and how fast can you go. No doors in the way, no curbs to bounce over, it's just, 'See how fast you can go.' That's why I love racing."


Union Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In a Day-Care Case, New Questions, Few Answers
In the curious way that the camera eye sometimes finds itself in the view finder, a new public-television documentary about this town's notorious day-care sexual-abuse case has now become a central part of the story.
The four-hour program, "Innocence Lost: The Verdict," calls into question the fairness of the trials that led to long prison terms for two workers found guilty of molesting preschoolers at the Little Rascals Day Care Center here.
And if the case itself tore this gracious old town apart, pitting neighbor against neighbor, the documentary has raised thorny legal issues that will surely prolong the agony.


Long-Distance Giants Find Strength Amid Price Wars
After years of brutal price wars, the once viciously competitive long-distance telephone business is turning into a surprisingly cozy and profitable industry.
After plunging by about 40 percent since the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, prices of long-distance calls are beginning to inch up as costs are coming down.
This means fatter profits for the long-distance companies, and fewer bargains for customers.


Kirtilal M. Mehta, 86; Built a Gem Company
Kirtilal M. Mehta, who worked in the gem industry for nearly 75 years and built an international wholesale diamond business, died on Tuesday in a hospital in Antwerp, Belgium.
He was 86 and lived in Antwerp and Tel Aviv.
He had a long illness, a family spokesman said.


Bogey, Bogey, Bogey, But Kestner Survives
Just when it looked as if the six-stroke lead he held at the beginning of the day was about to evaporate amid a streak of bogeys by himself and a run of birdies by his closest challenger, Darrell Kestner righted himself today and went on to capture the $65,000 Michelob New York State Open at Albany Country Club.
The 39-year-old Kestner recovered from three consecutive bogeys on the front nine to win his first major tournament since he became the head pro at the Deepdale Golf Club in Manhasset, L.I., four years ago.


Free Trade's Fine, as Long as It's Really Free
To the Editor:
In "The Lies of Nafta's Critics" (Op-Ed, July 13), Patrick J. Lucey, former United States Ambassador to Mexico, accuses critics of the North American Free Trade Agreement of "outrageous disregard for the facts." That unfortunate method of debate is especially regrettable if the accuser's assertions are also open to question.
He asserts: "Mexico is already America's fastest-growing export market. Between 1986 and 1992, United States exports to Mexico have soared 230 percent -- creating more than 400,000 jobs."


Texaco's Earnings Double Despite Decline in Revenue
Texaco Inc. reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings more than doubled.
It attributed the performance to higher domestic natural gas prices and an increase in the production of international oil.
Net income totaled $309 million, or $1.10 a share, up from $151 million, or 49 cents a share, in the corresponding period the year before.
The higher income came despite a small decline in revenue, which slipped 3.5 percent, to $9.07 billion.


Indian Monsoon Brings Floods and Landslides; Death Toll Is 500
India's monsoon, the summer rains whose arrival is anxiously awaited by farmers, came with a vengeance this year.
More than 500 people have been killed, hundreds of thousands driven from their homes and farms, and perhaps hundreds of millions of dollars in agricultural production lost.
Vast areas of the country's breadbasket, the Punjab and Harayana, have been inundated by rains and swollen rivers, and the entire northeast, lands of tea plantations and tropical forests, has been severed from the rest of the country.


Summer Air Fares Are Up Sharply Despite Return of Multiple Prices
In a turnabout that has surprised even airline officials, the average ticket price is sharply higher this year -- not only compared with air fares last summer, when a half-price sale helped put 24 million Americans in the air, but with those in the first six months of 1991.
With money-losing carriers striving to show profits, the increase shows signs of holding, despite sporadic sales, and even though upstart regional carriers are forcing the biggest airlines to lower prices on competitive routes.


Serbs' Attack on Sarajevo Keeps Bosnians From Talks
Serbian heavy artillery pounded Sarajevo today with one of the heaviest bombardments in months, prompting the Bosnian Government to delay attending a new round of peace talks with Serbian and Croatian nationalists in Geneva.
The talks were to resume on Friday, and the Government's decision caused the international mediators, Lord Owen of Britain and Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway, to delay the opening until Sunday.
The mediators seemed to hope that the Serbian forces would ease their attacks, meeting one of the conditions set by Bosnia for attending the talks.


The Midwest Flooding; Like Sandbags, Flood Losses Pile Up
With heavy rains and overflowing rivers continuing to inundate the Midwest, many companies and individuals are canceling construction plans, postponing car purchases and asking creditors for deferrals of payments as they assess their losses.
The Des Moines Chamber of Commerce estimated this evening that lost sales from the flood amounted to $525 million in that city alone, and were nearly three times greater than the $182 million in damage to business property.
Federal Reserve economists in St.
Louis and Chicago said the figures showed the flood's extensive damage to the Midwest, although they cautioned that some of Des Moines' sales may have been diverted to neighboring towns, and that Des Moines had been particularly hard hit because the city lost its running water for 12 days.


REWARD IS STYMIED IN TOWERS BOMBING
A plan to offer up to $2 million in Government money for information about a missing suspect in the World Trade Center bombing has been stymied since mid-April by a dispute over what agency should foot the bill, officials acknowledged today.
The disagreement between the State Department and Federal Bureau of Investigation has meant that the United States has still not offered a reward for information about Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who is believed to have fled to Iraq soon after the attack.
The officials say privately that they fear the United States may have squandered a crucial chance to track down Mr.
Yousef before he disappeared in the Middle East.


Sports of The Times; The Debate: Athletes as Role Models
IT has become something of a common practice for major league baseball to borrow from the successes of the National Basketball Association.
Rookie development seminars, All-Star weeks as opposed to a single-day event, even All-Star N.B.A. home-run hitters come to mind.
So it seems natural that the game also delve into the N.B.A.'s pet issue of the year: should players be role models?
So far, no baseball player has chosen to echo the sound-bite sentiments of Charles Barkley.
He stirred a tremendous debate when an otherwise intriguing message that urged parents to set the standards for children was lost in the opening line of a television ad in which he said he was not a role model.


New Jersey Blue Cross Reverses Policy
Under mounting pressure from the Legislature, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey today reversed its decision to offer only managed health care in the state and said it would also offer a range of contracts for people who buy their own insurance.
The decision represents a truce between insurers and lawmakers who had accused the company of circumventing a sweeping 1992 revision of insurance laws aimed at aiding the 830,000 people in New Jersey who had no health insurance.


BANKAMERICA CORP. (N)
The BankAmerica Corporation reported essentially flat results yesterday, reflecting the slow California economy.
The country's second-largest banking company earned $488 million for the quarter that ended June 30, compared with $240 million for the same period a year earlier.


Rikers Guard Is Accused Of Arranging to Be Shot
At first, Correction Officer Tommy Jones sounded like a hero.
Officer Jones, a guard at a Rikers Island jail, said that he had been shot in the thigh while single-handedly breaking up a melee among 48 inmates on Jan. 2.
But yesterday he was arrested and charged with having arranged for two inmates to shoot him to cover up his role in a tangled gun-smuggling plot.
New York City's Investigation Commissioner, Susan E. Shepard, said Mr.
Jones's role was uncovered in a broader investigation into inmates deliberately shooting themselves that began last year.
As many as 10 inmates in the last three years have arranged to suffer minor bullet wounds in order to sue the city or obtain improved accommodations, the Investigation Department said.
First Plan Goes Awry
Ms.
Shepard said another correction officer, Roger A. Morice, smuggled a .22-caliber derringer into the George R. Vierno Correctional Center on Rikers Island late last year for two inmates awaiting trials on murder charges.
Officer Morice was promised $3,000 to $5,000 for bringing in the weapon, Ms.
Shepard said.


BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP. (N)
The tumult in European currency and bond markets helped Bankers Trust increase its earnings by 35 percent in the second quarter.
The nation's seventh-largest banking company said yesterday that it earned $251 million, up from $186 million in the period a year ago.
The company earned $2.97 a share, sharply higher than the $2.16 analysts expected.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Arco Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Refugee Panic Act of 1993
America, true to its tradition of sheltering the oppressed, guarantees due process to all who claim asylum here.
Recently, however, America has devalued that guarantee.
Public anxieties about job competition and terrorists as well as plain racism have so frightened Washington that it's been intercepting shiploads of Haitians and Chinese on the high seas before they can get a fair hearing on their claims of persecution.
Now the Clinton Administration, in cooperation with senators from both parties, is about to unveil a politically driven, poorly targeted package of legal changes, tentatively called the Expedited Exclusion and Asylum Reform Act of 1993.


TV Listings
On Fridays, television and radio news and listings now appear at the end of section D, with Home Video.
Today, pages D15-16.


Pitney Bowes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Hamptons' New Places for Dining Out Have a Close-to-Home Appeal
Basking in the summer sun, this year's crop of new Hamptons restaurants is putting America first, forsaking Tuscany to find culinary inspiration closer to home on eastern Long Island.
The dominant theme at almost all the places that have opened this season is straightforward, contemporary American food, with an emphasis on seafood and on locally produced ingredients.
Long Island wines, and even Long Island beers, are served with pride.


Genuine Parts reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about Tuesday's stock market trading misidentified the products made by the Amtech Corporation.
They are electronic identification tags for vehicles, not anti-shoplifting devices.


41,000 Graduates Await the Test of a Lifetime
"This is war," said Brad Call, who had just graduated from George Washington Law School.
"It's war, man."
Still, he seemed calm for someone who had spent $1,000 on a review course and had been studying 10 hours a day since early June.


Crown Heights Officers Say They Feel Betrayed
"We're the ones who have to go back out there," the officer from the 71st Precinct in Crown Heights was saying.
"We're the ones who have to make the split-second decisions. If we turn to a commander and he turns away, I mean if that happens again, where does that leave us? We'll be blamed no matter what."
Two days after the release of a state finding that New York City's police commanders, including the Commissioner at the time, Lee P. Brown, had given officers little direction or leadership on handling the disturbances in Crown Heights in 1991, the officers of the 71st described themselves as "betrayed" and "abandoned," rejected and misunderstood.


Penn Central Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Good Ol' Steve Earle
Steve Earle, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-7880.
In the mid- and late 80's, Steve Earle's twangy, low guitar, rebel attitude and breathtaking songs about lovers, loners and losers helped rejuvenate country music.
Although albums like "Guitar Town" and "Exit 0" never racked up big-league sales or chart positions, they served as a reminder that behind country's facade of good ol' conservatism lurks a dark, reckless heart.
Like a true iconoclast, Mr.
Earle then moved beyond country into folk and rock.
This acoustic show, his first appearance in the metropolitan area in more than two years, allows a framework for characters like the death-row inmate of "Billy Austin" or the over-the-hill football hero of "No. 29" to come shining through.
Shows are tomorrow night at 8 and 11.
Tickets are $15.


Walter D. Fackler, 71, Economist Known for Accurate Predictions
Walter D. Fackler, an economist known for the accuracy of his annual forecasts of national trends, died yesterday at a hospital in Chicago.
He was 71 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Pentagon Keeps Silent on Rejected Gay Troop Plan
Back in April, the Defense Department commissioned two studies on how to carry out President Clinton's intention to lift the military's ban on homosexuals.
One, conducted by a panel of generals and admirals, led to the new policy.
But the Pentagon is refusing to make public or even talk much about the other one, a $1.3 million report by the influential Rand Corporation.


METRO DIGEST
BICKERING STALLS BOMB PLOT REWARD
A plan to offer up to $2 million in Federal Government money for information about a missing suspect in the World Trade Center bombing has been stymied since mid-April by a dispute over what agency should foot the bill, officials have acknowledged.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
SPLIT AT TOP HURT CROWN HTS. RESPONSE
When he was quizzed by state investigators about a lack of coordination between City Hall and the Police Department as the Dinkins administration responded to the Crown Heights violence, former Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch said, "My position was always, whether that was good or bad, was that we worked different sides of the street." A1.


Conferees on Budget Agree To Raise Tax Rate on Rich
Inching toward a final deficit-reduction bill, House and Senate conferees agreed today to a steep increase in the top Federal income tax rate and to leave the capital gains tax rate unchanged.
This was one of the easiest matters for the conferees to resolve.
They basically split the difference between the House and the Senate bills, which were quite similar to begin with.


CHRONICLE
CLAUDE MONTANA, the French fashion designer, and WALLIS FRANKEN, a former model, were married yesterday in the town hall of the seventh arrondisement in Paris.
The couple first became engaged 18 years ago.
The civil ceremony was performed by Anne-Marie Coudert, the deputy mayor of the 13th arrondisement and a member of the National Assembly, before some 100 guests, who included the bride's 2-month-old granddaughter and the bridegroom's dog, a Shar-Pei.


72 Hours of Relief; Center Tackles Family Crises
Shatava Barnes, a recovering drug addict, was at the end of her rope, close to a nervous breakdown.
Her 3-month-old daughter, Raven, seemed to sense it, and was screaming and shaking in her mother's arms.
"I was crying and holding her tight in my arms," said Ms.
Barnes, who is 22 years old and homeless.
"I wouldn't let anybody take her. My mind was really playing tricks on me, and I was scared they wanted to take her away from me."


Hear That? It's the Still-in-the-Bronx Bombers
The first one was a neatly placed shot, drifting high and barely landing deep enough to climb the right-field fence.
The next one was awesome, zooming toward the deepest part of Yankee Stadium and disappearing over the 408-foot sign.
Then there were two three-run bullets -- one barreling to left field and the other rocketing to right -- before one more prodigious blast to left completed the power picture.
No, this was not batting practice or a home run-hitting contest.
This was Yankees-Angels.
This was 12-1 for the Yankees and Jim Abbott.
This was the result of the Yankees bashing five homers in a game for the first time in three years, including back-to-back moments twice.
This was eight splendid innings of pitching from Abbott.
This is when baseball is fun, for the team hitting the homers, that is.


Plan to Insure Abortion Survives an Early Vote
Using an arcane procedure and careful vote counting, Democratic abortion-rights supporters won a skirmish today over whether Federal employees' health insurance could cover abortions.
By a 15-to-14 vote in the Senate Appropriations Committee, they killed a measure that would have prohibited insurance plans financed by the Federal Government from paying for abortions except in cases of rape, incest or threats to the life of the mother.
The provision was approved by a subcommittee earlier this week.


In the Margins of 2 Minorities: A Double Fringe
Until very recently, to be a black gay man in America meant being relegated to the margins of two minority cultures, each with its own agenda.
But in the last three years, the invisibility of this dual minority has been strikingly challenged on several fronts.
Jennie Livingston's documentary about voguing, "Paris Is Burning," Marlon Riggs's video movie "Tongues Untied," Madonna's tour film "Truth or Dare" and most recently, the rise of the black drag-queen pop star RuPaul have brought the black gay experience proudly and sassily out of the closet.
Not everyone is pleased.
In the realm of performance art, the way is being led by Pomo Afro Homos, a San Francisco troupe whose pieces explore black gay identity with a mixture of biting humor and campy playfulness.
The group, which is performing its newest piece, "Dark Fruit," at Alice Tully Hall this evening as part of the Serious Fun festival, made its debut in a San Francisco cabaret two and a half years ago.
Since then, in tours across the country, the Pomos, as they are nicknamed, have won warm critical approval and several awards, but they have also encountered resistance and hostility.


Twain Said It First
To the Editor:
Reader's of Larry Doyle's "Be Inventive. Write Biography" (Op-Ed, July 9) might be amused to find that his parody disclaimer of social purpose for "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" was anticipated by Mark Twain, who prefaced his book thus: "Persons attempting to find a motive in this narrative will be prosecuted; persons attempting to find a moral in it will be banished; persons attempting to find a plot in it will be shot." VICTOR PESKIN, HARVEY PESKIN Berkeley, Calif., July 10, 1993


Review/Film; A Fake Mom and Dad And the Boy Next Door
"Another Stakeout" is made for the kind of person whom television drives out of the house to the movies but who doesn't want surprises when he arrives at the theater.
It's big-screen television fare.
Directed by John Badham, written by Jim Kouf and starring Richard Dreyfuss and Emilio Estevez, the film is not only a sequel to the same team's "Stakeout" (1987), but also to approximately 9 out of every 10 comic-cop movies made.
This time the policemen played by Mr.
Dreyfuss and Mr.
Estevez are joined by Rosie O'Donnell, who appears as an assistant district attorney.
The three are assigned to stake out a house in an upscale island community near Seattle.
Their goal is to find a key witness in the trial of some Las Vegas mobsters.
Their cover: Mr.
Dreyfuss and Ms.
O'Donnell will pretend to be the happily married parents of Mr.
Estevez.


Change in 'Aladdin' Lyrics Looks Like Cowardly Censorship; A Hopeful Sign
To the Editor:
Re "It's Racist, but Hey, It's Disney" (editorial, July 14):
True, the talented creative people who made "Aladdin" exhibited no sensitivity when they vilified every Arab except Aladdin, Jasmine and her father in that remarkable picture.
Neither did they consider what an odious lesson would be taught by a film in which all the characters were Arabs, but where all the good guys spoke unaccented American English, while all the bad guys had accents.


TV Weekend; Equal Injustice for All In Political Spoof Show
The new series "Politically Incorrect," having its premiere on Comedy Central on Sunday, describes itself as a funny version of "The McLaughlin Report." That's odd.
Perhaps what's needed is a "McLaughlin Report" that isn't laughable.
Actually "Politically Incorrect," obviously working on a weekly budget of $3.98, has the look of a "Saturday Night Live" sketch about how political correctness might be handled on a small-town public-access channel.
The effect is curiously endearing.
The show was created by the comedian Bill Maher, who also serves as host.
At a quick glance, Mr.
Maher could be mistaken for Bill Murray before he started losing his hair.
In each half hour, Mr.
Maher and four guest panelists sit elbow-to-elbow on a cramped stage pondering with one-line zingers such burning issues as sex addiction or sin vs. disease.
The point, according to Comedy Central, is to "puncture both the liberal and conservative ideas of the day." The real point, of course, is to drum up a few laughs.


Fed Abandons Policy Tied to Money Supply
The Federal Reserve said today that the main yardstick it used in guiding the economy's growth for more than 15 years had become so unreliable that it would largely abandon it.
Alan Greenspan, the central bank's chairman, said the Federal Reserve would stop relying on growth in the money supply -- its traditional tool -- and begin relying on interest rates, an approach more akin to the way it worked before it started relying on the money supply figures.
Changes in Investments
In an appearance before the Senate Banking Committee today, Mr.
Greenspan said the central bank was jettisoning the money supply approach because changes in the way Americans invest their money meant it could no longer predict how much economic growth would be produced by a certain amount of growth in the money supply.


G.O.P. Forces a Vote on Scandal Records
In an attempt to embarrass the House Democratic leadership and win a leg up on the 1994 elections, Republican Representatives forced a vote today on a resolution to make public all evidence gathered last year in an internal probe of the House Post Office scandal.
Democratic lawmakers easily beat back the Republican offensive on a virtual party-line vote, but the Republicans succeeded in stimulating a highly partisan debate in which they described the scandal as a symptom of Democratic corruption.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


A Sensible Look at the Airline 'Crisis'
For the last three years, anyone scanning the headlines could easily have concluded that America's airline industry was on its last legs, trapped by inexorable forces it could not control.
A commission appointed by President Clinton to fix the industry rightly rejects this dismal scenario.
It will recommend minor tightening of government oversight, tax cuts, some regulatory relief and increased foreign investment.
But the commission's draft recommendations reject Government fare-setting and other major structural changes.
These small fixes will disappoint some in Congress, but the commission has aimed well.


Reviews/Art; In the Hudson Valley, Three Moderns, One Age 91
In the Hudson Valley are surveys of the works of three very different contemporary artists: the eccentric self-searchings of Jonathan Borofsky are at the Hudson River Museum, the modernist drawings and sculptures of Dorothy Dehner at the Katonah Museum of Art, and the cerebral, architecturally derived constructions of Siah Armajani at the Storm King Art Center.
Yonkers
"Subject(s): Prints and Multiples by Jonathan Borofsky, 1982-1991," at the Hudson River Museum, is an illuminating survey, although you may still leave it wondering just what to make of this hard-to-place figure who has created an art out of his own quirky psyche.


Man Charged With Murder In Shooting In Brooklyn
A Brooklyn man has been charged with murder in the shooting of a man who was the third of three brothers gunned down on the streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant during the last six years, the police said.
Inspector Charles Kammerdener, executive officer of the Housing Police detective bureau, said the suspect, Carlos Weeks, 20, of 2780 86th Street in Bay Ridge, was arrested at 6:45 P.M.
Wednesday and charged with second-degree murder and criminal possession of a weapon, a revolver.


AMOCO CORP. (N)
The Amoco Corporation announced yesterday that second-quarter earnings more than doubled from the period a year earlier.
The company said last year's results included special charges against earnings totaling $805 million for asset sales and reduction of work force.
This led to a net loss of $499 million in the second quarter last year.
Without the charges, earnings would have been $216 million, or 43 cents a share.


Who Wants to Know?
We've got no numbers to prove it, but lately we've begun to wonder if the five most overheated words in the media-speak lexicon are "According to a recent poll." Not that polls are inaccurate.
Or unscientific.
But it's getting hard to separate what's useful from what's merely intriguing.
In the past few months we've learned that 37 percent of psychotherapists report hating a patient at some point; that Hillary Clinton scores almost 15 percent higher in popularity polls than Hillary Rodham Clinton; and that almost 31 percent of Americans don't expect the second coming of Christ to occur before the year 2000.


Books of The Times; Illuminating Gang Life in Los Angeles: It's Raw
Monster
The Autobiography of an L.A. Gang Member
By Sanyika Shakur, a k a Monster Kody Scott
383 pages. The Atlantic Monthly Press. $22.
Eldridge Cleaver once described the fierce, liberating power that comes from penetrating "one's own little world" with language, the power that comes from "combining the alphabet with the volatile elements" of one's soul.
It's a power possessed by his own 1968 book, "Soul on Ice," and it's also a power radiated with dangerous aplomb by Sanyika Shakur's disturbing new book, "Monster: The Autobiography of an L.A. Gang Member."


Redskins Start Post-Gibbs Era
The Washington Redskins struggled to a 9-7 record last season.
Mark Rypien's passing was erratic, and his offensive line was hobbled by injuries.
Still, the Redskins sneaked into the playoffs, beat the Minnesota Vikings, and played tough in losing to the San Francisco 49ers.
So, at the end of a bad year, the Redskins were not so bad.
And now, with new faces and a new coach, they seem sure to be contenders again in the National Football League.


COMPANY REPORTS: As Firms Shift Strategies, the Old Order Moves On; Top Trader to Quit; Salomon Net Soars
The wrenching transformation of Salomon Brothers that began with a huge management shake-up following the 1991 Treasury markets scandal appears far from over.
A series of announcements yesterday indicated that the firm might be shifting its emphasis from reliance on in-house trading decisions to business generated by its customers.
The firm said yesterday that Lawrence E. Hilibrand, who earned Salomon hundreds of millions of dollars by using esoteric mathematical formulas to trade for the firm's own account, would be leaving at the end of the year.
Mr.
Hilibrand will be part of a recent exodus of several of Salomon's most senior and accomplished traders.


DELTA AIR LINES INC. (N)
Accounting changes related primarily to future retirement benefits resulted in a $20.4 million loss for the fiscal quarter and a $1 billion loss for the fiscal year for Delta Air Lines.
Without the accounting changes, Delta said yesterday that it had a profit of $7.1 million in the April-June quarter, and a loss for the fiscal year of $370 million.


Frances R. Grant, 96, Champion Of Rights in Latin America, Dies
Frances Ruth Grant, who spent her life opposing dictatorships and promoting human rights in the Americas, died on Wednesday at her home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
She was 96.
Miss Grant's dedication to Latin American culture, art and human rights began in her childhood.
The daughter of a pioneer of New Mexico's statehood, she was born and raised in the remote pueblo of Abiquiu in the foothills of the Valle Grande mountains.
It was there that she absorbed the atmosphere of Hispanic-American culture.


CLASHES INTENSIFY IN LEBANON ZONE
In their most intense fighting in months, Israel and pro-Iranian Islamic guerrillas repeatedly shelled each other's positions in southern Lebanon Thursday, raising concern that the violence there may soon spread.
An Israeli soldier was killed and two Lebanese militiamen were wounded in an exchange of artillery fire in the "security zone" that Israel has declared in a strip of southern Lebanon.


Sounds Around Town
Jacquet's Big Band
Illinois Jacquet's Band, Fountain Plaza, Lincoln Center, (212) 875-5400.
The saxophonist Illinois Jacquet was the last of the instrumental stars of the swing era to form his own big band.
It happened 10 years ago when he was invited to give a series of master classes at Harvard University and found that his students were eager to know about the big-band era, which had ended more than 35 years earlier.
Drawing on his experience as a sideman in the big bands led by Lionel Hampton, Cab Calloway and Count Basie, Mr.
Jacquet put together the band he has led ever since.
Its performance for dancing tomorrow at the Fountain Plaza will be the last of this season's Mid-Summer Night Swing sessions at Lincoln Center.
Music starts at 8:15 P.M.
Admission is $7.50, or $6.50 with any Citibank card or New York Transit Authority 10-pack token wrapper.
Jarvis and Hinton
Benny Golson Quartet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, East Village (212) 533-7900.
Benny Golson moves fast and frequently and in a variety of guises.
He is a saxophonist, a composer, a band leader and a writer of scores for films and television, talents that are usually mingled in whatever he may be doing.
This weekend at Fat Tuesday's, he will draw to some extent on all of his talents.
He will not actually compose a film or television score but his program may include material he wrote for scores for "M*A*S*H," "Mission Impossible" or "Ironside"; songs he wrote or arranged for Ella Fitzgerald, Mama Cass, Eartha Kitt and Diana Ross, and his now-classic jazz compositions ("I Remember Clifford," "Whisper Not" and "Stablemates").
And he will introduce the latest in a line of groups that began in 1959, when he shared leadership in the Art Farmer-Benny Golson Jazztet.
This one is a quartet featuring a fresh talent, Kevin Hayes, on piano, and two solidly established sidemen: the bassist Rufus Reid and the drummer Marvin (Smitty) Smith.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 8, 10 and midnight, 8 and 10 P.M. on Sunday.
There is a $17.50 music charge and a $7 minimum.


Luxor Journal; The Muslims' Wrath Doesn't Spare the Mummies
Pity the indignities suffered by the Pharaohs.
Their royal tombs, dug deep into the cliffs of the Valley of the Kings, were pillaged 3,000 years ago by ungrateful subjects.
Their mummified remains have been exhumed and put on public display.


Bare-Bones Health Plans Are Found to Attract Few
Wherever affordable bare-bones health insurance has been offered nationwide, the policies have been a disastrous market failure, according to a new study.
Such policies, which are relatively inexpensive and offer relatively few benefits, were intended to cover people with no health insurance.
It was expected that the uninsured, or their employers, would flock to companies offering them.
Some suggested they might be an inexpensive way to cover the uninsured even after some kind of national health-insurance program was established.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-8 BRITAIN SETS BACK UNITY TREATY  The British Government of John Major lost a crucial parliamentary vote on the European unity treaty, further weakening his hold on power and leaving the treaty's final ratification in limbo.
A1  JAPANESE POLITICIANS' INVECTIVE  Politeness was abandoned in Japan's political process as a meeting of the Liberal Democratic Party dissolved into a spectacle of name-calling after the Prime Minister said he would resign as party leader.
A2


Governor Cuomo Forms a Council for the Benefit of the People


Nagle Signs With Jets and Doesn't Even Miss Dinner
While players were checking into the dormitories at Hofstra University for the start of the Jets' training camp this afternoon, the team's president, Steve Gutman, and Leigh Steinberg, the agent for Browning Nagle, were locked behind closed doors nailing down a contract that would get the quarterback in camp before dinner.
After two and one-half hours of negotiations -- broken up by lunch -- an agreement was reached on a one-year contract worth $750,000, plus incentives based on playing time and starting time, and Nagle had fulfilled his wish to be in camp in time to compete for the starting job with Boomer Esiason.
Jones Is Still Unsigned
The Jets were not so successful in talks with their first-round draft pick, linebacker Marvin Jones.
Although the two sides spoke again, there was no movement and there seemed to be little hope for a speedy agreement.
On the heels of the Nagle agreement, Gutman described the situation with Jones as "disheartening."


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/Art; Long Island Shows Off Paintings of and From Itself
This summer, painting is the medium of choice among most of Long Island's major museums, and the preferred format is the one-artist exhibition.
There's one slight exception to the first generalization: a retrospective of prints by the painter Wayne Thiebaud at the Heckscher Museum in Huntington.
And diverging dramatically from the second is a large and almost hilariously diverse selection of works from private art collections at the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn.
But tally it all up and the bottom line says "painting." Roslyn
The chance to see intriguing and unfamiliar paintings by 19th- and 20th-century artists, works usually hidden away in private homes, is the main drawing card at the Nassau County Museum.
"Long Island Collections: The Gilded Age to the 1990's" has an inflated title made more obtrusive by the museum's unfortunate attempt to organize the show's eclectic contents into some kind of historical narrative.
Mainly the exhibition is an overcrowded hodgepodge of good, bad and indifferent that seems more determined to flatter as many Long Island collectors as possible than to reflect consistent curatorial judgment.
And most auction previews are better installed.


INVESTCORP FILES SUIT OVER PARTNERSHIP IN GUCCI
In the opening salvo of what promises to be a fiery legal battle, the Investcorp Group, the investment company that owns Saks Fifth Avenue, Carvel and Color Tile among others, filed suit yesterday against Maurizio Gucci, its partner in the holding company that owns the various businesses of the Gucci luxury goods empire.
Investcorp also filed a request for an arbitration agreement with the American Arbitration Association that would force Mr.
Gucci and an investment fund allied with him called Seaton Hills Holding N.V. to sell their 50 percent stake in Gucci to Investcorp.
Justice Stanley Sklar of State Supreme Court granted Investcorp a 10-day injunction.


Gas Explosion Kills 2 in Minnesota


Suffolk Chief Backs Amended Financing Measure
Robert J. Gaffney, the Suffolk County Executive, backed a measure today that would pointedly tell voters that their taxes would pay the candidates' bills under a proposed local public campaign financing law.
His critics called Mr.
Gaffney's move a cynical attempt to sabotage campaign reform in Suffolk County.
Mr.
Gaffney's measure, co-sponsored in the 18-member County Legislature by 10 Republican and Conservative members, would amend a proposition to appear on the November ballot.
That proposition would make Suffolk one of only a handful of municipalities in the country with a public financing law intended to lessen the influence of special interests.


Road Race of the Stars At Lime Rock Park
The only major auto racing series with an Academy Award winning actor, a National Football League Hall of Fame running back and one of the most promising young American drivers rolls into Connecticut this weekend.
The eighth race in the Sports Car Club of America's Trans-Am Tour is scheduled for tomorrow at the 1.53-mile Lime Rock Park road circuit in Lime Rock, Conn.
The leader in the championship standing is SCOTT SHARP, a 25-year-old driver from East Norwalk, Conn., who is projected as American road racing's next major star.
Sharp won the title in 1991 and narrowly lost it last year to his teammate, JACK BALDWIN of Marietta, Ga.
Both drivers will be in Camaros.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS U.S.
Team Is Ousted For the second time in two days, Lori McNeil was upset in the Federation Cup in Frankfurt, Germany.
This time, though, the United States team could not survive her defeat and was ousted by Argentina.
Florencia Labat won the last nine games to beat McNeil, 5-7, 6-3, 6-0, yesterday.
In the first singles match, Ines Gorrochategui beat Lindsay Davenport, 6-7, 7-5, 7-5.
That gave Argentina the two victories it needed to advance to the semifinals.
McNeil lost in three sets on Wednesday to Fang Li of China, but the United States managed a 2-1 victory. (AP) Pierce Triumphs: In last night's quarterfinal at the Pathmark Tennis Classic in Mahwah, N.J., 16th-seeded Mary Pierce easily defeated 13th-seeded Shawn McCarthy in straight sets, 6-0, 6-0.
Pierce's strong volley and corner shots overpowered McCarthy and gave her trouble throughout the match.
"It was more or less a combination of my strong shots and her short shots that helped me win," said Pierce, appearing in her first tournament without her father present.
"Today I played surprisingly well, and I think she played a little short."
Jim Pierce, who has served as his daughter's coach, was banned by the Women's Tennis Council from attending any more events on the tour after an altercation at the French Open.
In doubles, top-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez and Patti O'Reilly defeated Ida Khalatian and Lillianana Manoukian, 6-1, 6-2.
In the first doubles match of the tournament, Louise Field and Tracey Morton defeated Elise Burgin and Joann Russel, 6-1, 6-3.
In a quarterfinal, Fernandez defeated fifth seeded O'Reilly of Ridgewood, N.J., 6-1, 6-1.
Lisa Raymond beat Mercedes Paz of Argentina, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3.


U.S. Says It Foiled Killings Plotted by Drug Chief
The head of the Drug Enforcement Administration said yesterday that the agency had headed off a series of killings and possible car bombings in New York City ordered by Pablo Escobar, one of the most violent Colombian drug traffickers.
The official, Robert C. Bonner, said the plot was broken up last week with the arrest in New Orleans of Eliana Escobar, a 32-year-old Colombian woman, on drug distribution charges.


Dinkins Counterattacks; Giuliani Hammers Away
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, continued to hammer away yesterday at Mayor David N. Dinkins's handling of the Crown Heights racial violence, while Mr.
Dinkins counterattacked by evoking the image of a peacemaker that was a key to his victory over Mr.
Giuliani in 1989.
As he tried to offset the politically damaging critique of his administration in the state report on Crown Heights, which was released on Tuesday, the Democratic Mayor also sought to shift attention to Mr.
Giuliani and to issues other than Crown Heights.


Alfredsson, Okamoto Share U.S. Open Lead
Using her power game on the course John Daly made famous and finishing with a flourish, Helen Alfredsson of Sweden took the first-round lead among the early finishers today in the 48th United States Women's Open.
But matching Alfredsson's 68 over the Crooked Stick Golf Club was Ayako Okamoto of Japan, who relied on her accuracy and finesse in her latest assault on the championship she most wants to win.


Medicare Choice for Old Means Rationing
To the Editor:
Re "Let the Elderly Choose" (Op-Ed, July 12): It is certainly true that our country has choices to make concerning the future of health care.
But Daniel Callahan's suggestion of a "Medicare: Part C," which would offer the elderly a choice of either acute-care coverage or extended long-term and home-care coverage, doesn't make a great deal of sense.


On Stage, and Off
'Fool Moon' to Close
True sadness is but a tear in the eye of a clown.
"Fool Moon," the two-man romp at the Richard Rodgers Theater starring the clowns David Shiner and Bill Irwin, will be closing on Sept. 5.
"We hate bringing down a hit show earlier than any of us would want to," said James B. Freydberg, one of the producers.
"But it's because of David Shiner's health that the producers have decided to close for now." His co-producers are Kenneth Feld, Jeffrey Ash and Dori Berinstein.


Awe and Acceptance of Their Ruinous River
Scrambling through cornfield flotsam into a borrowed boat, Richard Frakes ignored the terrible beauty of what the river had done.
He was too intent on reaching his mother's inundated house a mile distant on the watery horizon and wading into the upstairs in search of a computer disk.
"The family tree is in the computer," he said, anxiously pushing off from a riverbank that had rushed four miles inland from where it used to be, before the rain-swollen waters systematically brushed aside the levees and sandbags and rolled 11 feet over the best of this farming hamlet.


Daughter of Slavery Hushes Senate
The Senate's only black member, Carol Moseley Braun, made the chamber listen today as freshmen seldom do.
Her oratory of impassioned tears and shouts, stopped Jesse Helms in his tracks as he defended the Confederate flag.
Senator Helms, the 20-year North Carolina Republican, had sought -- and seemed to be finding -- a roundabout way to preserve the design patent held by United Daughters of the Confederacy on a symbol that includes the flag.


Inside Art
De Kooning's Sculptures
From 1987 to 1990, the Long Island sculptor Philip Pavia cast bronze sculptures that were created by his friend Willem de Kooning, the Abstract Expressionist painter.
But since 1989, when Mr. de Kooning, who has Alzheimer's disease, was declared mentally incompetent, and his wife, the painter Elaine de Kooning, died, Mr.
Pavia has not been paid.
The artist's daughter, Lisa de Kooning, who is also an artist and a conservator for her 89-year-old father's assets, says some of the sculptures Mr.
Pavia cast were hers, not her father's.
She also says she never commissioned Mr.
Pavia's castings and has no knowledge of the arrangements Mr.
Pavia says he had with her father.


Different Sides of Street; Response to Crown Heights Unrest Showed Divergent Paths of City Hall and the Police
When he was questioned by state investigators about a lack of coordination between City Hall and the police during the violence in Crown Heights two summers ago, former Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch responded this way: "My position was always, whether that was good or bad, was that we worked different sides of the street."
Behind the voluminous official state report on Crown Heights, with its finding that a long skein of leadership failures and miscommunications allowed the violence to rage out of hand, city and police officials said yesterday, was a sense of divided responsibility for handling the crisis.


Mets Get Lots of Gifts in 10-5 Victory
Somebody committed four errors tonight, and it was not the Mets.
Los Angeles Manager Tom Lasorda, before the game, delivered one of his patented I-Bleed-Dodger-Blue pep talks, and his team ended up bleeding all right -- in the infield.
Lasorda's catcher, third baseman and second baseman each made grotesque errors in this evening's second inning, and the appreciative Mets rolled up seven runs right then, a glut of them coming on Eddie Murray's first of two home runs, a three-run blast.
Coupled with Bret Saberhagen's brave pitching and Anthony Young's continued infallible relief, New York had its fifth victory in six games, 10-5.


A Strategy on the Budget: Go After the Greenhorns
Looking over the political landscape as a Senate-House conference committee began debating the budget reconciliation bill this week, the deans of Washington's lobbying forces collectively settled on a new strategy for getting their way: make targets of Congress's freshman Democrats.
Many lobbyists are hoping that the relative inexperience of the new members will leave them open to special entreaties.
But some of the newcomers find that approach insulting.


American Cyanamid Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coke Takes the Fizz Out of Campaign Doomsayers: For Now, at Least, It's 'Always Coca-Cola.'
AS soon as the Coca-Cola Company announced on Wednesday that Peter S. Sealey was resigning as the senior vice president to create his own marketing consulting firm, speculation arose that officials of the company might have grown dissatisfied with its "Always Coca-Cola" campaign, which Mr.
Sealey had helped coordinate with Creative Artists Agency.
Clever as the advertisements may be, the talent agency's unconventional two-year association with the soft-drink company has failed to energize the domestic cola market.
The market share for Coca-Cola Classic, the jewel of the company, has held steady at about 19.5 percent for almost three years, according to John Maxwell of Wheat, First Securities in Richmond, and sales of diet cola in general have slipped this year.


Prison Term in Fraud by Asbestos Monitor
A 37-month prison sentence was imposed yesterday on the president of a company charged with submitting fraudulent bills and using unqualified workers to monitor asbestos in public schools in New York City.
The defendant, Saundra Webb, who pleaded guilty in the racketeering case, was sentenced by Judge Robert L. Carter in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The company, Sandaq Engineering Company, did asbestos monitoring and consulting work at 60 public schools in 1990 and 1991.


Gas Leak Disrupts Trains
Thousands of rush-hour commuters were delayed yesterday when a high-pressure gas main began leaking in Brooklyn and disrupted train service for more than an hour, the authorities said.
The leak happened about 3:20 P.M. as Brooklyn Union Gas workers were repairing a 20-inch underground main at the intersection of McDonald Avenue and Avenue X, said Bob Loftus, a spokesman for the company.


Excerpts From Senate Hearings on the Ginsburg Supreme Court Nomination
Following are excerpts from the third day of hearings yesterday by the Senate Judiciary Committee on the nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to become Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, as transcribed by the Federal News Service, a private transcription service: On Discrimination
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, cited several instances in the 1980's when the Supreme Court "cut back on the legal protections against job discrimination." He then asked Judge Ginsburg to discuss her view of the Court majority's approach to construing civil rights laws in those cases.
JUDGE GINSBURG My view of the civil rights laws conforms to my views concerning statutory interpretation generally -- that is, it is the obligation of judges to construe statutes in the way that Congress meant them to be construed.
Some statutes, not simply in the civil rights area but the anti-trust area, are meant to be broad charters: the Sherman Act.
The Civil Rights Act states grand principles representing the highest aspirations of our nation to be a nation that is open and free, where all people will have opportunity.
And that spirit imbues that law, just as free competition is the spirit in the antitrust laws, and the courts construe statutes in accord with the essential meaning that Congress had for passing them.
. . .
Q.
I note that in a 1979 speech at a colloquium on legislation for women's rights you stated that "I think discrimination based on sexual orientation should be deplored." . . .
I'd like to ask you whether you still believe, as you did in 1979, that "discrimination based on sexual orientation should be deplored."
A.
I think rank discrimination against anyone is against the tradition of the United States and is to be deplored.
Rank discrimination is not part of our nation's culture.
Tolerance is.
And a generous respect for differences based on -- this country is great because of its accommodation of diversity.
I mean, the first thing that I noticed when I came back to the United States from a prolonged stay in Sweden -- and after I was so accustomed to looking at people whose complexion was the same -- and I took my first ride on a New York subway and I thought, What a wonderful country we live in -- people who are so different in so many ways and yet we, for the most part, get along with each other.
The richness of the diversity of this country is a treasure, and it's a constant challenge, too, to remain tolerant and respectful of one another.
Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, noted later that the courts had frequently deferred to military regulations far more restrictive than would be permitted in civilian law.
He then referred to Judge Ginsburg's earlier testimony that she found "rank discrimination" deplorable and asked her precisely what she meant by the term.
A.
Yes.
I think base discrimination is deplorable and against the spirit of this country -- discrimination, arbitrary discrimination without reason.
Q.
No.
Does "rank" mean institutional discrimination?
Does it mean intentional discrimination?
Does it mean arbitrary discrimination?
Because as I understand the Constitution, it is permissible to discriminate or to classify provided there is a rational basis for it.
A.
If I discriminated against some person for reasons that are irrelevant to that person's talent or ability, that is what I meant when I said rank discrimination: arbitrary discrimination that's unrelated to a person's ability or worth, unrelated to a person's talent; discrimination because -- simply because of who that person is and not what that person can do.
Q.
Or does?
Or does?
In other words, do you draw it upon that person's status or conduct?
Would it be a difference, in your judgment?
A.
A person's birth status should be -- should not enter into the way that person is treated.
The person who is born into a certain home with a certain religion or is born of a certain race, those are irrelevant characteristics to what that person can do or contribute to society.
Q.  What about sexual orientation?
A.
Senator, you know that that is a burning question that at this very moment is going to be before the Court, based on an action that has been taken.
I cannot say one word on that subject that would not violate what I said had to be my rule about no hints, no forecasts, no previews.
Q.
Well, it seemed to me that you already did comment on that when you responded to Senator Kennedy this morning.
He talked about race, religion, and gender and sexual orientation, and I think your comment was rank discrimination is deplorable under all of those circumstances.
A.
I think rank discrimination for any reason -- hair color, eye color, you name it -- rank discrimination is un-American for whatever reason.
If you have a classification, there has to be a reason, as you said, for any classification.
On Capital Punishment
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, asked Judge Ginsburg whether she believed, "as Justices Brennan and Marshall did," that the death penalty was incompatible with the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment.
A.
At least since 1976, and possibly if you date it from Furman and earlier, the Supreme Court by large majorities has rejected the position that the death penalty under any and all circumstances is unconstitutional.
I recognize that there is no judge on the Court that takes a position that the death penalty is unconstitutional under any and all circumstances; all of the Justices on the Court have rejected that view.
There are many questions left unresolved.
They are coming constantly before that Court.
I think at least two are before the Court next year.
I can tell you that I have -- I do not have a closed mind on this subject.
I don't want to commit my -- I don't think it would be consistent with the line I have tried to hold to tell you that I would definitely accept or definitely reject any position.
I can tell you that I am well aware of the precedent, and I have already expressed my views on the value of precedent.
Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, cited Herrera v.
Collins, in which Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, writing for the majority, "was unable to declare clearly and unequivocally that the Constitution forbids the execution of innocent people." He asked Judge Ginsburg, "Do you believe the Herrera case stands for the principle that it is unconstitutional to execute an innocent person?"
A.
As I understand it -- and the case is not fresh in my mind -- what the Court said was that the evidence in that case was insufficient to show innocence.
It did not rule out a different ruling in a case with a stronger record.
We heard yesterday from Senator Feinstein, who was expressing her anxiety with the number of cases that go on for years and years.
The colloquy that is occurring here is showing the tremendous tensions and difficulties in this area.
Her anxious plight was there must be a time when the curtain is drawn, and your anxiety is that no innocent person should ever be put to death.
Those tensions are coming before you, some of them, in the Powell Commission report that you are going to have to address.
My understanding of Herrera is it's concerned with the situation that someone could say, 10 years after a conviction and multiple appeals, "I didn't do it," and then the process would start all over again.
I can empathize tremendously with the concern.
. . .
What the Court said -- and this is to the best of my recollection -- that the evidence was too slim in Herrera to make out that claim, and it left the door open to a case where there was stronger evidence of innocence.
That case is yet to come before the Court in the future.
So my understanding of this case is it, based on that particular record, said the evidence was too thin to show innocence, that the Court was leaving open the question of whether you could have such a plea on a stronger showing than the one that was made in that case.
And that's as far as the Herrera case went.
It just left open a case where a stronger showing could be made.
In response to a question from Senator Hatch, Judge Ginsburg declined to discuss her views on the death penalty because, she said, she had never decided a capital case or written about the subject.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, later reminded her that while practicing law she had written a friend-of-the-court brief in Coker v.
Georgia, arguing "that the death penalty for rape was not constitutional."
A.
I did not write about the question we've been addressing about the constitutionality of the death penalty.
The Coker-against-Georgia brief was a brief that said the death penalty for rape, where there was no death or serious permanent injury apart from the obvious psychological injury -- that that was disproportionate for this reason: The death penalty for rape historically was part of a view of woman as belonging to man, as first her father's possession.
If she were raped before marriage, she was damaged goods and she was not someone -- it was a theft of something that belonged first to the father.
And if she were a married woman and she were raped, again she would be regarded as damaged goods.
We've seen that most recently in tragedies in many places in the world, where women in Bangladesh, for example, were discarded, were treated as worthless, because they had been raped.
And that was what Coker against Georgia came out of, and that's the whole thrust of that brief, that this was made punishable by death because man's property had been taken from him because of the rape of women.
And that was the perspective that was taken in the Coker-against-Georgia brief.
Q.
On page 22 of that brief, a heading underlined says, "The death sentence for rape is impermissible under the Eighth Amendment because it does not meet 'contemporary standards' regarding the infliction of punishment and is inadvisable since it diminishes legal protection afforded rape victims." It seems to me it deals directly with the issue of the Eighth Amendment.
A.
Senator Grassley, I urge you to read the entire Coker-against-Georgia brief.
I think you will find it to be exactly what I represented it to be.
One of the reasons why rapes went unpunished, why women who had been raped suffered the indignity of having the police refuse to prosecute, was statutes of that order.
. . .
I've written on the subject of women who have been raped and society's attitude toward them.
Coker against Georgia fits into that category, and it must not be taken out of context to say anything about any other subject than the one that was addressed in that brief.
And that was that the death penalty for rape -- the origin of that and the perpetuation of it -- was harmful to women, far from resulting in convictions.
. . .
It was a contribution to the proper way to look at this terrible crime.
It was a contribution to the end of thinking of women as damaged goods because they had been raped.
That's what I think about it.
On Free Expression
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, asked whether freedom of expression was still an evolving right under the Constitution.
A.
Free expression, I think, was an idea from the start, even before the limitations on it -- the Alien and Sedition Act, which I think never was reversed by the Supreme Court but certainly has been reversed by the history of our country since that time.
The idea was there from the beginning, -- though I mentioned the Revolutionary War cartoon, "Liberty of speech for those who speak the speech of liberty" -- the idea was always there.
The great opposition to the government as censor was always there.
But it is only in our time that that right has come to be recognized as fully as it is today with the line of cases ending in Brandenburg v.
Ohio -- truly recognizes that free speech means not freedom of thought and speech for those with whom we agree, but freedom of expression for the expression we hate.
I think that there are always new contexts that will be presented but that the dissenting positions of Holmes and Brandeis have become the law that everyone accepts.
I think that is the case today.
Q.  What about in the area of entertainment?
A.
Well, now we're getting into more slippery territory.
It depends what kind of entertainment, I suppose.
You know that the Supreme Court has a series of decisions about the speech that's in the kind of nether land between fully protected speech and unprotected speech.
Indecent speech -- you have -- it's not subject to -- that is within the First Amendment but not entitled to the same level of protection as other speech.
The Supreme Court has had decisions about the -- what do they call? -- adult movie theaters, that those can be zoned for the safety of the neighborhood.
They can either be -- a municipality can decide to spread them out so they won't be clustered or can put them all together in one combat zone.
So there is a difference between the degree of respect of the kind of knowledge, information -- political speech on the one hand; then, as you know, there is this category of speech that is unprotected by the First Amendment called obscenity.
And then there is this category of speech that's not out of the ball park but that is subject to regulation, indecent speech.
That's an area that I can't talk about in specific terms because it is something that is -- has come before my court, is coming before the Supreme Court in connection with broadcast regulation.
But I do recognize that there are those -- there is that category of speech that does not get the full protection of the First Amendment but is not left out entirely.


Pennzoil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


McDonald's Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Picnic and Concert
The Manhattan School of Music Brass Quintet is to play works by Gabrieli, Ewald, Bach, Brahms and Janacek in an outdoor concert tomorrow evening at 5:30 at the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard in the Bronx.
The program is part of a series of Sunday Supper Serenades; visitors may carry a picnic supper and blankets or lawn chairs.
The concert is free, but admission to the grounds is $3 ($2 for students and the elderly).
Parking is $4.
Directions: (718) 817-8779.
Information: (718) 817-8700.


FPL Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Not the Catskills of Yore
To the Editor:
Your July 12 article on the demise of the Borscht Belt is more of an anachronism than the Borscht Belt itself.
It is time to recognize that the Catskills are more than Sullivan County and more than depressing articles on a bygone era.


Yanks Look Within for Pitching Help
Befuddled by a bullpen that has betrayed them over and over and frustrated by their inability to trade for a pitcher, the Yankees acted on a seemingly inevitable move yesterday by summoning Mark Hutton from their Class AAA Columbus team.
Hutton, a right-hander who throws hard, will be inserted into the rotation tonight and will make his major league debut under somewhat daunting conditions: he will oppose Mark Langston, the California Angels' best pitcher and the American League starter in last week's All-Star Game.


Tiriac Gets the Boot
BORIS BECKER has parted with ION TIRIAC, his manager, ending a 10-year relationship that included three Wimbledon titles and numerous lucrative endorsement deals.


Review/Film; They're From Another Planet (Another Medium, Actually)
You'd have to visit the planet Remulak to find anyone who really thinks the Coneheads needed to be brought to the big screen.
Based on the string of gleefully absurd "Saturday Night Live" sketches about a family of queasy extraterrestrials going native in America, "Coneheads" is not conspicuous for its wide-ranging wit.
Nonetheless, the idea has been stretched out to feature length and propped up with sight gags, "Saturday Night Live" cameos and special effects.
These visual tricks allow the Coneheads to broaden their horizons in expensive and not-terribly-necessary ways.
They are actually seen visiting the planet Remulak, for example.
As Hollywood's latest effort to build the Empire State Building out of toothpicks, and as a film squarely aimed at those who found "Wayne's World" too demanding, "Coneheads" still has its dopey charms.
It brings back Dan Aykroyd and Jane Curtin in the welcome roles of Beldar and Prymaat, a Conehead couple bound by weirdly touching notions of Earthly propriety.
Prymaat forms her ideas of wifely behavior by reading women's magazines and looks particularly poignant in head cone, pearls and cardigan sweater.
Beldar, who like his wife speaks fluent techno-jargon ("starch disk" is what they call a pizza), has the darting-eyed, paranoid manner of someone who almost thinks his ruse is a success.


Reggie! Bar Returns
REGGIE JACKSON isn't making a comeback, but his candy bar is.
A Pittsburgh candy manufacturer, which has sold 5 million MARIO LEMIEUX candy bars, will bring back the Reggie! bar.
The candy will be introduced at Cooperstown, N.Y., during Jackson's Hall of Fame induction on Aug. 1. (AP)


GINSBURG DEFLECTS PRESSURE TO TALK ON DEATH PENALTY
Despite increasing pressure from Republican senators to spell out her positions on controversial issues, Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg today resisted giving her views on the death penalty and gay rights as she completed her third day of testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
With little suspense over the outcome -- she is expected to be confirmed easily as the nation's 107th Supreme Court Justice -- the day's hearing was highlighted by a display of just how much the committee's Democratic and Republican members have traded roles since Bill Clinton's election.  [ Excerpts from the hearing, page A16. ]


Emlen Etting, Artist, 88
Emlen Etting, a painter, sculptor and illustrator, died on Tuesday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 88.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Gloria Braggiotti Etting.


Restoration Begins on Conservatory at New York Botanical Garden


Market Place; Terminating Outside Sales Staff Proves Costly to WD-40.
TIME was, if a company had cash to spare, a takeover artist or two would be at the door faster than you could say "Stick 'em up."
So who has taken their place?
Independent contractors seeking retribution for having been let go.


At the Bar; Temporary lawyers and the price of prosperity: when a job agency puffs, the competition huffs.
Lesley Friedman would not have thought of knocking her competition six years ago, when she began her business finding temporary jobs for lawyers.
There was next to no competition, to begin with.
And she had more serious problems on her hands, like an opinion from the New York City bar association that her entire operation was unethical.
The bar association soon reversed itself.
And a dismal economy, cost-conscious corporations and legions of disaffected or unemployed lawyers available for comparatively cheap, part-time service have made legal temping a growth industry.


Scott Salmon, 50, Choreographer For Radio City's Seasonal Shows
Scott Salmon, director and choreographer of Radio City Music Hall's Christmas and Easter shows since 1990 and a Tony Award nominee, died on Saturday at Granada Hills Hospital in Granada Hills, Calif.
He was 50 and lived in Studio City, Calif.
He died of injuries after an automobile accident, said his former wife, JoLinda Salmon.


At Last: Chiappucci Stops Spinning His Two Wheels
Claudio Chiappucci, the nonstop attacker, finally won a stage of the Tour de France today.
What's more, he won it in a sprint finish.


Prosecution Rests Case In Bank Fraud Affair
After calling 45 witnesses and introducing about 300 exhibits into evidence, prosecutors from the Manhattan District Attorney's office yesterday rested their case against Robert A. Altman.
Mr.
Altman, a Washington lawyer, has been charged with eight felony counts involving fraud and bribery for his role in what prosecutors say was a scheme to deceive bank regulators about the ownership of First American Bankshares Inc., a Washington bank that was controlled by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


Store Founder Pleads Guilty in Fraud Case
Stew Leonard Sr., the Connecticut milkman who parlayed a hardworking, aw-shucks image into a sprawling dairy bazaar that has won acclaim as a paragon of American entrepreneurial spirit, pleaded guilty today to conspiring to defraud the Federal Government of taxes on more than $17 million.
The plea came nearly two years after Federal agents raided his store in nearby Norwalk, Stew Leonard's, and seized cartons of files and computer records.
Mr.
Leonard and three senior executives admitted in Federal Court here that they had engaged in a sophisticated, decade-long scheme to skim money from the store's sales -- an operation that included computers programmed to hide cash discrepancies and bags of cash stashed in hiding places.


Home Video
Imagine walking into the average video store and finding both older foreign films like "Madame Rosa" and a mix of specialized nonfiction titles like "L. B. J.," "A Calf Grows Up" and "The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union."
Tapes like these aren't found in many commercial establishments.
Sometimes, though, it pays to try the public library.
A recent study by National Video Resources, a project of the Rockefeller Foundation, said that about 10,000 of the country's 15,000 libraries have video collections.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Reshuffles Accounts
Johnson &amp; Johnson said yesterday that it had completed the long-awaited series of product account shifts among its agencies.
The move, part of a worldwide realignment, elevated DDB Needham Worldwide in New York to a more vital role as its fourth worldwide agency.
Now with more than $30 million in billings, up from $5 million, DDB Needham joins Lintas Worldwide in New York, McCann-Erickson Worldwide in New York and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York as the agencies handling the company's major consumer products.


INSIDE
How Women Get AIDS
For the first time, heterosexual intercourse outstrips intravenous drug use in transmitting AIDS to women, Federal health officials say.
Page A12.
New Focus on Interest Rates
The Federal Reserve will abandon its traditional measure for steering the economy -- the money supply -- and focus on interest rates.
Page D1.
Japan Politicians' Invective
Politeness was abandoned in Japan's political process as a meeting of the Liberal Democratic Party dissolved into name-calling on TV.
Page A2.
Silence on Gay Troop Report
The Pentagon is refusing to make public a study that found that homosexuals could serve openly in the armed forces.
Page A12.


Hamilton, a Sophomore, Expects More
Be confident.
That's the attitude of Giants defensive end Keith Hamilton.
And no more settling for a backup job.
Be ready to be a starter.
In fact, if necessary, be a little bit cocky.
During last season's hurricane-force turmoil that was the Ray Handley era, Keith Hamilton fought not to get swept away.
He was solid at times as he played primarily on passing downs.
There was criticism that he couldn't play the run very well, that the rookie wasn't quite ready for the big time.


A. Oakley Brooks, 81, An Investment Banker
A.
Oakley Brooks, a retired investment banker, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Falmouth, Mass.
He was 81 and lived in Manhattan and Edgartown, Mass.
The cause was bone cancer, his family said.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Business Day yesterday about executive changes at the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation referred incorrectly to the company's chairman and chief executive in some editions.
He is Charles W. Moritz.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Sex Is Leading Cause of AIDS in Women
For the first time, more women have developed AIDS as a result of heterosexual intercourse than intravenous drug use, Federal health officials said yesterday, reporting on figures from 1992.
Nearly 60 percent of those women had been sex partners of men who were intravenous drug users, and most of the remaining sex partners were bisexual men.


Ryder System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Film; Along Some Mean Streets In Unlikely Locations
The single modern film most likely to put film schools out of business is Martin Scorsese's "Mean Streets," since it serves as a blueprint for so many new film makers eager to emulate Mr.
Scorsese's fierce, boisterous brilliance.
The mark of "Mean Streets" is all over "Amongst Friends," Rob Weiss's showy, energetic debut feature about (of course) boyhood buddies intoxicated by a life of crime.
Mr.
Weiss, whose film was well received at this year's Sundance Film Festival, certainly has the right idea.
And he also has geography on his side.
"Amongst Friends" is helpfully situated "on the killer streets of Hewlett Harbor" and in other prosperous Long Island locations, places where the mob kingpins wear loud sweaters and the visual ironies are inescapable.
The freshest thing about his film is its depiction of how bored, well-heeled boys from the Five Towns (the film maker's own home turf) have turned themselves into drug-dealing petty crooks.
Thus transformed, they spar and jive with raucous authority and taunt one another in fluent, staccato Scorsese-ese.


On My Mind; What the Hasidim Know
Let's all put Crown Heights behind us -- certainly, but not now, not yet.
To walk away from Crown Heights now, with its real meaning and the real offense of New York City's government still unstated and unexamined, would make it more likely that some other riot, some other pogrom, against some other group would be committed somewhere in America.
There can be hope after Crown Heights -- but, as always, only when reality is faced.


Review/Film: Poetic Justice; On the Road To Redemption
FROM time to time throughout "Poetic Justice," John Singleton's new romantic melodrama, a pretty, button-nosed South-Central Los Angeles beautician named Justice, played by the pop superstar Janet Jackson, muses about life and loneliness on the soundtrack.
It might be better if she sang the words accompanied by a loud backup group, so we couldn't hear them.
Instead, Justice speaks the words clearly, with the fearful reverence of a child ordered to commit Portia's "quality of mercy" speech to memory overnight.
Not only the individual words are comprehensible, but also enough of their meanings so that we are aware of the singular disparity between the speaker and her musings.
Although these are supposed to be poems dashed off by Justice to ease her pain, they are, in fact, the work of the celebrated Maya Angelou, poet and earth mother.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.36
3.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.06
3.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.18
3.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.56
5.50
6.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.66
6.63
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.34
8.53
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.79
5.77
6.14
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


For Children
South Street Seaport
Pier 17  South Street  Lower Manhattan  (212) 669-9400  Recommended for all ages
Breakfast at the Seaport is an adventure of low-peaked thrills, especially on a Sunday morning.
If you go before 11 A.M., avoiding the crowds, the benches at the edge of Pier 17 are nearly empty and the place is clean, still and quiet.


Tax Fight Protects Lautenberg's Seat
Fifteen months before he comes up for re-election in New Jersey, Senator Frank Lautenberg is already running hard for a third term.
His chief opponent at the moment appears to be Bill Clinton.
On one of his frequent forays onto his home turf recently, Mr.
Lautenberg seemed to relish talking about how he told the Democratic President in Washington that his deficit reduction plan was no good for New Jersey.


Money Funds Gain
The total assets of the nation's 642 retail money market mutual funds increased $644.1 million, to $392.00 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
There were $308.91 billion in taxable retail money market funds and $83.09 billion in 240 retail tax-exempt funds.


A.T.&amp; T. Shifts Officers And Picks Finance Chief
The American Telephone and Telephone Company named a new chief financial officer and shuffled the assignments of seven top executives today, in an effort to sharpen the company's push into global markets and new multimedia services.
The moves, orchestrated by A.T.&amp; T.'s chairman, Robert E. Allen, appear to spill no blood.
Rather, they seem to strengthen the inner cadre at A.T.&amp; T. that has been instrumental in mapping the company's broad re-alignment over the last several years.


New York City Accuses Three of Deceptive Investment Ads
New York City accused two mutual fund companies and one brokerage firm yesterday of engaging in deceptive advertising.
The funds, Dreyfus and Franklin, and the brokerage firm, Charles Schwab, misrepresented investment risks or fund fees, the city's Consumer Affairs Department said.
Dreyfus and Charles Schwab denied the accusations, and Franklin issued a statement saying it expected to "resolve the matter quickly" with the city agency.


Giants' Remaining Draft Picks Sign On
Dan Reeves will of course be happy to know that his two remaining draft choices, defensive end Mike Strahan and linebacker Marcus Buckley, have reached agreement with the team and will soon report to camp.
But he wasn't ecstatic about the most recent biting remarks made by his former quarterback John Elway.
Strahan, the Giants' first pick (chosen in the second round), has agreed to a two-year deal with an option.
Though no figures were immediately available, the total package is believed to be worth a little over $1 million.


Japanese Forget Politeness As Political Wrath Flares
The Japanese political process is traditionally described as an elaborate effort to achieve harmony and consensus.
But politeness was abandoned today at a nationally televised meeting of the Liberal Democratic Party, which dissolved into a spectacle of name-calling after Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said he would resign as party leader.
The immediate targets of the invective at the meeting were Mr.
Miyazawa and other aging party leaders, who were assailed as "war criminals" and enemies of reform by younger members seeking a new direction after five years of corruption scandals.


Treasury Bond Yields Rise Again
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes fell again yesterday as yields rose for the third day in a row.
And as on Tuesday, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, was the catalyst for the rise in yields, traders and analysts said.
Mr.
Greenspan testified before the Senate Banking Committee, as he gave the second installment of the central bank's semiannual report on monetary policy to Congress.
He testified on Tuesday before a House banking subcommittee.


A Democracy Grapples With a Point of Honor
THE Newtown Board of Selectmen was rolling smoothly through its agenda at last Monday night's meeting: a printer for the ambulance corps, approved; applications from various community groups to march in the Labor Day parade, of course; a request from one Joel Tower of Litchfield for a permit to sell "educational books" door-to-door, denied.
Zita B. MacMahon, First Selectman, then read from her agenda:
"Item number 10: the flagpole." She made a tight smile and peered over her half-rims.
Selectman Gary Fetzer studied a piece of paper and looked grave.
Selectman K. Michael Snyder stared at the ceiling.


Reviews/Art; In New Jersey, Works From the Pacific and Tibet
A trip to New Jersey offers the best of several worlds this summer.
At the Newark Museum, one can travel from the splendors of a vanished Tibet to the multicultural beauties of the South Pacific and myriad points in between, while an adventurous program at the Jersey City Museum offers up-to-the-minute contemporary art.
Newark
There is no better way to get a sense of the breadth and individuality of the Newark Museum -- still one of the metropolitan area's great unsung treasures -- than by searching out the little black-and-silver "25" stickers that appear throughout its galleries these days.
They mark works that entered the collection during the quarter-century tenure of Samuel C. Miller, the museum's retiring director, and together make up "The Director's Anniversary, 1968-1993" show.


Free Trade's Fine, as Long as It's Really Free; Pulling Workers Down
To the Editor:
Your July 12 editorial on the North American Free Trade Agreement is on target.
Judge Charles Richey's decision requiring en environmental impact statement is warranted.
Mexico has a poor record of enforcing weaker environmental and consumer laws.
United States companies could pack up and move their businesses across the border to reduce their operating costs.
Under the trade agreement, food and products from Mexico would be treated as if they were produced domestically.
Thus, United States companies that want to do the right thing by way of their workers and the environment would be put at a competitive disadvantage.


The Midwest Flooding; In the Flood, Many Hear a Call to Serve
After watching enough flood coverage on television to feel waterlogged himself, Dave Culver decided it was his turn to help.
So Wednesday morning, Mr.
Culver, a 33-year-old high school teacher in Elizabeth, Colo., hopped in his gold 1982 Audi with 150,000 miles on the odometer, said goodbye to his wife, who is six months' pregnant, and headed for flood country.
He arrived here early this morning, slept a few hours in his car, and woke up in time to help the sandbagging trying to hold off the 43-foot crests of the Meramec River.


China, Barreling Along the Capitalist Road, Now Posts Strict Speed Limits
China's new economic program may or may not succeed in bringing down inflation, but it is already having one far-reaching effect: it is making many ordinary workers spitting mad.
When millions of Chinese collected their June salaries, they found most or all of their pay docked.
The money went to purchase Government bonds, which nearly all urban citizens have been forced to buy.


Goldman Band Concert
The Goldman Memorial Band is to end its series of free concerts on Sunday at 7 P.M. in Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center, with a program of waltzes, marches and band classics by Richard Strauss, Johann Strauss, Boito, Stravinsky, Grainger, Goldman and Sousa.
Information: (212) 886-9887.


A Summer's Art For the Faithful: Pilgrimages In the Region
LIKE all others, this summer art season has its special pleasures.
Could there be any better time or place to see the paintings of Fairfield Porter than right now at the Parrish Art Museum in Southhampton, L.I., not far from the very beaches that Porter captured once and for all in images bathed in the summer's brilliant light?
Is there any site both more reposeful and provocative than the giant steel gazebo designed by Siah Armajani for a hill amid the fields and surrounding peaks at the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y.?


CHRONICLE
"Where do cows go on vacation?" HENRY G. CISNEROS, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, whispered to his 6-year-old son at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia.
"Moo York City," the child replied, according to a report by The Associated Press, and it was a jubilant moment.


Now If He Can Cajole Ditka to Just Be Ditka
Jim Lampley sounds unconcerned about succeeding Bob Costas as the host of "N.F.L. Live" on NBC this fall, unworried about the nine-year reputation of credibility, facility and wit carved out during Costas's football run.
"We've done a lot of the same kinds of things over a long period of time," Lampley said after he was formally named to the position, six months after it was assured that he would be.
"I don't think I will be so radical a departure from him that you'll say, 'Oh, he's terribly different.' "


Those on Death Row Don't Ride a Carousel
To the Editor:
I read James Gorman's "Juristic Park" (Op-Ed, July 12) with envy at the clever idea and dismay at the subject.
I suppose it is yet one more demonstration that the only people who really like lawyers are people who need them.
Our profession, dealing with the raw edges of our society, will continue to endure this kind of ribbing, whether good natured or not.
One point makes me wince.
Mr.
Gorman writes that on the Capital Punishment Carousel, you can't get off until the Supreme Clones hear your appeal, complaining that an opening day visitor "was still on it."


American Calls Rival Mismanaged
Lawyers for American Airlines counterattacked Continental Airlines today in Federal District Court here, asserting that mismanagement at Continental, and not American's pricing, was to blame for the staggering losses that almost sank Continental last year.
Continental and Northwest Airlines contend that new and lower prices introduced by American Airlines in April 1992, followed by half-price fares offered to many travelers, cost them a total of $1 billion and were an attempt to drive them out of business.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a record judgment in a lawsuit involving a 1987 traffic accident referred incorrectly to the scene.
The collision occurred on Interstate 95 in New Jersey; the stretch of road involved, in Englewood near the George Washington Bridge, did not become part of the New Jersey Turnpike until 1991.


Illinois Tool Works Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dow Falls From Heights, Off 30.18 Points
Stocks retreated yesterday, a day after the Dow Jones industrial average set an all-time high.
The average fell 30.18 points, to 3,525.22, in heavy trading.
Traders said the bond market failed to give backbone to stocks, which moved in a tight range until late afternoon, when prices fell on programmed selling.


Diner's Journal
The Milieu of Hogs
The multi-million-dollar success of pop-culture theme restaurants like Hard Rock Cafe and Planet Hollywood, which has more to do with the sale of T-shirts and other licensed artifacts than with food, is inspiring new enterprises in Manhattan.
The Harley-Davidson Cafe, sort of an Autopub (the defunct car-theme restaurant that was in the General Motors Building) for motorcycle fans, is scheduled to open in October at 56th Street and the Avenue of the Americas.
Marc Packer, who owns Canastel's and Wolf's Sixth Avenue Delicatessen, is one of the owners.
The peripatetic Drew Nieporent will manage the cafe.
And this is not the end of it.
An early May debut is planned for Television City, a 292-seat restaurant with a television theme that is going into the four-story town house occupied by Lindy's, 1256 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street, conveniently around the corner from the NBC studios.
David Liederman, who owned Chez Louis, runs Broadway Grill and created David's Cookies, and his brother, Bill, the owner of Mickey Mantle's, are partners in this venture.


Voyage to Life of Shattered Dreams; At Cost of $30,000, Woman Goes From Poverty in China to Prostitution in Chinatown
It was just about dawn that day more than a year ago when the smugglers' van left her on East Broadway in Chinatown and sped off.
A.
W.
Chen, a 20-year-old illegal immigrant from Fuzhou, China, had made it, she believed, and the anxious weeks that she had spent aboard the rusty freighter that delivered her to America's shores would soon be a fading memory.
Although Ms.
Chen hadn't slept for two days, her eyes widened as cars zoomed by her.
She would soon own a car, she thought, and be rich beyond her dreams.


No Headline
We must get racism behind us.
We must move forward.
We must realize we live in America today. -- SENATOR HOWELL HEFLIN of Alabama, opposing the symbolic use of the Confederate flag.  [ B6:6. ]


Now if X Sues Y, What Would Happen? A, B, C or D?
Questions on the bar examination are typically convoluted, presenting a fictional case that improbably but conveniently raises a set of legal doctrines for the test-taker to identify and weigh.
Here is a sample question, from the BAR/BRI Multistate Testing Book:
Dieter and Freya were recently engaged to be married.
They went to Katzenjammer, a popular local nightclub, to celebrate their engagement.
While at Katzenjammer, they met their friend, Ingrid, who joined them at their table.
Although Freya and Ingrid had several drinks, Dieter drank moderately, telling the waiter, "I have to drive." Freya asked Dieter to give Ingrid a ride home and he readily agreed.
A statute in the jurisdiction makes it an offense to drive a vehicle on any public road without a valid driver's license.
Dieter's license recently expired, but he was too busy with wedding plans to go to a local branch of the State Department of Motor Vehicles to renew the license.
The trio left Katzenjammer and they entered Dieter's car.
Dieter and Freya sat in the front seat, while Ingrid sat in back.
Dieter began driving on what he felt was the best route to Ingrid's house.
Ingrid told Dieter that he was going the wrong way.
Dieter disagreed.
Ingrid became more insistent and began yelling at Dieter.
Freya agreed with Ingrid and impulsively grabbed the steering wheel.
The car swerved and struck Pike, a pedestrian, injuring Pike.


Sunbeam Will Settle Lawsuits
The Sunbeam-Oster Company said yesterday that it would pay $173 million in cash to Paul B. Kazarian and two of his partners to settle litigation over Mr.
Kazarian's ouster as chairman and chief executive last January.
The settlement with Mr.
Kazarian and the two partners in his Japonica investment group, Michael G. Lederman and Robert H. Setrakian, who were on leaves of absence from Sunbeam, was in the form of a repurchase of 12.4 million Oster shares they own at $14 a share.


Major Is Rebuffed in Parliament In Vote on the European Treaty
Prime Minister John Major lost a crucial vote on the Treaty on European Union tonight, further weakening his hold on power and leaving the treaty's final approval in limbo.
After the defeat, Mr.
Major immediately called a vote of confidence on Friday in his Government's policy in support of the treaty.
A loss on the confidence vote, which is considered unlikely, would leave Mr.
Major little choice but to call a general election.
Court Ruling Pending
A victory for Mr.
Major on the vote of confidence would apparently break the deadlock on the treaty and pave the way for final British approval pending a judicial review.
But the full consequences of Friday's vote will not be determined until the exact wording of the resolution is known.


Chris DeBlasio, Composer, 34
Chris DeBlasio, a composer best known for his song cycles, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 34.
His companion, William Berger, said the cause was AIDS.


Hand-to-Hand Fun in the Sun


Review/Music; Pianist Accepts a Brahms Challenge
The B-flat Piano Concerto is perhaps the only piece in the Brahms corpus big enough to hold all the contradictions in his composing style.
On Wednesday night, Garrick Ohlssen helped Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic continue their summer series at Carnegie Hall by playing the solo parts of this four-movement work.
He did it with remarkable confidence and command.
Even when modest competence is the goal, the first two movements are calculated to terrify soloists and orchestra members alike.
Certain passages are so convoluted and physically awkward that pianists often wonder whether Brahms -- who wrote the piece to perform himself -- might not have left out a bit here and a bit there: doing a little pragmatic recomposing to accommodate the pressures of the moment.


Morgenthau Says Release Was an Error
A woman who was accused of pushing two people onto subway tracks on Wednesday was arrested for a similar assault in May but was freed last month because of an error by prosecutors, the office of Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, acknowledged yesterday.
The woman, Eloise Ellis of Brooklyn, was arrested on May 7, charged with pushing Francisca Mazariegos into a moving train in the station at 110th Street and Lenox Avenue.
The victim suffered minor injuries.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Airline ticket prices have risen sharply in the last two years despite fare wars, competition from upstart carriers and attempts by the industry to simplify prices.
Analysts say prices will continue to rise in small but steady increments.  [ Page A1. ]
The Fed will abandon its traditional yardstick for steering the economy -- money supply -- because it has become unreliable.
Alan Greenspan said the Fed would focus on interest rates.  [ D1. ]


Black Journalists Talk of Gaps In Newsroom Advancement
Citing a striking difference between the way black journalists and their mainly white managers view questions of race in the newsroom, the National Association of Black Journalists is using its 18th annual convention here to examine the issue of not just getting blacks onto the staffs of the nation's newspapers and broadcast news outlets, but moving them up.
The convention has long been used as a staging ground for recruiting by some of the country's major news organizations.
But, in a stance that partly reflects the growing influence of the 2,400-member organization, it was clear today that the group's main focus was less on securing entry-level positions than on joining the ranks of senior management.


The Museum Exhibitions
Here is information about the museum exhibitions reviewed.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Long Island  "LONG ISLAND COLLECTIONS: THE GILDED AGE TO THE 1990's." (Through Sept. 12.) Nassau County Museum of Art, Northern Boulevard and Museum Drive, Roslyn Harbor, (516) 484-9337.
Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Monday.
Admission: $3; free on Fridays.


U.S. Sees Side Accords Set For Trade Pact by August
With the pace of negotiations quickening, the environmental and labor side accords to a North American Free Trade Agreement should be completed by early August, the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, said here today.
After meeting with President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Mr.
Kantor said it was unlikely that the talks with Mexico and Canada could be wrapped up when he meets with the trade ministers of those countries late next week in Washington.


The Buzzwords For New-Music Fans And Budding Moguls
SQUALLING guitars, booming drum samples, proffered business cards, promiscuous handshaking: the New Music Seminar is back in town for its 14th year.
Anyone in the neighborhood of the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers in Manhattan by day, or outside many of the city's rock clubs at night, can expect to see crowds of well-scrubbed music moguls in training, with their laminated seminar passes around their necks, hanging over T-shirts chosen to make that indelible first impression.
The seminar, which runs through tomorrow, offers discussions of commerce and issues by day and dozens of bands by night.
For the approximately 7,000 people who have bought full passes, at up to $380 each, it's an educational update, a job fair, a talent bazaar and a place to make contacts.
For fans who haven't made music their business, the fact that the seminar is in town brings an opportunity this weekend to hear a plethora of bands, as clubs switch from double bills to quadruple and quintuple ones.
And for all concerned, the seminar is the place to try out the latest pop jargon, whether discussing styles of music or ways to turn them into profit centers.


Free Trade's Fine, as Long as It's Really Free; Environmental Weapon
To the Editor:
On most days, your editorials advocate international cooperation and agreement, and at least once a week you call attention to the proper allocation of functions of our national government.
It is astounding, therefore, that "Nafta, Meet the Environment" (editorial, July 12) supports Judge Charles Richey's unexpected decision on the North American Free Trade Agreement case.
He would place the judiciary between the executive and legislative branches by requiring an environmental impact statement before submission of an international agreement to Congress.
If this decision were to stand, it would hamper not only the proposed free trade agreement with Canada and Mexico, but also other agreements on trade, arms control, defense, indeed on the environment itself.
Almost any subject can be construed as "affecting the quality of the human environment" by those seeking to delay or annul or hold hostage an agreement not to their liking.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Placed Norm Charlton, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Rich DeLucia, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Traded Todd Burns, pitcher, to the St.
Louis Cardinals for a player to be named later.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Brooks Kieschnick, outfielder.
Basketball Continental Basketball Association  ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Named Bill Musselman coach and vice prsident of basketball operations.
Football National Football League  NFL -- Named Thomas Spock chief financial officer and Bill Polian vice president of football development.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Agreed to terms with Jerome Bettis, running back, on a five-year contract.
Signed Don Bracken, punter; Anthony Thompson, running back, and Leon White, linebacker.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Todd Rucci, offensive lineman, to a three-year contract.
Waived Al Golden, tight end.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Browning Nagle, quarterback, and Adrian Murrell, running back.
Hockey National Hockey League  CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Released Brad Lauer and Rob Brown, forwards.
American Hockey League  SPRINGFIELD INDIANS -- Named Joel Quenneville coach and Paul Gillis assistant coach.
International Hockey League  CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Signed Don Biggs, center, to a two-year contract.
LAS VEGAS THUNDER -- Signed Brad Lauer, center.
Announced an affiliation with Knoxville of the East Coast Hockey League.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League  BALTIMORE SPIRITS -- Agreed to terms with Goran Hunjak, midfielder, on a one-year contract.
College  SKYLINE ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Named Terry Wansart president and Ron Ratner sports information director.
AKRON -- Named Mary Ann Grimes women's basketball coach.
JAMES MADISON -- Named Brooks Teal men's swimming and diving coach.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Samantha Courbell, Anna Bernstein and John Farris read from their work.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
EXPLORING THE BROOKLYN MUSEUM, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"Italian Renaissance Panel Paintings," by Martha Usdin, today at 2 P.M.; "Women in American Art," by Maribeth Flynn, tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


Change in 'Aladdin' Lyrics Looks Like Cowardly Censorship
To the Editor:
In "It's Racist, but Hey, It's Disney" (editorial, July 14), you reprint lyrics from the film "Aladdin" that the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee found unacceptable.
You applaud the Walt Disney Company's "bowing to pressure" by changing the lyrics for the home video.
Your narrow-minded, politically correct view disturbs and frightens me as a lyricist.
While I do not condone lyrics that promote intolerance of Arabs or any other group, you seem to suggest that any writing that can be interpreted as a slur or stereotype, regardless of context or the author's intent, should be deleted.
"Aladdin" is a fairy tale, adapted from "The Arabian Nights," set in a mythical, ancient and, yes, "barbaric" kingdom.
I don't think the author intended to comment on Arabs today and would probably have written the same lyric (changing the reference to "caravan camels") if it had been ancient Greece, China or Rome.


Restaurants
What kind of restaurant is Soleil?
Well, the decor is Provencal by way of California.
The food is American with Asian, French and Mediterranean influences.
The manager is English.
The crowd is Upper East Side, dressed for the country.
The din is as loud as it is in any downtown restaurant of the moment.
This is not as confusing as it sounds.


COMPANY NEWS
ACME ELECTRIC CORP., Olean, N.Y., an electrical equipment company, announced that it had signed a contract with L. C. Whitford Co., Wellsville, N.Y., to construct a $6 million electronic products manufacturing facility in Cuba, N.Y.
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, said it was cutting 300 jobs, mostly in the United States, to pare costs.


CHRONICLE
Ask E. L. DOCTOROW about the interaction between television and literature, and he waxes poetic.
Perhaps that is because he and two colleagues are deep into plans for a 24-hour cable network called Booknet that will be -- no surprise -- about books.
"It only makes sense that among the channels devoted to the selling of mattresses and costume jewelry, Americans should be able to find a channel that honors the full range of intellectual and cultural life," the award-winning writer said the other day.


GERMAN SOLDIERS HEAD FOR SOMALIA
In an action intended to show that reunified Germany is not hamstrung by inhibitions about the use of military forces outside its borders, Germany began flying 1,700 soldiers to Somalia this week on a mission that many fear could prove the opposite instead.
As a test case of Germany's willingness to take on international responsibilities, the Somalia deployment -- the first by German combat troops since World War II -- is potentially a fragile one.
The Government has assured the many domestic opponents of the operation that the troops joining the United Nations forces already there will not be drawn into combat.


Robert M. Kossick, Chief Executive, 53, At New Jersey Bank
Robert M. Kossick, chairman and chief executive officer of the National Community Bank of New Jersey, died on Tuesday at his home in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 53 years old and also had a home in Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The cause was a heart attack, the bank's announcement said.


Free Music Outdoors
The Naumburg Orchestra is to play Rossini's "Turco in Italia" Overture, Haydn's "Military" Symphony, Schumann's Cello Concerto and Leo Weiner's Serenade tomorrow evening at 8 in a free concert in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
Jens Nygaard is to conduct, with Leslie Parnas the soloist in the Schumann.
Information: (212) 799-1259.


A White House Death: Grief Wrapped in Confusion
A few months ago Amy Stewart asked her former law partner, Vincent W. Foster Jr., how he liked his new work.
Mr.
Foster, the deputy White House counsel, summed up his feelings like this: "Interesting, yes. Fun, no."
That was about the time that Judge Richard S. Arnold, chief of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, in St.
Louis, called Mr.
Foster with a similar question, Are you having fun yet?
Mr.
Foster replied tersely, "Not yet."


Now Takeover of Canal Makes Panama Uneasy
Until recently, there was still no greater act of nationalist faith among Panamanians than to declare that the 51-mile canal that cuts through the psyche of this country as completely as it bisects its geography must revert to full local ownership and control.
But with the turnover of the canal and the 500-square-mile corridor surrounding it fast gathering momentum and due to be completed by the end of the decade, there has been a tidal shift of attitudes among Panamanians.


Brown-Forman Gets New Chief
The Brown-Forman Corporation said yesterday that Owsley Brown 2d, its president since 1983, had been named chief executive.
Mr.
Brown succeeds William Lee Lyons Brown Jr., his brother, who announced at the company's annual shareholder meeting yesterday that he was stepping down as chief executive of the big liquor and wine company.
He will continue as chairman for two years.


Review/Film; From Japan, Animated Views Of the Future
For those whose ideal movie is a sophisticated extension of Nintendo, the Japanese animated films "Silent Mobius" and "Neo-Tokyo" are the next best thing to diving into a video game and becoming part of the electronic landscape.
Michitaka Kikuchi's "Silent Mobius," the longer film in the program, which opens today at the Cinema Village, visualizes Tokyo in the year 2024 as an endless city of identical skyscrapers and permanent gridlock.
An all-female police force patrols the streets, its main task the destruction of a nether world led by an "Alien"-esque devil called Lucifer Hawke.
Lucifer, in the language of the film, can shift at will "from corporal to intangible states of being."


Justice Dept. to Stay on Case of Aide's Death
The Justice Department said today that it would continue investigating the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., a senior White House lawyer and a close friend of President Clinton, until it could find a reason for his apparent suicide.
The decision to conduct the unusual Federal investigation was announced after Mr.
Clinton said this morning that there was nothing more that could be known about why, at the pinnacle of his career, Mr.
Foster appeared to have killed himself.


Malcolm Birnbaum, 48, Leader In Financing Independent Films
Malcolm A. Birnbaum, a leader in the financing of independently produced movies, died on Tuesday at his summer home in Old Greenwich, Conn.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE DESIGN SHOW: EXHIBITION INVITATIONS IN THE U.S.A.," Exit Art/ The First World, 548 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Closes today.
Free.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 966-7745.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


As Firms Shift Strategies, the Old Order Moves On; Perella Severing Wasserstein Link
Breaking up one of the most influential teams from the takeover battles of the 1980's, Joseph R. Perella will end his long-running partnership with Bruce Wasserstein and resign as chairman of their investment firm, the Wasserstein Perella Group.
Mr.
Wasserstein, now the chief executive, will assume the additional title of chairman when Mr.
Perella's resignation takes effect on Sept. 1, the firm announced yesterday.


Mortgage Mover
Stock in the First Financial Caribbean Corporation, Puerto Rico's leading mortgage banker, has risen sharply since June.
The company plans further expansion on the United States mainland and is awaiting approval to acquire Catano Savings Bank of Puerto Rico.
Yesterday, the company reported record second-quarter earnings.


At Home Abroad; No Longer Quiet
"It used to be a quiet country," Dr.
Vichit Suraphongchai said.
"We opened the door, and in came the wind of change. Do we want to close it again?"
Dr.
Vichit is president of Bangkok Bank, the country's largest, and his question was only rhetorical.
No one visible here wants to end Thailand's boom.
After economic growth in double digits over recent years, people are complaining that it is now a mere 8 percent or so -- a figure that would be a miracle in Western countries.





Clinton Urges Haitian Leader To Appoint a New Premier
President Clinton urged today that Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, move swiftly toward restoring democratic institutions in his country as part of an agreement that is to return him to power on Oct. 30.
The Administration particularly wants Father Aristide to appoint a new prime minister to replace the military Government headed by Gen.
Raoul Cedras.
That step is part of a peace settlement reached on Governors Island on July 3 by Father Aristide and Haiti's military leadership.


Today's Hearing Will Be Closed
When the Senate Judiciary Committee reconvenes Friday morning to consider the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg it will do so in a session closed to the press and public.
The closed hearing is one of the changes put in place by the committee chairman, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, to avoid some of the turmoil that occurred two years ago during the Supreme Court confirmation hearings for Judge Clarence Thomas.


Silver Lining Dept.
Students of history will find one small note of cheer in this week's otherwise depressing report about the collective failure of New York City's leadership that turned the 1991 disturbances in Crown Heights into a four-day riot.
Back in 1968, the Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders -- the Kerner commission -- examined the riots then engulfing America's cities.
One major problem, it said, was that elected officials had deliberately distanced themselves from urban unrest, ceding authority to the police.
Further, they had done so with the connivance of the police, who resented civilian intrusion on their turf.
The net result was to inhibit municipal coordination and alienate the poor.


Reviews/Art; In Connecticut, Clothes, Photos and a Yale on Yale
From Stamford to Hartford and at points in between, the summer art season in Connecticut includes a provocative look at contemporary art that uses clothing as a metaphor, an examination of the influence of the 19th-century photographer Eadweard Muybridge, a celebration of an important university art program and a consideration of the work of an American master.
Ridgefield
In an age of grunge, clothes may no longer make the man.
But as "Fall From Fashion" at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art makes clear, they can make terrific art.
The 37 artists take clothes, with their implicit references to social status and personal identity, and extend the metaphorical suggestions in a wide variety of ways.
The result is a thought-provoking show on an intriguing theme.


Review/Music; How Mozart and Brahms Took On the Status Quo
The weekly themes at the Mostly Mozart Festival in Avery Fisher Hall this season have not always revealed much on individual nights, but the lecture and concert on Tuesday made a convincing case for a connection between Mozart and Brahms.
Well, all right: two separate cases.
The lecture was by Michael P. Steinberg, who teaches European history at Cornell University.
Mr.
Steinberg, as he has proved at the Bard Music Festival in upstate New York, is a wonderfully stimulating speaker about music.
Here he extended Schoenberg's notion of Brahms the Progressive, showing the senses in which Mozart, too, can be seen as progressive.


Ferry Promises Relief for Rockland's Weary Commuters
Laura McGovern's commute from her home in Rockland County to her office in Manhattan seems like it would require the conditioning of a triathlete.
To get to her job at the Social Register on Park Avenue, Ms.
McGovern must drive from her family's New City home to the train station in Nanuet, board an N.J.
Transit train to Hoboken, take a PATH train from Hoboken to 23d Street and then walk six blocks.
Her round-trip commuting time: about three and a half hours.


Clinton at Funeral for White House Aide


Rabbi Baruch N. Faivelson, 80, Yeshiva University Administrator
Rabbi Baruch N. Faivelson, a retired teacher, administrator and dean at Yeshiva University, died on July 17 at Kings Highway Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 80 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was heart failure after a long illness, his family said.


Philippines Acts to Protect Environment
To the Editor:
Your July 13 Hinunangan Journal inaccurately presents images of the Philippines as a metaphor for the national situation.


INSIDE
7 Homeless Boys Slain in Rio
Hooded members of a so-called extermination group in Rio de Janeiro killed seven homeless boys and wounded two as gunmen opened fire on dozens of youths.
Page 3.
Industry May Aid Ex-Soviets
The White House wants American companies more involved in building a private sector in the former Soviet Union, and more money allocated for the non-Russian republics.
Page 4.
White House Irks Moynihan
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan declared that the Clinton Administration must make compromises on the budget.
Page 26.
Vietnam War Grows Longer
In New York State, America's longest war just got longer.
The starting date was moved up, making more veterans eligible for benefits.
Page 21.


MOBIL CORP. (N)
The Mobil Corporation reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings more than doubled, to $579 million, because of higher natural gas prices, strength in its Far East markets and gains in tax-related benefits.
Allen E. Murray, Mobil's chairman, said the company was able to overcome low oil prices and recessions in industrialized markets through higher natural gas prices, $41 million in companywide restructuring efforts and an increase in worldwide production, especially in Nigeria, California and the North Sea.


Observer; Hasta La Vista, Gutenberg
Every year promptly on the dot of the summer solstice, we bookish folk put down Balzac, Hawthorne, Ivan Turgenev and Virginia Woolf and pick up our summer reading, and this year my summer reading has left me tickled pink.
Yes, obviously I've read and been bewitched by "Tickled Pink," Maggie Maxwell's ingenious self-help book on how to cultivate gloriously glowing summer skin color now that we all know sunburn is even grimmer news than sidestream smoke.
Maxwell's "299 ways to tickle like a pro" include a few that may make you blush if you're not a regular TV fiend or moviegoer, but as the book roguishly notes, "nobody ever got skin cancer from a blush."


Armco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jail? Must Be Houston
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL became the latest professional athlete to see the inside of a Houston jail yesterday when he was arrested for allegedly assaulting two off-duty police officers at a nightclub.
At least 12 other athletes since 1986 have been similarly charged while in Houston, according to police records.


Gang Membership Grows In Middle-Class Suburbs
A few of the middle-class teen-agers in baggy shorts and backwards baseball caps smoking cigarettes on the lawn behind Mark Twain Junior High School were quick to claim membership in a street gang.
"Ooh, ooh, I'm in one!" said George Clementi, a 14-year-old in a Looney Tunes T-shirt.
Actually, he said, he belongs to two groups, the Crime Related Artists and the United Crime Kings.


Brown's Perry Returns After 2-Day Walkout
Cleveland Browns defensive lineman MICHAEL DEAN PERRY was back in camp yesterday after a two-day walkout.
Perry missed morning workouts but returned in time for afternoon practice.
"It's good to be back," said Perry, who has often quarreled with Coach BILL BELICHICK.
"Contrary to what everybody believes, it will be all right."


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Joseph J. Palisi, 67; Brooklyn Historian Restored Monument
Joseph John Palisi, a history professor, research specialist and former official historian of the Borough of Brooklyn, died on Wednesday at his home in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
He was 67.
His nephew, Christopher Policano, said the cause was a heart attack.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Senate vote on the patenting of the Confederate flag as a design symbol -- a use opposed by Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois -- misstated the number of nonwhites in the Senate besides Ms.
Moseley Braun.
There are three: Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado, and Daniel K. Inouye and Daniel K. Akaka of Hawaii.


Kimberly-Clark reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Russia Aid Plan Promotes Role for U.S. Companies
Revising its aid proposals for the former Soviet Union, the Clinton Administration has told the Senate that it wants to get American companies more involved in efforts to build a private sector and to expand money allocated for republics other than Russia.
The new proposal came in the form of a request for $2.5 billion in appropriations sent to the Senate Thursday night and intended to carry out the Administration's aid pledges for Russia and the other former republics of the Soviet Union.


Textron Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Stern Test for Devil His Due
Devil His Due, the 4-year-old colt who has won four stakes in his last five starts, will meet his biggest test today when he races seven rivals in the $500,000 Philip H. Iselin Handicap at Monmouth Park.
The race is the seventh of nine events in the American Championship Racing Series, which Devil His Due leads on points after victories in the Gulfstream Park Handicap, the Pimlico Special and the Suburban Handicap.
But he was expected to be challenged by the West Coast speed horse, Bertrando, who ran second to Best Pal in the Hollywood Gold Cub three weeks ago and who might hold his speed longer at a mile and an eighth in the Iselin.


Moynihan Scolds the White House, Saying It Must Be Flexible to Win a Budget Deal
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the chief Senate negotiator on the deficit-reduction legislation, accused the Clinton Administration today of inflexibility and naivete and said that if the White House did not agree to some compromises next week, he would not be able to produce a budget bill that could pass the Senate.
Mr.
Moynihan's outburst came as Congressional negotiations on the budget broke for the weekend.
It represented growing tension between Congress and the White House just as the differences between the Senate and House conferees were narrowing, including the emergence of the outlines of a compromise on a gasoline tax.


CHRONICLE
As the benefit party scene, transplanted from Manhattan to the Hamptons for the summer, goes into full tilt, it is increasingly common to open the checkbook for more than one worthy cause in an evening.
A main event draws hundreds, even thousands, and then there are the more intimate pre-parties, which are often attached to different charities.
A dance, for example, called Take Off! will be held next Saturday for the Long Island Association for AIDS Care.
More than 1,000 people are expected to turn out in a hangar at the East Hampton Airport for what the chairman, ROBERT KEILT, described as "a high energy party for people who want to tear their shirts off."


Cipsco Inc. reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Review/Dance; The This-Worldly Side of Nikolais
Back in the 1950's, Alwin Nikolais amazed and shocked audiences with his multimedia experiments.
The strange gestures, bizarre costumes and odd props Nikolais devised made his productions appear to take place in an alien world far removed from our own, an impression intensified by the whirring, buzzing and chiming electronic music he composed to accompany his theatrical adventures.
A few dancegoers pronounced his choreography nonhuman.
Others greeted it with delight.
What the fuss was about became wonderfully clear on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater when Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance presented four works choreographed between 1953 and 1960.
It was a dazzling evening that confirmed that the Nikolais Retrospective, which is to continue through July 31, is a major event.


MAJOR WINS VOTE INSURING APPROVAL OF EUROPEAN PACT
In a do-or-die move on which he staked his political future, Prime Minister John Major won a vote of confidence today that insured the British Parliament's final approval of the Treaty on European Union.
With the vote, the so-called Maastricht Treaty to forge a closer economic and political union among the 12 countries of the European Community faces one last hurdle in Britain, a judicial review likely to be decided by August.


Trinova Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Chris DeBlasio, Composer, 34
Chris DeBlasio, a composer best known for his song cycles, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 34.
The cause was AIDS, his companion, William Berger, said.


Man of the Mississippi Returns to Conquer It
After all the miseries sown by the Mississippi lately for John Fowler, it seems biblically meet and just that he stands once more in his wildly bucking boat to reap 35-pound catfish and other rewards from the mud and fickleness of the river.
For more than 40 years he has been standing up, never allowing boat seats aboard, the better to save space for the morning catch offered up by the river in what seems hand-to-hand combat as he wrestles his hoop nets up from the bottom.


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Woman's 1990 Seaside Death To Be Treated as a Homicide
The death of a 20-year-old woman in 1990 whose body was found bruised, bloodied and partly nude in a New Jersey resort town will be investigated as a homicide, not an accident, state officials said yesterday.
The inquiry comes after three years of pressure from family members and private investigators who objected to official conclusions about the death of Susan Negersmith, whose body was found in an alley in Wildwood, N.J., on May 27, 1990, the start of the Memorial Day weekend.


First Colony Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Increases Fund To Outbid Terrorists For Afghan Missiles
The Central Intelligence Agency's covert operations division will spend $55 million in a new effort to buy back more than 300 Stinger antiaircraft missiles it gave to guerrillas fighting the Soviet-backed Government of Afghanistan in the 1980's, Government and intelligence officials say.
The effort reflects the agency's fear that it may be outbid by terrorists and hostile governments in the black market for the Stinger, a lightweight, shoulder-carried, highly accurate antiaircraft missile considered the best weapon of its kind, the officials said.


Monson Wins Lawsuit
DON MONSON, a former Oregon basketball coach, was awarded $292,000 by a jury in his breach-of-contract lawsuit against the university.


Jumping From Student to Entrepreneur
Bill Neely, 22, of Silver Spring, Md., founded B.G Graphics in 1990 as a sophomore at Howard University.
"My father was doing a seminar and he needed a brochure. He took it to someone , and it didn't look that good. I looked at it and I said, 'Dad I could do that.' So he let me do that brochure."
He sketched, doodled and worked on computers at a lab at Howard, one at his part-time job, and one at his friend's house.
For less than eight hours work, he earned $150.
He then designed a business card and solicited business from neighbors, church members and friends.
"One of my biggest breaks was designing orientation information packets for Howard University. Having that in my portfolio opened some other doors for me," Mr.
Neely said.
The biggest door was that of the Congressional Black Caucus.
His company produced graphics for its annual Legislative Weekend in 1992.
"It wasn't major work for them, but for me, it was pretty major."


Ametek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Let the Truth Pour In
As Sarajevo totters, Americans and Europeans can agree to little more than hand-wringing about the dismembering of the former Yugoslavia.
Yet without putting lives at risk, and at modest cost, the West could strike an important blow against nationalist bullies in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It can challenge the media monopoly by the warlords who foment tribal hatreds.
Surveys show that 64 percent of Serbs glean their information from television, 12 percent from radio, 11 percent from newspapers.
Token dissent is permitted in print and radio, but not on television; it offers only a picture of a suffering but wronged people who ardently support President Slobodan Milosevic.
And in Croatia, where the beloved leader is Franjo Tudjman, the evening news ends with this hortatory flourish: "Good night, Croatian fighters, wherever you may be."


Surgeon General-Designate Weathers Senate Hearing
Surgeon General-designate Joycelyn Elders, under attack by many conservatives for her outspoken advocacy of condom distribution in high schools, early sex education and government financing of abortion, underwent a bumpy Senate confirmation hearing today but seemed to weather it well.
Her performance, before the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, was such that Democrats were bolstered in their confidence that the questions raised last week about a number of her past financial dealings would not block the road to confirmation.


Classical Music in Review
Taipei Artists Chorus Taipei Theater


U.S. Eases Rules Governing Telephone Links With Cuba
In what could be the most significant easing of the economic embargo of Cuba in years, the Clinton Administration has decided to permit American telephone companies to expand communications links to Havana and share some of their revenues with the Castro Government, officials said today.
The move is a response to a surge in calls through Canadian-based companies that relay telephone calls from the United States to Cuba, evading the embargo and charging higher rates than American companies.


Are There Any More Like Him Down on the Farm?
Welcome to the Yankee future.
If you are ready for fastballs that zoom past hitters at 95 miles an hour, nasty sliders that confound and confuse and a mound presence that speaks of intensity and guile and not rookie nerves, you are ready to watch Mark Hutton pitch in a pennant race.
Overcoming a first-inning run by the Angels and an unearned run in the sixth that snapped a 1-1 tie, Hutton pitched wondrously in his debut to power the Yankees to a 5-2 victory at Yankee Stadium.
General Manager Gene Michael said Hutton was ready for the majors a month ago, and he looked it last night by halting the Angels on three hits and one earned run in eight innings.


Natural Limits
When the history of the last half of this century is written, population growth is likely to get far more attention than it does now.
Those of us born before mid-century have witnessed unprecedented worldwide rises in incomes, steady gains in food consumption and a dramatic extension of life expectancy.
But this golden age may be coming to an end for reasons that we do not well understand.
And that is what will fascinate historians.
After mid-century, the world's farmers more than doubled the grain harvest, something no previous generation had done.
Raising the harvest from 631 million tons in 1950 to 1,650 million tons in 1984, they increased grain production by 40 percent per person, reducing hunger and malnutrition around the world.
Since 1984, however, grain production has fallen behind population growth, falling roughly 1 percent a year.


Cuomo Seeks Compromise On Bill to Aid Mentally Ill
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed a compromise today aimed at breaking his nettlesome deadlock with the Legislature over mental-health financing, but top lawmakers gave it a cool reception.
"If this represents their bottom-line proposal, I would have to say they don't seem to be very serious about reaching an accommodation with the Legislature," said Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a Manhattan Democrat and the chairman of the mental health committee.


Alleghany Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Owens &amp; Minor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Beliefs
In the Midwest the floods may be cresting, but the agony of loss has only begun.
Among the millions stripped of homes, possessions, crops, farm land and futures, there are doubtless many who will sit, like Job, amid the ruins of their lives and ask why God has turned against them.
Some Americans have already come up with answers.
In St.
Louis, people on radio call-in programs are proclaiming that the floods are God's punishment for the legalization of river boat gambling in the region.
And nearly one of five Americans agreed with the statement in a Gallup Poll that the "floods are God's judgment on the people of the United States for their sinful ways."


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Wood's 65 Overtakes Clampett by a Stroke  Willie Wood turned in a stellar round yesterday to take the lead in the $1 million New England Classic at Sutton, Mass.
Wood followed a first-round 68 with a 65, completing 36 holes in nine-under 133 for a one-stroke lead over Bobby Clampett.
"So far it's been one of those days, two days in a row," said Wood, who has nine birdies and no bogeys so far.
Wood won five major junior golf titles in the late 1970's, but his promising career was slowed when his wife, Holly, died of cancer four years ago.
Clampett, the first-round leader, had 18 pars yesterday after a 63 on Thursday over the 7,110-yard Pleasant Valley Country Club course.
Steve Lowery, Brad Bryant, Bob Estes and Joey Sindelar were another stroke back at 135. (AP)
Newcomer Wins New Jersey Open: Greg Hamilton, a 25-year-old who made a living gambling on golf courses last year, rolled in a four-foot birdie on the second playoff hole with Ed Whitman to win the New Jersey Open yesterday at the Montclair Golf Club in West Orange.
The victory was the first in the state for Hamilton, who left Texas in April to became the assistant pro at Canoe Brook County Club in Summit.
Hamilton and Whitman, of Knickerbocker, both finished with 72-hole totals of five-over-par 285 to finish a stroke ahead of a four-time Open winner, David Glenz of Crystal Springs.
Charlie Cowell of Green Brook and Chris Dachisen of Maplewood were two shots back. (AP)


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Waived Ted Power, pitcher.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Recalled Mark Hutton, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
Optioned Kevin Maas, first baseman-designated hitter, to Columbus.


When Selling Stocks, Monday's Child Fares Less Well
Say you're spending a quiet weekend reviewing your stock portfolio, deciding what to sell.
You hope to place the order before the busy workweek begins, using the toll-free lines that so many brokerage houses operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
That may not be such a good idea.
A number of studies have found that share prices tend to fall at the start of the week -- especially early on Monday.


CHRONICLE
At the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation in Chicago, the talk was on a lofty plane this week.
The appointment of CATHARINE R. STIMPSON, University Professor at Rutgers University, to be director of the MacArthur Fellows Program was announced there yesterday.
As director, Professor Stimpson will oversee the way the foundation selects recipients of what have come to be known as "genius prizes." The awards of $150,000 to $375,000, given over five years, are intended to allow gifted people in various fields to develop their potential.
Candidates are proposed by 100 anonymous nominators, and winners are chosen by a committee and the foundation board.


World and Pathmark Are Raymond's Oyster
It seems that Lisa Raymond has complete control of her life.
For a while she wanted to be a normal teen-ager, hang out with friends, party a little, listen to music and go to college.
So she did.
The past two years she attended the University of Florida, majoring in criminology, while advancing in the collegiate tennis ranks.
When she had enough of that, she did the only logical thing: she turned professional.
While in college, Raymond lost only 4 of 87 matches with 44 straight match victories, two National Collegiate Athletic Association singles championships and a team title last year.
And in her recent debut in Japan, Raymond defeated Gabriela Sabatini.


Stress Fracture Means Giants Won't Get Kicks Out of Willis
The Giants have lost one of their place-kickers, Ken Willis, with a severe stress fracture in his lower left leg.
They have not officially announced the injury because they are still making personnel decisions, but Coach Dan Reeves said today that it was likely the injury would sideline Willis for the season.
"It's an unfortunate thing for him," said Reeves.
"I met with the staff last night and we talked about this, but we haven't reached a decision yet. Apparently the injury was worse than we all thought."


Ginsburg Hearings End In a Secluded Meeting
The Senate Judiciary today held its first closed hearing ever to hear personal accusations against a Supreme Court nominee, but the session for Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg was really just for practice, committee members said.
No substantive charges surfaced in the 20-minute session, committee aides said, and Judge Ginsburg seemed headed for an easy if not unanimous confirmation after three days of public testimony.
The committee vote is scheduled for Thursday.


Kendall International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Out on a Limb on Job Data
They say that politics runs in cycles, but these days the cycles seem to spin faster and faster.
Only last summer Bill Clinton mocked President George Bush, saying he had failed to meet his pledge to create 30 million jobs in four years.
The lesson, some Democrats said, is that such a specific promise is always folly.


Tecumseh Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Theater; America, As Loony As It Is Beautiful
Midway into "The Complete History of America (Abridged)," its zany 90-minute gloss of events of the last 500 years, the Reduced Shakespeare Company produces a flip chart to teach the audience its new and improved version of "America the Beautiful." Translated into the jargon of political correctness, the revision is a turgid clot of words like "eco-warrior" and "bio-region" that when jammed against the song's simple melody are virtually impossible to sing.
The hopeless incongruity between melody and lyric, however, doesn't prevent the company from stumbling hilariously through its own four-syllable verbal sludge.
"The Complete History of America," which was performed on Wednesday evening, was one of two pieces that the San Francisco troupe brought to Alice Tully Hall as part of the Serious Fun festival.
On Thursday, the company performed its similarly whimsical epic "The Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged)."


Exxon Posts A 33% Gain In Earnings
The Exxon Corporation reported a 33 percent gain in second-quarter profits yesterday, attributing the sharp increase primarily to cost-cutting, increased demand for gasoline in Europe and lower crude oil prices.
The nation's largest oil company, based in Irving, Tex., reported a net income rise to $1.24 billion, or 98 cents a share, from $930 million, or 73 cents a share, last year.
Revenues rose slightly, to $27.9 billion from $27.8 billion.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about an offer to contribute American troops to a United Nations force for Haiti referred incorrectly to tensions between Haiti and the Dominican Republic in 1963, which contributed to the end of the last deployment of American troops to Haiti.
Haitian troops entered the Dominican Embassy in Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital; they did not invade Dominican soil.


Trying a Talking Cure In a Young, Ailing World
THEY sat in a semicircle and talked about what was on their minds.
One girl was mournfully pregnant and mostly quiet.
A boy with a Caribbean lilt painfully picked out words to describe friends shot dead.
When the conversation moved to relationships, one girl allowed that the only real answer was to give men 24 hours to get out of New York City.
"Put them in jail," was her answer to the recently publicized problem of boys molesting girls in public swimming pools.
"Let somebody feel on them to let them see how it feels."


Nash Finch Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Viacom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dr. Karl Paley, 79; Internist Specialized In Metabolic Illness
Dr.
Karl Robert Paley, an internist and former department head associated with Lenox Hill Hospital for 45 years, died on Wednesday at his Greenwich Village home in Manhattan.
He was 79.
The cause was lymphoma, his family said.


Blind Woman's Subway Death Exposes Platform Safety Flaws; Install Warning Strips
To the Editor:
An issue that must be addressed with regard to the death of Pamela Schneider on a subway track is the need by people who are blind or visually impaired for tactile and visual warning strips at platform edges in the New York City subway system as well as in all mass transit systems.
Such strips use raised domes and contrasting colors to alert those with visual impairments that they are approaching the platform edge.


From McGinniss's Side, A Strike at Manchester
In a counterattack on William Manchester -- who has accused Joe McGinniss of including plagiarized material in "The Last Brother," his forthcoming book on Senator Edward M. Kennedy -- Simon &amp; Schuster, Mr.
McGinniss's publisher, is circulating a document that essentially accuses Mr.
Manchester of doing the same thing in a book 10 years ago.
The document, which the publisher is making available to reporters as background for interviews with Mr.
McGinniss, includes what the publisher says is a comparison of Mr.
Manchester's 1983 memoir, "One Brief Shining Moment," to a 1963 book by Hugh Sidey called "John F. Kennedy, President."


Tapie Attacks TV Crew
BERNARD TAPIE, owner of embattled European soccer champion Olympique Marseilles, attacked a French television crew and threw its camera into the Mediterranean, the network said yesterday.


Review/Dance; With an Affinity for Trees
Grass became a stage floor and foliage served as scenery last Saturday afternoon when Irene Hultman, Reggie Wilson and Muna Tseng presented dances at Wave Hill.
They thereby made a magical theater out of this beautiful public garden in Riverdale, in the Bronx.
Ms.
Hultman's "Right in Front of My Nose" took place on a sloping hillside.
Rachel Lynch-John, Chrysa Parkinson and Ms.
Hultman came into view from behind some trees, dancing gently and lyrically to a score by Ben Neill that combined electronic sounds with live music for a mutantrumpet, a trumpetlike instrument invented by the composer.


B. W. Bates, 85, Princeton Professor And Conservationist
Blanchard W. Bates, a scholar of Romance languages and literature and a conservationist, died at home on Wednesday.
He was 85 and lived on Chebeague Island, Maine.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Despair Is Haunting the Midwest As Flood Waters Continue to Rise
The spent emotions are much the same, from Chelsea, Iowa, where people are returning home to find rotted fish inside waterlogged farmhouses, to Kaskaskia Island, Ill., where stunned residents tried today to salvage livestock and belongings from their island town swallowed by the Mississippi, to this soggy Missouri village where residents are still watching floodwaters rise.
The soul-numbing floods without end are producing a physical and mental exhaustion that is slowly wearing down people.
"I haven't slept for a week," said Patsy Thornton, who lies awake each night here listening to the sloshing of the floodwaters in her basement and the rumble of the pumps working to keep them from rising too high.


Compueter Associates International (N)
Computer Associates International Inc., a leading maker of software, reported that its net income rose 60 percent for the first quarter that ended June 30, an increase that exceeded analysts' expectations.
Revenue rose 15 percent.


Blind Woman's Subway Death Exposes Platform Safety Flaws
To the Editor:
The tragic death of Pamela Schneider, the blind woman who fell on the subway tracks, raises questions about New York City transit system safety warnings and operating procedures (news article, July 8).


Committee Supports Bill to Halt Program For Nuclear Testing
The Senate Armed Services Committee voted unanimously today to eliminate Safeguard C, a cold war program that keeps the United States ready to resume nuclear testing in the atmosphere.
The United States signed a treaty 30 years ago forswearing such tests.
The program to remain prepared for a resumption of such testing has cost more than $1 billion since then, Congressional aides said.
It is one of scores of nuclear weapons programs that survived the cold war.


Lauritzen, 36, Rides On, Ignoring That Old Sunset
When a group of 20 riders detached themselves from the Tour de France field and attempted a breakaway this morning, Dag-Otto Lauritzen made sure he was among them.
He was dreaming -- and who isn't -- of a stage victory before the bicycle race ends Sunday in Paris.
The break had no chance and was caught at the 25th mile of the 125-mile rolling stage from Orthez through dark and orderly pine forests to the vineyards leading to Bordeaux.
Lauritzen, a Norwegian who rides for the TVM team, had one more opportunity.


Classical Music in Review
Samuel Brodsky Pianist Weill Recital Hall


President's Policy on Gay Troops Is Backed in Vote of Senate Panel
As it approved a Pentagon budget for the fiscal year 1994, the Senate Armed Services Committee today endorsed President Clinton's policy to allow homosexuals to serve in the military.
The panel added a provision that would allow the Defense Secretary to restore the practice of asking recruits about their sexuality if the Pentagon believes it is necessary to maintain combat readiness.
But Pentagon officials said the provision was only Congressional guidance, not binding language, and did not substantively alter the Administration's plan.


Strike Possibility Raised
With baseball's club owners still at least three weeks away from making a decision on their revenue-sharing plans, players were advised yesterday that the owners might be deliberately stalling in the negotiation of a new collective bargaining agreement as part of a strategy to avoid a late-season strike.
In a "status of negotiations" memo, Donald Fehr, executive director of the Players Association, told the players that the owners might be trying to control the timing of talks and wrote: "Regrettably, it is for this reason that players must now begin to consider a work stoppage late this season."


COMPANY BRIEFS
CITICORP, New York, said its Citibank N.A. unit had bought a 50 percent stake in the life insurance company Cruz Blanca Seguros de Vida S.A., Chile, for $19 million.
MAGNA INTERNATIONAL INC., Markham, Ontario, said it would build a stamping plant in Greenville, S.C., to make vehicle body parts for the car assembly plant being built by BMW A.G., Munich, Germany, in the nearby Greer-Spartanburg area.
ROTOREX TECHNOLOGIES INC., and Shenzhen Petrochemical Co.
Ltd. of China said they had agreed to form a joint venture to manufacture rotary air-conditioner compressors in Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China.


President Returns Home To Bury Boyhood Friend
President Clinton came home today to bury a boyhood friend and the mystery surrounding his unlikely suicide.
Speaking in a cathedral packed with the state's political and legal elite, the President described Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, as a lifelong protector whose failure to protect himself is beyond human understanding.


For New Entries, Europe Is Popular
New funds that invest in Europe are popping up everywhere.
Many analysts say that the economic cycle in Europe is a few years behind the United States and that Europe is on the edge of a big bull market.
The Tweedy, Browne Company, an investment firm begun in 1920, specializes in classic value stock picking, or buying shares at a significant discount to what investors believe the companies are actually worth.
Its first foray into mutual funds is a global stock fund, now totally invested outside the United States, mainly in Europe.
It concentrates on companies with small and medium capitalization, and plans to hedge all currency risks.


Olin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Death and (Retroactive!) Taxes
Tucked away in the statutory language of President Clinton's budget reconciliation bill, now in a House-Senate conference, is a little noticed provision that would surprise many estate beneficiaries.
The measure would unfairly impose a rate increase in estate, gift and generation-skipping taxes that would be retroactive to Jan. 1.
The proposed increase, which would raise the top rate from 50 percent to 55 percent, would hit many estates and beneficiaries, including many owners of family-owned businesses and farms.


SOUTH ASIANS SEEK A SECURITY FORUM
Anxious over the growing power of China and over the pullout of American armed forces from Asia, several large Southeast Asian countries are moving to create a regional security forum with the United States and Japan that will meet regularly to discuss military stability in the region with the world's fastest-growing economy.
The security forum, which is being established at the suggestion of Japan and with the blessing of the Clinton Administration, represents an important shift in strategy for the major non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia, which had long depended on Washington to keep peace in the region.


Dumas and Suns Agree
Rookie forward RICHARD DUMAS, who helped the Phoenix Suns reach the National Basketball Association finals last season, agreed in principle to a long-term contract, the team said yesterday.
Terms of the deal weren't given. (AP)


Alaska Governor, Once Pro-Secession, Sues Over Federal Land
Gov.
Walter J. Hickel of Alaska, who was elected as a candidate of a party that advocated seceding from the union, filed a lawsuit against the Federal Government today, charging that the United States has violated the terms of statehood and deprived the state of its ability to raise revenue.
The $29 billion suit, which Alaska officials say is the largest ever filed by a state against the Government, is the loudest broadside yet in Mr.
Hickel's continuing battle with the Federal Government.
In the last year, he has stepped up his criticism, accusing the Government of treating Alaska, the nation's biggest state, like a distant colony.


Amerada Hess Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Threat of Statehood in Puerto Rico Leads to a Restored Tax Break
Worried about reopening the debate on Puerto Rican statehood, budget negotiators agreed today to reinstate $2.6 billion in tax breaks for big American companies that do business on the island.
President Clinton had originally proposed to move quickly to phase out Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, which exempts mainland companies from Federal taxes on income earned in Puerto Rico as long as it remains a commonwealth.
Intended to save the Treasury $6.8 billion over five years, the provision passed the House intact as part of the President's deficit-reduction package two months ago.


Fund American Enterprises Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BOMBING SUSPECT SEIZED AT RESORT
An Egyptian welder described as a major conspirator in the foiled plot to bomb four targets in New York City was surprised at a barbecue in a New Jersey seaside motel Thursday night and arrested while trying to flee with an 11-year-old boy he had grabbed, Federal officials announced yesterday.
The man, Matarawy Mohammad Said Saleh, 44, a convicted heroin dealer, became the 11th suspect seized in what authorities have charged was a conspiracy by Muslim militants to explode bombs in the Holland and Lincoln Tunnels, the United Nations and the Federal Building, which houses the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
A second man, accused of hiding Mr.
Saleh, was also arrested.


With $160 Million, Ousted Chief Is Looking to Buy
The $160 million being paid to Paul B. Kazarian by the Sunbeam-Oster Company, which ousted him as chairman in January, won't be lying around for long.
The 37-year-old executive said in an interview yesterday that he was already drawing up a shopping list of possible acquisitions, one day after Sunbeam announced that it would buy out his stake in the company to settle lawsuits.


DQE reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Emlen Etting, Artist, 88
Emlen Etting, a painter, sculptor and illustrator, died on Tuesday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 88.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Gloria Braggiotti Etting.


Browning-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


No Headline
They have absolutely no sense that they cannot have everything they want.
I'm beginning to feel they think I'm from the backwoods or something. -- DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, the chief Senate negotiator, on his budget dealings with Administration officials.  [ 26:2. ]


Custody Case Affirms Biological Ties That Bind
To the Editor:
In Elizabeth Bartholet's "Blood Parents vs. Real Parents" (Op-Ed, July 13), on the two-year custody battle of the Schmidts and the DeBoers over Jessica DeBoer, Ms.
Bartholet, a lawyer, neglects a crucial legal fact: Jessica's biological mother and father have been in court trying to get their baby back from the time she was a month old.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.12
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.08
3.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.21
3.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.59
5.56
6.18
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.70
6.66
7.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.43
7.40
8.56
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.81
5.79
6.13
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mexican Stocks Rise 3.87%, Lifted by Telmex Earnings
Lifted by better-than-expected earnings for Telefonos de Mexico, the Mexican stock market surged today in its most substantial rise of the year.
The market's main index rose 3.87 percent, or 64.97 points, to 1,745.66.


Classical Music in Review
Wim Mertens  Pianist Serious Fun Lincoln Center


METRO DIGEST
STRAINS BETWEEN DINKINS AND CUOMO
Strained relations have long been the norm between New York City mayors and New York governors, but seldom in this long, tangled history have the interests of Mayor Dinkins and Governor Cuomo collided as decisively as they did this week.
Page 1.
ANOTHER BOMBING PLOT SUSPECT ARRESTED
An Egyptian welder described as a key conspirator in the foiled plot to bomb four targets in New York City was surprised at a barbecue in a New Jersey seaside motel Thursday night and arrested while trying to flee with an 11-year-old boy he had grabbed, Federal officials have announced.
Page 1.
At a beach motel, one group did not seem like typical vacationers.
Page 23.
SUBURBAN GANGS ON THE INCREASE
Suburban youth gang activity is so different from urban gang warfare that it is considered almost a separate phenomenon by police officers across the region, who say the number of youth gangs is on the rise in New York suburbs, particularly in Westchester County.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
REWARD OFFERED IN TOWER BOMBING
Ending a three-month stalemate with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the State Department has offered a reward of up to $2 million for information leading to the arrest of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the main missing suspect in the World Trade Center bombing.
Page 23.  2 ARRESTED IN SLAYING OF 4
Reaching across a continent in a bid to solve four murders, New York City police detectives have arrested two men in Reno, and are returning them to New York City to face charges of killing an Indian prince and his wife and two West Side men.
Page 23.
REGION
A COMPROMISE VIEWED WARILY
Gov.
Cuomo has proposed a compromise aimed at breaking his nettlesome deadlock with the Legislature over mental-health financing, but top lawmakers gave it a cool reception.
Page 22.
DEATH RECLASSIFIED AS A MURDER
The death of a 20-year-old woman in 1990 whose body was found bruised, bloodied and partly nude in the New Jersey resort town of Wildwood will be investigated as a homicide, not an accident, state officials said.
Page 24.
HUDSON RIVER FERRY PLANNED
As early as next year, according to preliminary state plans, a high-speed ferry able to carry up to 500 people may originate in Rockland County -- either in Haverstraw or nearby Nyack -- and make a stop in Yonkers before traveling to midtown and lower Manhattan.
Early estimates put the maximum travel time at about 70 minutes each way.
Page 24.  LEONARD'S ACCUSED OF SHORT WEIGHING
Stew Leonard's Dairy, the Connecticut grocery store that built its reputation on customer-comes-first friendliness, suffered another blow when the State Consumer Products Commissioner said that it had short-weighted items like chicken, walnuts and tomatoes.
The president of the company contended that most of the violations were matters of tiny amounts.
Page 24.
About New York by Felicia R. Lee 23


Shock Therapist for Eastern Europe
Leszek Balcerowicz is a hero of Polish economic reform.
Now he's a candidate to lead the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which was formed to spur market reform in Eastern Europe and the old Soviet Union by pumping Western capital into new private enterprise.
The bank's board could not make a better choice.
Mr.
Balcerowicz helped design and, as Minister of Finance, institute "shock therapy" -- the policy of moving from centralized controls to competitive markets virtually overnight.
The shock was shocking: prices temporarily soared, output plummeted in state-owned enterprises and unemployment rose in a country where no one had known joblessness.
Frightened Poles thought him reckless; so did many Western pundits.


Herbert Uhlig, 86, Teacher and Expert On Metal Corrosion
Herbert H. Uhlig, a chemist who was an expert on the corrosion of metals, died on July 3 at his home in Hancock, N.H.
He was 86.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Custody Case Affirms Biological Ties That Bind; Origins Do Matter
To the Editor:
The bias in your coverage of the Schmidt-DeBoer custody fight over the biological child of the Schmidts (news article, July 3) has been insidious because it is hidden.
By choosing only experts who come down on the side of the would-be adoptive parents, the DeBoers, you effectively paint the Schmidts as the bad guys.


At Least 59 Killed in Crash of Chinese Airliner


Ms. Moseley Braun's Majestic Moment
On Thursday, Carol Moseley Braun woke up a sleepy Senate to the unthinking way the white majority can offend minority Americans.
Before Ms.
Moseley Braun interrupted, that body was about to renew the patent of the United Daughters of the Confederacy.
Alone at first, then joined on the Senate floor by others whose awareness she raised, the Senate's only black member stopped the renewal of the Daughters' design patent with its Confederate flag insignia.
Wave your flag all you want, she argued, but don't ask Congress to keep granting exclusive rights to a logo that reminds black Americans of slavery.
Senator Jesse Helms studiously missed her point when he said "Race shouldn't have been introduced" into the floor debate.
Once the full Senate realized that race was already implicated in the symbolism of the Civil War emblem, the affront to black Americans was clear.


A Cool Ride on a Warm Day


After Circuit Repair, Shuttle Is Ready to Blast Off Today
The space shuttle Discovery and its crew of five astronauts are set to blast off Saturday morning, now that engineers have fixed a bad firing circuit that interrupted last Saturday's launching attempt.
It turns out that the 18-story, 2,260-ton shuttle was grounded when a single transistor failed and equipment on the launching pad prematurely prepared to fire the explosive bolts that hold down the winged spaceship.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said the shuttle's safety systems insured that the bolts would not have exploded early.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Daily Focus, Not Daly Focus, Is the Challenge for McGann
John Daly's aura continued to hover over Crooked Stick today as the longest hitter in women's golf took command of the 48th United States Women's Open.
Michelle McGann, hitting almost nothing but short iron approaches, shot a six-under-par 66 for a 36-hole total of eight-under-par 136, two strokes better than the first-round co-leader, Helen Alfredsson, who had a 70, and Hiromi Kobayashi of Japan, who had a 67.


Rehabilitation Chief Arrested
The president of a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center was arraigned today on a minor drug charge after the police said he tried to pick up a package of cocaine that had been sent to an air express mail office.
The man, Michael Herzlin, 44, of Rockville Centre, L.I., is president of Freeport Hospital, a private treatment center in Freeport, L.I.
Nassau County police officers arrested him yesterday morning shortly after he asked a clerk at DHL Worldwide Express in Jericho, L.I., for the package, which had been mailed from Miami.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Integrated Device Technology Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Political Memo; Crown Hts. Shadow Reaches Past Dinkins Toward Cuomo
Strained relations have long been the norm between New York City mayors and New York governors, and over the last four years the uneasy alliance between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been no exception.
But seldom in this long, tangled history have the interests of a Mayor and a Governor collided as decisively as they did this week.


Thousands of Shells Hit Sarajevo As Serbian Units' Pincers Close In
Serbian artillery batteries pounded wide areas of Sarajevo today in a sustained offensive that raised concerns that Serbian commanders may be trying to seize the strategic western districts of the city.
The Serbian attack on Sarajevo, the most intensive since last fall, sent the new United Nations Commander in Bosnia, Lieut.
Gen.
Francis Briquemont of Belgium, on a hasty trip into the mountains south of Sarajevo for a meeting with the Serbian military commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Ratko Mladic.
General Mladic told reporters after the meeting that his troops would observe a cease-fire beginning at 10 A.M. on Sunday, but United Nations officers cautioned that there was no guarantee that Bosnian forces, driven back by the latest Serbian attacks, would agree to a truce.


Lawmakers Add to Defiance of Yeltsin
The Russian Parliament recessed for the summer today after rushing through an extraordinary string of measures.
If put into force, they threaten to disrupt the economy, undermine the turning over of public property to private interests, fracture relations with Ukraine, jail a key Yeltsin aide and, among many other things, expand the privileges of the legislators.
The long list ranges from a budget that is twice as large as anticipated revenues to little-noticed actions like closing K.G.B. archives for an extra 20 years.
It includes a declaration claiming the Crimean port of Sevastopol to be Russian, not Ukrainian -- and another condemning the United Nations Security Council for denouncing the measure.


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Smith's Food &amp; Drug reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Commonwealth Energy System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Typical Beach Barbecue Is Crashed
There was shuffleboard. There was the beach. There were lounge chairs.
But the two men, the woman and the several children who checked into the Sea Wolf apartments in North Wildwood on Wednesday night just did not seem like the usual visitors to the Jersey Shore, said Ruth Wolf, who owns the small motel with her husband, Woody.
"I wondered why they weren't going to the beach," she said.


Norman S. Weiser, 73, Chappell Music Head
Norman Sidney Weiser, a music publishing executive, writer and editor, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said his lawyer, Alvin Deutsch.


McDermott International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Earlier Date Set for Service In Vietnam
In New York State, America's longest war just got longer.
On Thursday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed legislation that establishes Dec. 22, 1961, as the beginning of American involvement in the Vietnam War, making an array of state veterans' benefits available to as many as 25,000 additional state residents.
The day is one year earlier than the date previously recognized by the state and more than two years earlier than the one established by Congress in 1975.


Doman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Take Me Out of the Ball Game
STEPHEN SCHREINER knows the exact date and time he decided that he had had enough: "June 24, 1993," he said yesterday from his San Diego law office.
At 10 A.M. that day, Schreiner said, his partner called from his car phone and broke the news: the Padres had traded Gary Sheffield.
Suddenly, the frustration that began last year when San Diego parted company with other standout players -- Craig Lefferts, Benito Santiago and Tony Fernandez -- had turned to anger.
"I said, 'That does it,' " recalled Schreiner, a devout Padres fan.
"The irony is that June 24 is the day our firm annually closes down the office and spends the afternoon at a Padres game."


Unions Rebuff American on Equity Stake
Two of American Airlines' major unions today rebuffed suggestions by the airline that they request an equity stake.
They said they feared that American would try to extract big concessions on wages, benefits and work rules in exchange.
And in a Federal courtroom today, lawyers for American asked the judge to throw out the antitrust case brought against the airline by competitors Continental Airlines and Northwest Airlines, which have accused American of predatory pricing.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Europe's monetary system withstood another battering from speculators, as France and Germany intervened to prop up the franc.
The system appeared headed for a showdown next week at an important Bundesbank meeting.  [ Page 35. ]
Speculation that Volkswagen's board would meet was denied after the company's chairman met with the Premier of Lower Saxony state, VW's largest shareholder, to discuss the dispute over Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and G.M.  [ 35. ]


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Customers Are the Show; Night Life at a Pharmacy
Friday, 10 P.M., and Barry from California was desperate for an antibiotic.
Two women in midtown needed pain killers.
An elegant Argentine couple was on the hunt for a good hairbrush.
"I need something to take out these curls," the gentleman said, furiously smacking at the ends of his hair.
"This straight type of brush, she won't do."


Corrections
A brief report in Weekend yesterday about an outdoor concert at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx misstated the day.
The Manhattan School of Music Brass Quintet is to play at 5:30 P.M. tomorrow, not today.


Frederick A. Sundermann, Bank President, 74
Frederick A. Sundermann, a former president and chairman of the National Bank of Westchester, died on Thursday at a hospice in Derwood, Md.
He was 74.
A Westchester resident for nearly all his life, he most recently lived in Kensington, Md.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Prospect Family Nursery in the Bronx misidentified the first such crisis-nursery program in New York City.
It is not the Prospect; the New York Foundling Hospital's program, started in 1982, is 10 years older.


Schwab and Fidelity Vie As Fund Supermarkets
AT a recent luncheon in New York that the Charles Schwab discount brokerage firm gave to promote its mutual fund services, the rhetoric soared higher than the 64th- floor Rainbow Room setting.
"It's probably the best family of funds available in the United States," said Charles R. Schwab himself.
No, too modest.
"We have created perhaps the most powerfully competitive mutual fund marketplace in the world," he said moments later.


Bell &amp; Howell reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.D.A. Approves a Multiple Sclerosis Drug
The Chiron Corporation and Berlex Laboratories Inc. announced yesterday that Federal regulators had approved Betaseron, the first treatment for multiple sclerosis to get marketing approval in the United States.
The companies said they expected the genetically engineered drug would also be approved in Europe in about two years.


VF Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Blue Cross 'Profits' Are Security Reserve
To the Editor:
Re Donald W. Light's June 29 letter on Blue Cross and Blue Shield:
The jury is still out on allegations that Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield engaged in dishonest bookkeeping.
Yet Mr.
Light ascribes such practices to "Blue Cross plans across the country," a charge without merit.


I.B.M. Narrows Field in Ad Review
The IBM Personal Computer Company said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $80 million United States and European account to 12 agencies from 50 or 60, according to a report by Advertising Age, an industry publication.
The account has been handled by Lintas New York in the United States and in Europe by its parent, Lintas Worldwide, and GGK.


Wheeling Pittsburgh reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Santa Fe Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nederlanders and Partner Buy the Biltmore Theater
In what may be its greatest chance for revival after six years of abandonment, the landmark Biltmore Theater has been bought by the Nederlander Organization and Stewart F. Lane.
The transaction for the Broadway house at 261 West 47th Street occurred in late June, said Nancy Brock, manager of corporate communications at the Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company of Buffalo, which foreclosed on the mortgage last year and took title to the property.


Another Italian Business Leader, Tied to Scandal, Is Found Dead
One of Italy's best-known tycoons was found dead of a gunshot wound in his Milan apartment today as the country's huge and ever-broadening corruption investigation moved closer to the core of his business dealings.
The police said they were treating the case as a suicide.


Pressure Continues On Franc
Europe's monetary system held together today despite taking another battering from currency speculators, but it remained headed toward a showdown with the markets next week.
The primary target of the speculators, the French franc, was propped up by concerted action from the French and German Governments and their central banks.
The two nations issued a public statement today reiterating their commitment to maintaining the relative values of the franc and the mark.


Going, Gone: The Words Sting Maas
The boxes were placed on carts and wheeled out of the clubhouse at Yankee Stadium last night.
There were Kevin Maas bats, some T-shirts and socks and even a few unopened wedding presents from teammates.
They were Maas's possessions and they were destined for Columbus, Ohio.
Maas was going back to Class AAA.
The move, which was made to create a roster spot for Mark Hutton, was a logical one.
Maas had batted only 11 times since June 16 and had disrupted clubhouse harmony last Saturday by asking to be traded on the same day the Yankees advanced into a first-place tie with Toronto.
Still, it was surprising in a sense because the organization once viewed Maas as its next great home run hitter.


IVAX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Critic's Notebook; Leno's Guns Blazing At Target on Horizon
"Where's the cyanide capsule?" David Letterman shouted in mock horror on July 16 on NBC's "Late Night." "Let me take it tonight!" No, he was not panicking about his move to CBS and his debut on Aug. 30 opposite the "Tonight" show.
Actually, the Letterman shows on NBC these days are reruns; that Friday's edition was taped on April 13, 1991.
Mr.
Letterman was simply reacting to an unwieldy session that included, among other things, the comedian Sandra Bernhard's suggestion that he kiss her derriere.
Ms.
Bernhard was touting her role in the film "Hudson Hawk." Remember that one?
Welcome to the television time warp.


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dry St. Louis Is Furiously Battling a Flood of Misperception
In this city that has been at the epicenter of the Mississippi's soggy wrath for the last week, a lot of people are desperate to get a simple message out: they're dry.
The flooding across the Midwest is likely to continue for weeks, and it could be almost a month before the Mississippi moves below flood stage here.
But virtually all the city remains dry, its tourist attractions are all open and officials hope the message gets out before the natural disaster in the region turns into a bigger economic one here.


Horace Mann Educators reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


2 Arrested in Slaying of Prince
Reaching across a continent in a bid to solve four murders, New York City police detectives arrested two men in Reno yesterday and are returning them to New York to face charges of killing an Indian prince and his wife and two others.
The police say that George Cobo, 56 years old, and Tony Lee Simpson, 21, killed Prince Chitresh Rao Khedker and his wife, Nenescha, in their Park Avenue apartment in April, and murdered Eric C. Price and Milton A. Setzer in their West End Avenue apartment last month.


Dow Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Caterpillar Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Official Dismissed in Dispute At Disabled Veterans Group
A top executive of the Disabled American Veterans has been dismissed for "dishonesty and misconduct" after using $80,000 from the group to settle a claim against him made by the wife of an employee, D.A.V. officials said today.
Charles (Butch) E. Joeckel Jr., the group's national adjutant and a leader of the veterans lobby here, was dismissed earlier this month after the payment was discovered during an audit, the officials said.
The dismissal was first reported today in The Washington Post.


Empire Scrambles Back
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield says it has no alternative: To cut costs it must put its sickest customers into health plans that restrict the choice of doctors and hospitals.
But that policy would present many chronically ill patients with an ugly choice: Join Empire's managed care plan, and give up a trusted personal physician, or drop Empire and pay the physician out of pocket.
The new policy is necessary if Empire is to keep its premiums at levels most New Yorkers can afford.
But it's harsh.
For some it will even be traumatic: patients suffering from asthma or AIDS or recovering from a transplant will be forced to leave trusted physicians for unknown substitutes.


Moscow Journal; A Poet Sings Fondly of an Old Enemy
Opening the program, Culture Minister Yevgeny Sidorov scanned the overflowing Concert Hall of the Rossiya Hotel with unfeigned delight and said, "Look at that, a full house, just like the 60's!"
A bemused murmur spread through the audience, most of them people of the Sixties with graying beards and the stern, unfashionable clothes of the pre-glasnost intelligentsia, and it turned to applause when Yevgeny Yevtushenko walked out.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


A Beach Grows in the East River


Europe's Social Dumping
Everybody agrees on the principle that economic growth winds up to the benefit of all, and that zero-sum games of beggar-thy-neighbor are an illusion.
Eventually, all lose.
But when times are hard, everybody looks to the home front and the right-now -- leave principle to the long term.
What they remember about John Maynard Keynes is that he said, "In the long term, we are all dead."
The most painful new dilemma as the world feels the impact of another industrial revolution, as profound and disruptive as the 19th century's, is that growth no longer equals jobs.
The demands of expansion through free trade -- productivity, competitiveness, cost-cutting -- work to reduce jobs, substituting technology or much cheaper labor somewhere else.
This is more evident in Europe than in the U.S., with unemployment in the Community at 11 percent and getting worse, although the same factors are at work in America.


Stocks Bounce Higher; Dow Up 21.52, to 3,546.74
Stocks bounced higher in active trading yesterday, with the market showing a resiliency that had been lacking most of the week.
The Dow Jones industrial average finished at 3,546.74, up 21.52 points for the day and 18.45 points for the week.


Custody Case Affirms Biological Ties That Bind; A Child Is Not a Doll
To the Editor:
As the letter of the law smites the DeBoer family (news article, July 3), where is the wisdom of Solomon?
If the law must be rigid, let its semantic plane be consistent: an unmarried mother has no legal husband, and her offspring should be considered to have no legal father capable of interfering with adoption, especially an adoption sealed in good faith.
Granted, the law recognizes an out-of-wedlock "father" and holds him to some duties, but why give him rights superseding the interest of a child to whom he made no prior commitment?


The Dicey Game of Commodities Trading
The floods in the Midwest have devastated many farmers and sent the prices of some agricultural products soaring.
On the commodities exchanges, where contracts for future delivery of these products are traded, business is brisk.
Soybean prices alone set a four-year high on Monday.


Gunmen Said to Be Police Kill 7 Street Children in Rio
Hooded members of an "extermination group" killed seven homeless boys and wounded two others as they slept before dawn today in the shadows of the city's symbols of luxury and power.
Men cruising Rio's banking district in a taxi and in a private car, who survivors later said were police officers, stopped in front of Candelaria Church and sprayed a group of 45 sleeping boys and girls with pistol fire.
Four boys died instantly.
A fifth was shot and killed as he ran from the front of the church, a gold-encrusted landmark that is a regular setting for lavish society weddings.


Bridge
The United States Congress went from voting in the Capitol to dealing at the Capitol Hill Club here Thursday afternoon, and came within a touch of a famous victory.
Their representatives, not to mention senators, were hoping to avenge earlier bridge defeats at the hands of an experienced team representing corporate America and were in the lead by 4 imps going into the final deal.
But a game swing left them losing by just 7, though one of the losers felt like a winner: Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, received an impromptu donation of $10,000 from the corporate players toward flood disaster relief in his state.
The Congressional team led at the start, thanks to excellent play by former Representative Bob Kastenmeier of Wisconsin, his team's lone Democrat.
Playing with Senator Hank Brown of Colorado, he reached three no-trump as South, with Jimmy Cayne, President of the brokerage house of Bear, Stearns, and Rita Shugart, President of the Monterey Airplane Company, in the East and West seats.


Reward Conflict Ended
The State Department ended a governmental stalemate and offered a reward for a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing.
Page 23.


Raychem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Pop; A Blend of Influences, With Dissonance
Performances associated with the New Music Seminar, which ends today at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers, are often a means for independent record labels to display their wares.
Homestead Records took over the Pyramid in the East Village on Thursday night, and the major news was the first New York appearance of Trumans Water from San Diego.
The crowd had thinned considerably by 2 A.M., when this three-year-old, apostrophe-free quartet finally came on, but those who remained saw a band that thoroughly lived up to its hype.
The group formed casually when two brothers, Kirk and Kevin Branstetter, were given a guitar and a bass by a friend's father.
Glen Galloway, the singer and second guitarist, joined when he answered an ad for "lead singer, brain optional." Avid record collectors before they learned guitar, the band members built their style from various elite sources, everyone from San Francisco's capricious Thinking Fellers to Japan's thrashingly noisy Boredoms to the gleaming drones of Sonic Youth circa 1986.


Review/Music; A Celebration of Autumnal Ripeness
In a week at the Mostly Mozart Festival devoted to exploring connections between Mozart and Brahms, the Emerson String Quartet took an indirect approach on Thursday evening.
The group ended its program at Avery Fisher Hall with Brahms's Clarinet Quintet in B minor (Op. 115), a magnificent autumnal creation obviously influenced by Mozart.
But it chose not to drive the point home by including Mozart's Clarinet Quintet in A (K. 581), one of the pieces (in performances by Richard Muhlfeld specifically) that inspired Brahms's belated outpouring of music for clarinet.
Instead, the Emerson turned to other late Mozart, the "Prussian" String Quartet in D (K. 575), and to Beethoven, the Quartet in B flat (Op. 18, No. 6).


Robert M. Kossick, Chief Executive, 53, At New Jersey Bank
Robert M. Kossick, chairman and chief executive officer of the National Community Bank of New Jersey, died on Tuesday at his home in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 53 years old and also had a home in Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The cause was a heart attack, the bank's announcement said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 BRITAIN CLEARS UNITY TREATY
By a 40-vote margin, Prime Minister John Major won a vote of confidence that insured the British Parliament's final approval of the European unity treaty. 1


Scuttled Archivist
To the Editor:
The country is ill served by President Clinton's apparent decision to cast aside Stanley N. Katz's nomination as Archivist of the United States.


Marriott's Shareholders Back Plan to Split in 2
The Marriott Corporation overcame a major obstacle to its reorganization plan when shareholders at its annual meeting yesterday overwhelmingly approved its proposal to split the company in two.
Eighty-five percent of those attending the packed meeting, in the ballroom of the J. B. Marriott Hotel in downtown Washington, voted in favor of the plan.
Capping a busy day, Marriott also said it had settled with a majority of its preferred shareholders, who had sued to stop the reorganization, and it announced plans to add 400 hotels with more than 50,000 rooms over the next five years.


Corrections
An article yesterday about police officers' reactions to the Crown Heights report referred incorrectly in some editions to a disturbance last year that the officers said had contributed to mixed signals on the use of force.
It was in Washington Heights, not Washington Square Park.


Executive Changes
E.
W.
BLANCH CO., Minneapolis, a reinsurance intermediary, named Barbara Bufkin and Michael Wybar executive vice presidents for national sales.
GOLDEN VALLEY MICROWAVE FOODS INC., Edina, Minn., a unit of Conagra Inc., named John S. McKeon president.





Schlumberger Ltd. (N reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Still Seeking Answers, Detectives Bury Baby Hope
Two years after they found her abandoned body, the only family that ever claimed her -- the detectives of the 34th Precinct -- buried the girl they called Baby Hope yesterday.
"We are her family," said Detective Jerry Giorgio, who now heads the investigation into Baby Hope's murder.
"We are burying our baby."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a settlement of the disputed value of Andy Warhol's estate referred incompletely to an appraisal underlying the agreement.
The appraisal, by Christie's, at $220 million, was made in 1991.
In reporting that the agreed value was signicantly less than some earlier estimates, the article failed to take the 1991 timing into account.
It attributed the decline in estimates only to a drop in values in the art market, as shown by the falloff of Warhol's work at auction in May.


What Reeves Doesn't See Bothers Him
He's not going to lock the gates to training camp and prevent some of his veterans from getting in, but Coach Dan Reeves had some choice words today for two of his key AWOL players, linebacker Pepper Johnson and running back Rodney Hampton.
Using the wonderful world of technology, the first-year Giants coach delivered a message to the two players without even speaking to them.
Through the news media he warned that Johnson and Hampton were quickly falling behind their teammates already in camp and that at this point he would have difficulty putting them ahead of the first-teamers.


Kellogg Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stew Leonard's Is Cited For Shorting Customers
Stew Leonard's Dairy, the Connecticut supermarket that built its reputation on customer-comes-first friendliness, suffered another blow yesterday when the State Consumer Products Commissioner said that it had short-weighted items like chicken, walnuts and tomatoes.
The commissioner, Gloria Schaffer, said inspectors had checked 2,600 packages in the last 18 months and had found 1,200 to be in violation of state labeling laws.
Ms.
Schaffer said she could not tell how much the discrepancies had cost customers at the huge family-run store in Norwalk, Conn.
Stew Leonard's faces a maximum penalty of $500 for each violation, Ms.
Schaffer said.


Lifetime Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Subaru Parts With the Creators of Its Quirky Ads
Sluggish sales and a new management team can be a scary mix for an auto maker's advertising agency, especially one with the counterculture tendencies of Wieden &amp; Kennedy.
Subaru of America, which has experienced both, announced yesterday that its two-year relationship with the agency would not continue beyond the end of the year.
It was a stunning and unexpected development for Wieden &amp; Kennedy, based in Portland, Ore., which only last month had received assurances that its Philadelphia office would keep the account.
Subaru, based in Cherry Hill, N.J., is the agency's second-biggest account, after Nike athletic shoes and apparel, with annual billings that approach $70 million. 11 Staff Members Dismissed
Dan Wieden, the agency's president and creative director, said in an interview yesterday that he was told this week in a telephone conversation with George T. Muller, who was appointed president and chief operating officer of Subaru of America just two weeks ago, that Subaru would not renew its contract with the agency when it expires in December.
As a result, 11 people who worked on the Subaru account in Philadelphia were dismissed on Thursday, leaving a staff of about 45.
The office was opened when Wieden &amp; Kennedy won the account.


Johnson's Last Mets Spot May Be D.L.
Howard Johnson slid thumb-first into second base Thursday night, and now his hand is not cooperating.
X-rays show two chip fractures in his right thumb and possible ligament damage, so this nine-year Met might be through for the season, if not with the organization as well.
Johnson said today that the injury would shelve him anywhere from "five, six weeks to the end of the year," pending examinations Saturday and Monday in New York with the club's assistant team physician, David Dines.
But team executives sounded firm when they said he was likely done for the season.


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Q &amp; A
A Menu of Benefits
Q I've heard "cafeteria plan" used in connection with employee benefits.
What is it?
GUNTER HAIMANN, Jamesburg, N.J.
A Cafeteria plans are employer-sponsored benefit plans that give tax advantages to employees by allowing them to choose between receiving taxable benefits like cash or tax-free benefits like health insurance.
Its name comes from Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code, which has authorized these plans since 1978.


Southern New England Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Friendship No Factor, Say Coslet, Esiason
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet doesn't want to hear anyone whining, "Teacher's pet!" when it comes to his relationship with quarterback Boomer Esiason.
So he spent time this morning dispelling any notion that the quarterback would be treated favorably just because they have a friendship dating back to their days together in Cincinnati.
Coslet and Esiason, who came to the Jets this April in a trade with the Bengals, developed a close relationship in the late 1980's when Coslet was the Bengals' offensive coordinator and Esiason was the team's starting quarterback.
Coslet acknowledges that the two remain good friends, but he said he won't let that impede the coach-player relationship that often involves heavy criticism and stringent discipline.


Lighter Than Air, but Larger Than Life


Laura Whitman, Paul Provost
Laura Bowne Whitman, the cataloguer of Chinese paintings at Sotheby's in New York, and Paul Raymond Provost, a doctoral candidate in art history at Princeton University, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
F.
Washington Jarvis 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown in Locust Valley, L.I.
The bride, 26, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Whitman of Mill Neck, L.I.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in East Asian studies from Yale University.
Her father is the chairman of the MiddlebyCorporation, a manufacturer of food-service equipment in New York.


Andersson Facing A Serious Challenge
AFTER more than two decades of dominance of Swedish chess by Ulf Andersson, a serious rival, Ferdinand Hellers, has appeared on the scene.
They have not clashed in the Swedish championship -- being too busy in more important international tournaments -- but Hellers won a six-game match from Andersson as part of the 80th anniversary of the Eksjo Chess Club in early June.
Though not a title match, it may hint at the beginning of a changing of the guard.
Hellers is 24, Andersson 42.
The contest was close, one victory for Hellers, and five draws.
In Game 2, Hellers gave a nice example of nonstop attack.


Walter Cronkite Finds It Hard to Say No
Reassurance has always been Walter Cronkite's stock in trade, the ability to convince viewers that when he is on the air all will turn out well.
And, it is in this sense reassuring to hear that the former CBS anchorman hates to see himself on camera.
That's what he says.
He likes to be in front of the camera, but he does not like looking at the on-screen results.
"I cringe when I see myself," Mr.
Cronkite was saying the other day.
He was sitting in shorts and a sun-bleached plaid shirt in his vacation house overlooking the bay here.
"I don't feel I look that good. I get fat, sloppy. My suits don't fit that well. When I do interviews, my questions don't have the arrowlike quality of a Mike Wallace."


How We Live Now
SYSTEMS OF SURVIVAL A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce and Politics.
By Jane Jacobs. 236 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.


To See More Blooms, Kill Those Seeds
THE object of gardening now is to keep the plants going.
But the object of nature is to begin to shut them down, that is for annuals, perennials and shrubs to set seed and get ready for the cold season ahead.
The goal for the gardener then is to prevent plants from putting all their strength into developing seed.
The exception, of course, is those gardeners who are interested in home hybridizing or self-sowing of a certain species.
They may want their plants to set seed.


Yonkers Fighting To Save Rail-Car Jobs
THE last three subway cars bound for Taiwan stood on test tracks awaiting a final run at the once-busy Union Rail Car plant here.
Alan Suarez, an assembly-line technician, removed his baseball cap to mop his brow and wondered where he would turn next for work.
Union Rail Car, which over the last year manufactured 132 subway cars for Taipei's rapidly growing transit system, recently lost a bid to build 216 more cars for the capital of Taiwan.
The contract was instead awarded in early May to a German company whose bid was lower because, according to United States officials, it subcontracted part of the deal to a company subsidized by the South African Government.
Officials in Washington are investigating the matter and hope to convince Taipei's Department of Rapid Transit Systems to reverse its decision on the ground that South Africa violated United States and international trade laws.
The South African manufacturer, however, denied that any Government subsidy was involved, and Taiwan claimed that the Yonkers company was a front for a Japanese conglomerate.


Technology; Updating TV Programming Skills for the Interactive Era
IN all the talk these days about the "interactive multimedia" future of television, there remains an implicit question: what will the program "content" be?
The companies hoping to find an answer include Viacom International Inc., which has begun a program to teach its employees how to adapt their cable TV skills to the demands of the digital age.
Viacom, one of the nation's leading cable-system operators and owner of the popular cable networks MTV, Nickelodeon and Showtime, has set up an interactive programming lab at the company's corporate headquarters at Times Square in Manhattan.
There, some 100 employees normally involved in creating network programs have begun learning how to create CD-ROM and other software spinoffs from Viacom's TV shows.


Corrections
The Nasdaq listing in the stock market charts on the Money page last Sunday, for biggest percentage losers, included erroneous references to Laurel Bancorp and Research Frontiers.
Both companies had stock splits effective the previous Friday.
Adjusted for the splits, Laurel Bancorp shares rose 1/8 during the week in question, to 9 5/8; Research Frontiers rose 1/4, to 8 3/4.


The Born-Again Barn
Nestled in the Berkshire Hills of western Massachusetts is a renovated barn with none of the cutsey cliches that often accompany this kind of conversion.
There are no cutout cows or rooster weather vanes here.
Rather, its renovating architects, Andrus Burr and Ann McCallum of Williamstown, Mass., have taken great pains to preserve the essential character of the structure, what Burr calls its "barn-ness." A barn, he feels, should be "lofty, dark and cool."
First, the 152-year-old building had to be dismantled for repairs.
Moving it to the edge of a hill and connecting it with a walkway to a new guest house took advantage of magisterial views of Mount Greylock, the highest elevation in the state.
To keep the barn's spirit intact, while rendering it a livable summer house for a family, the architects took the unusual step of insulating the outside, which they covered in cedar clapboard siding, but leaving the interior walls alone.


Out of the Parlor, Into the Mainstream
Exactly a century ago, the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago chose to emphasize women's achievements.
There was a Woman's Building at the fair, and over six months, seven orchestral scores and 55 chamber works by women from around the world were performed.
Now Koch International Classics has released a CD of songs and piano and chamber works from that occasion, "Women at an Exposition" (7240), one of three fascinating new releases devoted to female composers.


FILIBUSTER DELAYS SERVICE MEASURE
Senate Republicans have mounted their fourth major filibuster of the year, refusing to agree to schedule a vote on the $394 million-a-year national service bill, which they attack as a case of tax and spend.
By warring against the bill, whose concept of offering educational grants in exchange for public service is generally popular in the country, the Republicans stepped up their general delaying and harassment campaign against Democratic legislation.
The tactic risks being labeled obstructionism but offers the hope of rendering the new Democratic Administration legislatively impotent.


Dinkins's Strategy: Cool Has Advantages
Mayor David N. Dinkins's best chance to survive the damage of the Crown Heights report is to trumpet the good things that he has managed to do and to persuade New Yorkers that this fall's election is not a passive referendum on his performance, but an active choice between him and Rudolph W. Giuliani.
That is the consensus of a broad range of the Mayor's friends and enemies, political consultants and his own aides after last week's official state report on the violent convulsions between blacks and Hasidic Jews in Brooklyn two years ago.
The report portrayed a striking chain of management failings in his administration and the police department during three days of street rampaging in August 1991.


Miss Dreyfuss And Mr. Schnell
Madeleine Dreyfuss, a daughter of Ralph and Helen Dreyfuss of New York, was married yesterday evening to Paul Alan Schnell, a son of Jack and Anita Schnell of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Rabbi Jon Haddon performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Miss Dreyfuss, 29, is a sales representative at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father, now retired, was the senior vice president at Cometals Inc., a mining company, in New York.
Her mother is a vice president and real estate broker at Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc., in New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  RUSSIA TO REIN IN MONEY SUPPLY


Crown Jewels
To the Editor: In Letters on Travel on June 13, two correspondents complain of being "rudely herded" past the British crown jewels while "surly" guards muttered "no stopping" and the like.


In the Name Of Dissent
BLACK HANDS OF BEIJING Lives of Defiance in China's Democracy Movement.
By George Black and Robin Munro.
Illustrated. 390 pp.
New York: A Robert L. Bernstein Book/John Wiley &amp; Sons. $24.95.


Love Story


Libraries Refuse Gift Of Middle East Report
I read with great interest Ina Aronow's article of June 27 on the increased costs incurred by public libraries in Westchester County and the cuts in funding they have to sustain.
Noticing an imbalance in the Middle East collections of the libraries I visit frequently and knowing their budget constraints, I offered a gift subscription to White Plains, Greenburgh and Tarrytown of the Washington Report on Middle East Affairs.
Tarrytown accepted it; Greenburgh canceled the subscription after initially accepting it, and White Plains turned my offer down.


Deborah Mattis, W. H. Collier 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Louis P. Mattis of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Cook Mattis, to William Henry Collier 4th, a son of Mrs.
Dempsey W. Hodges Jr. of Kinston, N.C., and Mr.
Collier 3d of Greenville, N.C.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mattis, 27, was until recently an account executive with Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Sterling Winthrop Inc., the pharmaceutical company in New York.


Loggers Listen to What Michigan Forests Say
Midway between Lake Michigan and Lake Superior, the Fence River cuts a silvery path across a lush landscape of maple, poplar and pine.
The woods on both sides of the river are owned by the Mead Corporation, and no one knows the landscape here better than Dr.
Dean Premo, a 38-year-old zoologist hired by the paper and lumber company to conduct some of the most important wildlife studies in the timber industry.
For more than 50 years, the nation's timber industry has focused most of its scientific work on one challenge: how to grow more trees in less time.
But mindful of the public's new interest in forests as well as Federal and state laws protecting endangered species, the industry is rapidly expanding its biological research to understand more thoroughly how plants and animals are affected by logging.


Compact, Versatile And Waterproof
THOUGH Pentax did not specifically design its Zoom 90 Weather Resistant 35-millimeter camera to be bomb resistant, it turns out that it is.
On April 24, 1993, a terrorist bomb exploded in London's financial district, killing one person, injuring more than three dozen and heavily damaging buildings and stores, including the City Camera Exchange Shop at National Westminster Tower.
After the debris was cleared away, two Zoom 90-WR's were found in the rubble, immersed in water.


Q and A
A Tuscan Garden
Q.
My family would like to see the Garden of Tarot by the artist Niki de Saint Phalle near the village of Capalbio in Tuscany.
When is it open?
Where can one stay nearby? -- M. C. Belfiglio, New York, N.Y.


SURFACING
THEATER -- The multiple-role supporting actor: an economically efficient device popular off Broadway.
Fisher Stevens, above, plays 18 characters in Terrence McNally's "A Perfect Ganesh," and the two supporting actors in A. R. Gurney's "Later Life" each play five different roles.
APPAREL -- L. L. Bean for kids: Playing catch-up with the Gap, the 81-year-old company has started making preppy necessities like rag wool socks, Blucher moccasins and fleece anoraks for children.
PRANKSTERS -- The Jerky Boys: With the success of the Jerky Boys' album of the same name -- a compilation of annoying phone calls made to New Yorkers -- prank calls are gaining cult-art status.


Karen Barker, George Marcou
Karen Elizabeth Barker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Barker of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to George Thomas Marcou, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George T. Marcou of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
James H. Donahoe, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Barker, who is 27 and is keeping her name, is a law student at American University.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Interlake Steamship Company in Cleveland and vice chairman of the Mormac Marine Group, a shipping company, in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Kaye Barker, is a social worker at Family and Children's Services in Stamford.


A Rare Tern Sets the Blood Racing for Birders
The bulletin, on telephone hot lines in all 50 states and an international computer network, arrived like a thunderclap.
"It made the blood race with excitement," said Paul Kerlinger, director of the Cape May Bird Observatory, who helped spread the word.


Saddle Up In a Sliver Of Leather
Products by Levi's could encircle the world, so why shouldn't one encircle the waist?
This leather belt has a vintage look, its design drawing on Western motifs from old Levi's print advertisements.
The belt, which is stitched by hand, is made in Italy by a licensee.
It costs $55 and is a best seller at the Original Levi's Store.


Soon Mi Shin, Hector Raul Pelaez
Soon Mi Shin, a vice president of the American Express Company in New York, was married yesterday to Hector Raul Pelaez, the First Secretary of the Argentine delegation to the United Nations.
The Rev.
Eugene Connolly officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Ms.
Shin, who is keeping her name, graduated from New York University and received an M.B.A. from George Washington University.
She is a daughter of Hyun Joon Shin and Hae Ryong Ham of Seoul, South Korea.
Her father, the founder of the Korean Marine Corps, is a former Korean Ambassador to Morocco and to the Holy See.
The bride's previous marriage was annulled.


Sharon E. Briden and Bill Fink
Sharon Elisabeth Briden, a daughter of Barbara and C. Richard Briden of Bound Brook, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles William Fink 3d, the son of Valerie Fink and Mr.
Fink Jr. of Little Falls, N.J.
Judge B. Thomas Leahy, a retired judge of the New Jersey Superior Court, officiated at a private residence in Spring Lake, N.J.
Ms.
Briden, 34, is keeping her name.
She and her husband are advertising sales representatives for The New York Times.
The bride graduated from Old Dominion University.


VIDEO
Don't Miss
"BRAM STOKER'S 'DRACULA.' " Playing like one long hallucinogenic special effect, Francis Ford Coppola's film takes a faithful adaptation of the novel and fills it with over-the-top frenzy and opulence.
Gary Oldham is the count who might want to rethink his denunciation of God centuries earlier.
Winona Ryder is his love and Anthony Hopkins the vampire battler in a wild dream of a movie that "transcends camp to become a testimonial to the glories of film making as an end in itself" (Vincent Canby). 1992.
Columbia Tri-Star. $94.95. 130 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.


A Philosopher's Perch on Main Street in Ridgefield
IT is approaching noon in Ridgefield and a queue is starting to form on Main Street at a little establishment that may be the most recession-proof business of all in these economically troubled times.
In other communities, the business would be described as a hot dog vendor's cart.
But in Ridgefield, in keeping with the upscale image of Fairfield County, the awning over the cart describes it as Chez Lenard, the Sidewalk Cafe de Ridgefield.


Music Festival In Brazil
The third annual Fest'in World Music Festival will be held from Aug. 26 to 29 in Salvador, capital of the northeastern Brazilian state of Bahia, a 90-minute flight from Rio de Janeiro.
The festival will showcase a variety of music from the Caribbean, United States, Africa and, of course, Brazil.
This year, Fest'in will include Youssou N'Dour, Senegal's world-beat pop star, Gregory Isaacs of Jamaica and the Neville Brothers from the United States.


42d Street
To the Editor:
A quickie plan for "interim" development of Times Square  [ "Rethinking 42d Street for Next Decade," June 27 ]  shouldn't be all that difficult.
If Cora Cahan and Rebecca Robertson (New 42d Street and and 42d Street Development Project, respectively) and their cohorts will walk across town to "Red Grooms at Grand Central" they will find their answer incongruously displayed in Grand Central Terminal's elegantly restored waiting room through next Saturday.


In Empty New York, August is the Coolest Month
MONDAY
Sang in my bath this morning.
Happy, so happy.
August is coming.
I'm at my very peak in August, and so, for my money, is New York.


A Romantic Comedy and a Metaphor
FALLING in love with the wrong person, something that everyone has done, is the basis for a great deal of tragedy and comedy.
That fate constitutes the core plot of "Shmulnik's Waltz," a comedy by Allen Knee having its Long Island premiere at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, where it continue through next Sunday.
Shmulnik, the title character, is a young Jewish man from Voronko, a small town in Russia.
He is poor and without prospects.
So when he happens to see the very beautiful and rich Rachel and falls in love with her, his chance of marrying her seems slim indeed.
But he is obsessed with her.
All he can do is think of her and follow her around like a lost puppy searching for a kind word.
He writes a waltz for her, which he sings at her window every night, much to the distress of her family.
Rachel thinks that he is funny, her father thinks that he is a bum, and her sister, Feyla, thinks that he is odd.


JULY 18-24: Clinton Fires Sessions; After a Long Struggle, A Former Agent Is Named For the Top F.B.I. Job
Months of turmoil at the Federal Bureau of Investigation ended last week as President Clinton ousted William S. Sessions, who had refused to resign ever since a highly critical report was issued in January on his use of Government planes and limousines.
Wielding the ax publicly, Mr.
Clinton declared that Mr.
Sessions "can no longer effectively lead the Bureau and the law enforcement community."


Laura E. Hobbie, Matthew T. Smoot
Laura Elizabeth Hobbie, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Hobbie of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Matthew Thomas Smoot, the son of Mrs.
John Smoot of Souderton, Pa., and the late Mr.
Smoot.
The Rev.
Richard Kelly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church.
The bride, 26, is a teacher at McGinn School in Scotch Plains, N.J.
She graduated from Gettysburg College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in early childhood education from Kean College.
Her father is a lawyer in Cranford, N.J.


Indiana on Two Wheels
AS I toppled into the mud, I took some comfort in the fact that one of my five mountain biking companions was a nurse.
I had jogged to train for this expedition. I should have mud-wrestled.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Muzzled on the Ferry
IF you are going to Fire Island this weekend, don't forget your suntan lotion.
Or your muzzle.
Fire Island ferries from Bay Shore now require that all dogs be muzzled.
If you have the dog but not the muzzle, no need to worry.
Along with Fire Island hats and T-shirts, the ferry gift shop now sells Fire Island muzzles -- $5.99 for medium, $6.49 for large.


The Ginsburg Hearings An Absence Of Suspense Is Welcomed
THE prelude to Ruth Bader Ginsburg's selection for the Supreme Court turned out to be much more mesmerizing than the business of actually getting her confirmed, and in that apparent contradiction lay the story of President Clinton's first Supreme Court nomination.
The absence of drama in Judge Ginsburg's three days before the Senate Judiciary Committee last week showed that Mr.
Clinton, after a fitful and awkward three-month search, had found the formula to cool the superheated atmosphere surrounding Supreme Court nominations during the previous two Administrations.
Take a nominee with distinguished legal credentials, a wide-ranging and accessible record, and no hard ideological edges, and send her up for a confirmation hearing that quickly evolves into a bipartisan coronation.


In America; There It Is!
It's the hottest phrase in the country but there are huge segments of the population that have never heard it: "Whoomp, there it is!"
Or, if you prefer, "Whoot, there it is!"


Treatment for Jankovic
SLOBODAN JANKOVIC, the paralyzed Serbian basketball player who broke his neck when he slammed his head into a concrete post in frustration after fouling out of a Greek playoff game in April, has been flown to England for treatment that doctors say might restore at least partial use of his arms and legs.
Since the incident on April 28, Jankovic, a member of the Paninios team, has been paralyzed below the waist. (AP)


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring special summer activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
On permanent display are items relating to film, television and video, like costumes, sets and filming equipment.
On exhibition through August is "Changing Faces," more than 450 photographs and artifacts that examine the work of hair stylists and makeup artists.
Through Aug. 1: "All in the Family: The Classic Melodramas of John Stahl and Douglas Sirk," movies by Hollywood's masters of the family melodrama.
Aug. 6 through Sept. 5: "Gossamer Garbage: A George Kuchar Film and Video Retrospective," poverty-row classics by a master of underground film and video.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children under 12; free for children under 4; $2 additional fee for screenings.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, Central Park West at 79th Street.
"Barosaurus," a permanent display, features a freestanding dinosaur more than 40 feet high.
Naturemax theater: Through January, "Antarctica," a film about the world's highest, driest, windiest and coldest continent.
Hours: 10:30 A.M., 11:30 A.M., 1:30 P.M. and 3:30 P.M.
"Tropical Rain Forest," a film exploring the evolution of the rain forest and the recent threat to its existence.
Hours: 12:30, 2:30 and 4:30 P.M.
Double feature, Fridays and Saturdays at 6 and 7:30 P.M.
Movie admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children under 12.
Museum hours: Sundays through Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 769-5100.
BROOKLYN'S HISTORY MUSEUM, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
On permanent display are photographs, paintings, drawings and memorabilia relating to Brooklyn.
On display through 1993 is "AIDS/Brooklyn," a collection of photographs, taped interviews and personal belongings of Brooklyn residents with AIDS.
Saturday, "Beyond Kielbasa: Polish Greenpoint," a tour of Polish butcher shops, bakeries and food markets, led by Annie Hauck-Lawson, an expert in the preparation and consumption of food.
The tour ends with an optional lunch at a local restaurant; Aug. 15, "Under the Boardwalk: Coney Island Memory Walk,", John Kriskiewiez, an urban historian, leads a walking tour of the Boardwalk.
Tours: $10 with reservations, $12 without reservations; $5 for children under 12.
Aug. 7, "Gallery Adventures: Bats, Hats and Stats," a day for Dodgers fans, 1 to 4 P.M.; $3 (includes museum admission).
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; $1 for the elderly and children under 12; free on Wednesdays.
Information: (718) 624-0890.
CHINATOWN HISTORY MUSEUM, 70 Mulberry Street, Chinatown.
On permanent display is "Remembering New York Chinatown," a collection of oral histories, photographs and other artifacts.
Through October: two photography displays, "The People of Chinatown," by Nina Kuo, and "From Canton to New York: The Broken Tradition," by Leh-Chyun Lin.
Today, Aug. 8 and Aug. 22, 10:30 A.M., the museum is offering a historical walking tour of Chinatown, including a 25-minute slide show.
Tour: $10, reservations are necessary.
Open Tuesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Admission: $1; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 619-4785
THE CLOISTERS, Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights.
A branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art with medieval art and architecture, including sculpture, tapestries, manuscripts and crafts.
Summer gallery talks include: Saturday: "The Old World for the New: The Cloisters as Architecture"; Aug. 7: "Four Cloisters"; Aug. 14: "The Cult of the Virgin Mary"; Aug. 21: "Water and Its Symbolism in Medieval Art"; Aug. 28: "The Arts of Medieval Monasticism"; Sept. 4: " "Outsiders": Medieval Depictions of Jews and Non-Europeans." Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
All lectures are at noon and 2 P.M. on Saturdays and are free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (212) 923-3700.
CONEY ISLAND, Astroland Amusement Park, 1000 Surf Avenue, Brooklyn.
Hours: Noon to midnight daily, through Sept. 6.
Rides are $1.50 to $3; a pay-one-price admission of $12.99 allows unlimited access to the major rides in scheduled sessions.
Information: (718) 265-2100.
ELLIS ISLAND IMMIGRATION MUSEUM, photographs, artifacts and displays documenting immigration to the United States from 1892 to 1924.
Circle Line ferries to Ellis Island leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan every 30 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily; boats also leave Liberty State Park in Jersey City every 45 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily.
All ferries stop at Liberty Island.
Round-trip fare: $6; $5 for the elderly, $3 for ages 3 to 17; free for children under 3.
Free admission to the island and museum.
Information: (212) 269-5755 or (201) 435-9499.
EMPIRE STATE BUILDING OBSERVATORY, Fifth Avenue at 34th Street.
Views of the metropolitan region from more than 1,000 feet above street level.
The observatory is open daily from 9:30 A.M. to midnight.
Admission: $3.50; $1.75 for the elderly and children 5 to 12; free for children under 5.
Information: (212) 736-3100.
HAYDEN PLANETARIUM, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 81st Street.
Daily through March: "Orion Rendezvous: A Star Trek Voyage of Discovery," a Sky show, narrated by LeVar Burton, which takes you on a voyage of the universe in the 24th century, Mondays through Fridays, at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, hourly from 1 to 4 P.M.; "The Star Trek Exhibit: A Retrospective of the 60's," alien costumes, Starfleet uniforms, Vulcan ear tips and assorted props and photographs from the original 1960's television series.
"Laser Drive 3-D," a laser show with animation and pop music, is presented Fridays and Saturdays at 7, 8:30 and 10 P.M.
Admission: $8.50.
Planetarium admission: $7; $6 for students and the elderly; $4 for children 2 through 12; free for children under 2.
Information: (212) 769-5921.
INTREPID SEA-AIR-SPACE MUSEUM, Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, at the Hudson River.
This converted World War II aircraft carrier features an A-12 Blackbird, the world's fastest plane, and a 1936 lightship, No. 112 Nantucket.
Also on view are items from the Persian Gulf war, including Patriot missiles, an A-6 bomber and Scud missile wreckage.
Through Sept. 6: "Seafest '93" lets visitors board police boats, fire boats, tugboats, antique sailing ships and lightships docked at a 330-foot barge.
Through Sept. 7: "The Battle of the Atlantic," 50th anniversary exhibit including photos and artifacts that commemorate the forced withdrawal of German U-Boats from the North Atlantic during World War II.
Through Oct. 12: "The Age of Exploration," features models, costumes, tapestries, maps and video presentations that chronicle the exploration of the "New World." Hours (through Sept. 6): daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; last ticket sold at 4 P.M.
Admission: $7; $6 for the elderly; $4 for children 6 to 12; free for children under 6.
Information: (212) 245-0072.
MUSEUM OF TELEVISION AND RADIO, 25 West 52d Street.
A collection of historic radio and television broadcasts, as well as exhibitions of other media, including drawings, posters and photographs.
Through Oct. 3: "Star Trek: The Next Generation," a screening series along with gallery displays, including the Emmy Award-winning costumes and masks.
Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.; until 8 P.M. on Thursdays.
Admission: $5; $4 for students; $3 for the elderly and children under 13.
Information: (212) 621-6800.
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT MUSEUM AND MARKETPLACE, 14 Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
This 19th-century port district has a large fleet of historic vessels as well as an array of restaurants, shops and bars.
Museum, 207 Front Street, lower Manhattan.
Special events include: Through Sept. 6: "The Original Cash Machines," a collection of mechanical banks from 1865 to 1915; Aug. 5 through March; "Twelve Ties to Tradition," model ships made in New York, toys and working design models.
Museum hours: weekdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; weekends, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed holidays.
Museum admission: $6; $5 for the elderly, $4 for students, $3 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 669-9400 for the museum; (212) 732-7678 for the marketplace.
STATUE OF LIBERTY, on Liberty Island.
Visitors can climb stairs to the statue's crown daily, from 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Circle Line ferries to Liberty Island leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan every 30 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; ferries also leave from Liberty State Park in Jersey City every 45 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
All ferries returning from Liberty Island stop at Ellis Island.
Round-trip fare is $6; $5 for the elderly; $3 for children 3 to 17 years old; children under 3 free.
Admission is free to Liberty Island.
Information: (212) 269-5755 or (201) 435-9499.
UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, entrance at First Avenue and 46th Street, Turtle Bay.
Hourlong tours with visits to the Security Council and the General Assembly leave every 15 minutes from the main lobby.
Tours cost $6.50; $4.50 for the elderly and students, $3.50 for children aged 5 to 15.
Children under 5 not permitted on tour.
Groups of 15 or more require reservations.
Information: (212) 963-7713.


The View From: Waterford; Sand's the Artful Medium in a Mall
WITH little knives in their hands and no shoes on their feet, Will Rounds and Steven Petruzates were at work on more than 40 tons of sand.
"I'm doing Aladdin's toes," said Mr.
Rounds, who used an icing knife to put the finishing touches on sand that he had shaped into a foot.
Mr.
Petruzates, meanwhile, carefully carved stripes into a sand tiger.
The two recently spent three weeks creating a sculpture -- a mountaintop castle surrounded by characters from the Aladdin story -- out of two truckloads of sand that had been dumped onto the floor of the lower level of the Crystal Mall in Waterford.


Jennifer Wright, John McCarthy
Jennifer Kelly Wright, a daughter of John W. Wright and Virginia Kelly Wright, both of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Gerard McCarthy, a son of Mary P. McCarthy of Yonkers and the late Daniel F. McCarthy.
The Rev.
Florence McCarthy, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral.
Mrs.
McCarthy, 27, graduated from Columbia University and is to become a student at Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn in the fall.
Her father is a literary agent in Rockville Centre and an author.


Chief Executives Who Are Quick on Their Feet
How do people manage to wrap their minds around the type of big decision that corporate chief executives face daily?
The techniques surely differ widely -- some may meditate, some may pray.
But for a good number of people charged with the fate of sizable enterprises, regular running plays a key role -- whether greasing the mind's wheels or providing relief from the pressure of decisions.


CLASSICAL
Tomorrow
JOHN CAGE: IN MEMORIAM.
Margaret Leng Tan, a specialist in contemporary piano music and a renowned interpreter of John Cage's works, will offer an overview of his keyboard music.
Besides works composed for a conventional, untampered-with piano, the program includes pieces for toy piano, bowed piano, prepared piano (that is, with pieces of metal, wood and rubber set between the strings) and string piano.
The 8 P.M. concert is part of the Serious Fun festival at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
Tickets: $20, $25, $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Q and A
Buying Foreclosures Question: I would like to purchase foreclosure properties, but I have been unable to obtain comprehensive lists of scheduled foreclosure sales of properties in Brooklyn and Queens.


Lageman Is Back, But Not Totally
A couple of days ago, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet was saying how he would like to have a photograph of Jeff Lageman from the start of each of the defensive end's previous four years with the team.
"From the long-haired, greasy, leather, dirt-bag biker to the clean-cut all-American guy driving the Ford Bronco," Coslet said.
"It's quite a transition over the years."


Now, for the Assimilation of the Killer Bee
THIRTY-SEVEN years after they were inadvertently let loose from a laboratory in Brazil, and three years after a swarm was spotted crossing the Rio Grande, Africanized or "killer bees" have caused their first documented death in the United States.
Officials from the United States Department of Agriculture confirmed last week that Lino Lopez, an 82-year-old rancher in south Texas, died earlier this month after dozens of the Africanized bees stung him when he sought to drive them from a shack by waving a burning burlap bag.
But despite Mr.
Lopez's death and the appearance of the term "killer bees" in headlines up and down the border, authorities here rushed to assure the public that there was no need to fear a widespread invasion.
"From the best we can tell, there are still more people struck by lightning in Texas per year than stung by Africanized bees," said Dave Mayes, a spokesman for Texas A &amp; M University's Agricultural Communications Department.


JULY 18-24: The President's Friend; A White House Official Takes His Own Life
Vincent W. Foster, Jr., the deputy White House counsel, had seemed peerless in his poise.
Then, last week, he was found in a Northern Virginia park, sprawled near his car with a bullet in his head and a pistol in his hand, and his apparent suicide turned a storybook aspect of the Clinton Presidency -- the journey of childhood chums to the White House -- into a deep mystery.
No one put forward a motive.


Finance Chairman's Worries Spark Speculation
Almost from the moment that Herbert E. Berman of Brooklyn became chairman of the New York City Council's Finance Committee in 1990, Council watchers wondered how long he would be content to remain in the No. 2 spot behind the man who gave him the job, the Speaker, Peter F. Vallone of Queens.
That speculation kicked into high gear again last week after Mr.
Berman worried aloud in pointed terms about the recently adopted city budget.
In an interview with Jack Newfield of The New York Post, Mr.
Berman, one of the Council's most articulate members, said that between $400 million and $700 million of revenue in the budget "may not be real," and he complained: "I feel like I've been crying wolf for three years, and nobody is listening. But the day of reckoning is coming."


Toward Broader Ambulance Coverage
SHOULD you be stricken suddenly with a heart attack or a stroke, geography can determine whether you live or die, contends Lenore A. Minerva, owner of Empress Ambulance Service in Yonkers.
"If you're stricken in New Rochelle, Mount Vernon or Yonkers, you will have a good chance of surviving, but if you happen to be in Hastings or Dobbs Ferry, for example, you are going to have a real problem," Ms.
Minerva said, explaining that those communities, unlike New Rochelle, Mount Vernon and Yonkers, don't have advance-life-support emergency medical-service systems with paramedics on call 24 hours a day.


Cheryl Kleinman and Frank Palombo
Frank Palombo arrived in Cheryl Kleinman's life accompanied by a rainstorm, thunderclouds, a blackout and electrical sparks.
Ms.
Kleinman, 44, is a wedding cake designer known for her whimsical and highly personalized cakes that take every shape from Faberge eggs to porcelain jewelry boxes.
"I like to crawl into each couple's thoughts and romance, and custom-design the cake," she said.


Of Ferris Wheels And Racing Pigs
WHEN somebody says, "Let's go to the fair," a kind of mythic experience sweeps over me.
I smell hay.
I hear pigs grunting.
I think of the best french fries of my life tossed piping hot into a white paper cone by some guy from the Kiwanis Club.
I remember the skinny muscular arms of my brother as he fired his fake rifle at the fake ducks riding along on their conveyor belt, only he never won the big stuffed panda from the woman in the low-cut blouse and more makeup than Mom said was nice.
I remember the joyful feeling of having a red helium balloon follow me everywhere.
Dad always tied it to my finger, saying, "Don't let it go." But I usually did because I liked the slightly melancholy feeling of watching it float away, smaller and smaller, over the vast parking lot.
Sometimes I'd bring it home and tie it to my bedpost.
But it was much sadder watching it die a slow death -- you know how they get all wrinkled and limp after a day or two -- so I usually liberated it the night of the fair.


Gubernatorial Foes Take Page From '92 Playbook
Within an hour of the announcement on Tuesday that the Republican gubernatorial candidate, Christine Todd Whitman, had hired a new media consultant, the campaign of her rival, Gov.
Jim Florio, had alerted reporters and others that the consultant was responsible for the notorious Willie Horton ads used to support George Bush in the 1988 Presidential race.
Barely a day later, the new consultant, Larry McCarthy of the Washington consulting firm of Cannon, McCarthy, Mason Limited, resigned from the Whitman campaign after intense criticism by civil rights leaders and Democrats.


British Air And Bank Issue A Credit Card
British Airways and Chase Manhattan Bank have introduced a joint Visa credit card that will earn users frequent-flier miles on international and domestic United States flights.
It is the first such partnership between a major foreign carrier and a major American bank, and underscores the growing popularity of air mileage awards.
It comes at a time when frequent-flier miles are increasingly being dangled as lures for everything from hotel stays to magazine subscriptions.
Most major United States airlines have similar affinity cards with banks, for which card owners typically pay an annual fee of $50 and accrue one frequent-flier mile for every dollar charged.
Under most such programs, at least $20,000 in charges are required to qualify for a free domestic United States ticket, $40,000 for an international flight.


Flood Victims Need Help, Not Scolding
To the Editor:
A July 16 front-page article reports that critics of Federal flood-control policies, including a growing number of lawmakers on Capitol Hill, say that aid encourages people to remain in flood-prone areas and not take adequate precautions.
As a "river rat" raised on the banks of the Mississippi, I take strong exception to the specious arguments of those who say the victims of the flood of 1993 should not expect the Federal Government to come to their aid.
The argument seems to be: "If they weren't prepared to deal with the aftermath of the flood, they shouldn't live in the flood plain."


CLASSICAL
Tomorrow
JOHN CAGE: IN MEMORIAM.
Margaret Leng Tan, a specialist in contemporary piano music and a renowned interpreter of John Cage's works, will offer an overview of his keyboard music.
Besides works composed for a conventional, untampered-with piano, the program includes pieces for toy piano, bowed piano, prepared piano (that is, with pieces of metal, wood and rubber set between the strings) and string piano.
The 8 P.M. concert is part of the Serious Fun festival at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
Tickets: $20, $25, $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


From a Banquet Table That Groaned With Silver
Glittering silver candelabra, sauce boats and teapots transformed dinners into visual feasts at the Harvey S. Firestones in Newport during the 1950's and 60's.
Now they are being shared with a larger audience at the Museum of Fine Arts here.
The museum describes the Firestone silver, acquired after World War II by the rubber industrialist's wife, Elizabeth, as one of the largest and finest such private collections in the world.
The 300 shimmering artifacts, produced from the 16th to 18th centuries, were donated in May by the estate of Mrs.
Firestone, who was 93 at her death in 1990. (Mr. Firestone died in 1973.)


Ms. McNamara, Mr. Montgomery
Kathleen Roberta McNamara, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. McNamara of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas John Montgomery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph West Montgomery of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Frank Hall performed the Unitarian-Universalist ceremony at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Ms.
McNamara, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from McGill University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University, where she now is a doctoral candidate in political science.
Her father was a foreign service officer and an assistant United States trade representative before retiring as the director of government relations, in Harrison, N.Y., for Texaco Inc.
He is now a consultant to the company.


At Work; Getting a Grip on Paper Pushing
IT'S not that the work environment in some of Corning Inc.'s far-flung administrative offices was ever hopelessly chaotic.
After all, far-flung in Corning, a microdot of population in the upstate New York countryside, is not the same as far-flung in some of the state's unwieldy metropoli.
But there were those small, daily absurdities that drove people crazy and probably drove up costs.
Like having to walk the check requests across a rooftop to the next person who needed to see them.
Or passing refunds through a couple of dozen hands, delaying them for weeks.
The Chemung River, which courses along the backside of downtown Corning and separates one cluster of Corning Inc. from another, became a symbol of inefficiency.
"Refund checks would go back and forth across the river and touch 22 hands," said Diane Pierri, who works in domestic credit at Corning.


County Is Steering Toward Alternate Fuel
THE county government unveiled five vehicles recently at the County Center in White Plains that County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke predicts will put Westchester "on the cutting edge of technology."
The vehicles, part of the county's fleet of 370 cars, trucks and vans, have been converted to operate on compressed natural gas as part of a six-month pilot program to test the economic and environmental benefits of using natural gas as an alternative fuel.
The program is a cooperative effort between the county, the Westchester Chamber of Commerce, Consolidated Edison and Cardinal Resources an oil and gas exploration and production company with headquarters in White Plains.


Wall Street; Whistle-Blowing at Raymond James
ANGRY employees who speak out publicly against a company are a rare breed in corporate America to begin with.
But in the securities industry, whistle-blowers are rarer than a sell signal before a market crash.
Thus an arbitration complaint filed on April 28 against Raymond James &amp; Associates, the St.
Petersburg, Fla., brokerage firm, is likely to be closely watched as it winds its way through the National Association of Securities Dealers arbitration system.
David W. Jonsson, a former analyst and broker at Raymond James, has asked that N.A.S.D. arbitrators sit in judgment of Raymond James for alleged infractions that include breach of contract, misleading sales tactics and defamation.


A Tarnishing Report for the Mayor of New York
A CONTINENT and nearly a year apart, independent investigations into the riots that erupted in disparate neighborhoods of New York City and Los Angeles reached a common conclusion: neither the police nor the mayor was in control initially, nor were they communicating with each other effectively.
In the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots, the Mayor, Tom Bradley, retired.
In New York, the Mayor, David N. Dinkins, is seeking re-election in a campaign redefined last week by the very investigation he had hoped would, after two years, put a racially charged riot in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn behind him.
But if the New York State report persuaded skeptics that, as Mr.
Dinkins had insisted all along, he had not restrained the police from protecting Hasidic Jews and other whites from marauding blacks, it raised a less emotional but equally fundamental question.
Was the Mayor, as one tabloid headline put it, out to lunch?


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Existing-home sales, millions, ann. rate
3.61
3.60
Tuesday
July consumer confidence index
58.9
57.8
Wednesday
June durable-goods orders, percent change
-1.7
1.4
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
352
395
Friday
June new-home sales, thousands, ann. rate
571
605
June personal income, percent change
0.6
0.1
July purchasing managers' index
53.9
53.3
Tuesday: Treasury to sell 2-year notes  Wednesday: Treasury to sell 5-year notes U.S., Canadian and Mexican trade ministers to meet on trade pact


Race Is On to Portray Pollock
JACKSON POLLOCK was a battler.
The East Hampton artist, who died in 1956 at the age of 44, had fistfights with, among others, the artists Philip Guston, David Siqueiros and Reuben Kadish.
Now a battle is shaping up among movie makers over who can complete the first film about Pollock's turbulent life.
Just as titans of Abstract Expressionism like Willem de Kooning, Franz Kline and Pollock wrestled with changing the nature of painting after World War II, half a century later giants of Hollywood are vying to portray the definitive version of Pollock's life.
Three groups are developing projects, each based on a different biographical source among the more than a dozen books on Pollock.


Vivaldi Earns a Place on 3 Programs
FORTY years ago, only Baroque specialists knew anything about Vivaldi; now the composer is so popular that two festival concerts this week are devoted entirely to his music, and one of his concerti grossi leads off a pops program.
The concerto will be played by the Westchester Band at a free concert on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the Eastchester Town Hall.
The program will be repeated on Thursday at 8 P.M. in Chase Park in Scarsdale.
In addition to Vivaldi, the founder and conductor, Joseph Albright, leads the players in opera, with the guest soprano Cecilia Tucker singing arias from "Tosca," "Madama Butterfly" and other favorites.
Works by Dvorak and Stravinsky continue the classical trend, but the lineup will also include a medley of songs popularized by Frank Sinatra, selections by Cole Porter and Mr.
Albright's own Americana fantasy, "Lady Liberty Suite." No tickets are required for either concert.


Buddha Is Still Larger Than Life


The Long Goodbye
She is sitting in the clinic waiting room, bent over a magazine, half an hour early for her appointment and looking fine.
Year after year now, as the others sitting out there slowly fade into shadows, she alone has remained solid, substantial, voluptuous, the only image left on the screen.
She first came to our clinic four years ago for an H.I.V. test.
It was her fifth.
The other tests had all been positive, but refusing to believe the unbelievable, she still felt there was the possibility of a mistake and had no patience for anyone who suggested otherwise.


DAMAGE ESTIMATES OF MIDWEST FLOOD CLIMBING SHARPLY
As the rain keeps falling and the water keeps rising, it is becoming clear that the terrible flooding of 1993 will have a considerably bigger effect on the nation's economy than seemed likely just a short time ago.
"Seems like we get bombarded with heavy rain and heavy rain; in between, we get light rain," said Roy R. Arends, a farmer in Alexander, Iowa.
"It's been hard to get the crops in, it's hard on equipment, it's hard on nerves. The financial impact is yet to be seen, but right now it really looks bleak."


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van and foot that are scheduled during the summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"HARLEM ON SUNDAY." A bus tour that includes a church service with gospel music, the Hamilton Grange mansion, the Morris Jumel mansion (former headquarters of George Washington), and the Apollo Theater.
Proper dress required for church service.
Sponsored by Harlem Spirituals.
Meets at 9 A.M. every Sunday throughout the year.
Fee: $29; $23 for children.
Reservations and information: (212) 757-0425.


Brahms and Messiaen in Chorus
THOUGH chamber music is the basic fare at the Norfolk Festival, one Sunday afternoon is traditionally given over to the Litchfield County Choral Union, and this is it: today at 3 o'clock, Jonathan Babbitt conducts Olivier Messiaen's "O Sacrum con Vivium," in memory of the French composer who died last year, and then leads the choir in one of the lyric masterworks of the 19th century, Brahms's German Requiem.
Come the weekend at Norfolk, it'll be back to instrumental business as usual, meaning attractive programing by outstanding artists.
Friday evening at 8:30 P.M., Eliot Fisk carries forward his mission to integrate the guitar into the broader spectrum of chamber music, presenting a Paganini sonata for violin and guitar, a Vivaldi concerto for guitar and strings, even lute compositions by John Dowland transcribed for five guitars.
More standard chamber fare is the expectation at Saturday's 8:30 P.M. recital, with the Cleveland Quartet offering Mozart, Beethoven and Smetana.
For travel directions or reservations, call 542-5537.


Let's Stop Buying a Secret Foreign Policy; Funds for Murderers
To the Editor:
In "Can It Be Happening?" (column, July 13), A. M. Rosenthal is guilty of the very cynicism and naivete for which he indicts Representative Paul Kanjorski and other members of Congress.
The National Endowment for Democracy is an institution of dubious status, finances and purposes, deserving Congressional and journalistic investigation.


Fighting Leaves 50 Dead in Nicaragua


Old? Who's Old?
Isabella Rossellini is getting serious about modeling again.
The actress, who has an exclusive contract to appear in ads for Lancome cosmetics, has just signed up with Ford Models.
And like just about everyone else with a famous name, she'd like to see hers on a line of products, but what they might be she will not say.
Ms.
Rossellini, 41, was previously represented by Click, but hadn't been actively working with the agency for the past few years.


Thousands of Missing-Persons Cases
WHEN Florence Orvieto of Stony Brook learned the fate of her daughter Lorraine, whose death was linked to Joel Rifkin, the reported serial killer, this month, she was shocked by more than the circumstances surrounding the case.
The body of her daughter, she learned, was found, but not identified, exactly one year ago and had been lying in a morgue in New York City despite a missing person's report filed in Suffolk County in January 1992.
Lorraine Orvieto, 29, was one of nearly 5,000 people reported missing last year on Long Island.
But the police said her case was extremely uncommon.


An Open-Air Cornucopia Teases the Senses
EVEN as gritty air rises from city sidewalks, New York's movable feast doesn't stop or slow.
Shaved ice drizzled with sweet Caribbean fruit syrups displaces honey-roasted cashews on corner pushcarts when the air gets heavy.
Dining alfresco beckons, against the odds of bus exhaust and steam from subway grates.
No city soul is immune.
The senses may plead for air-conditioning and iced tea.
But the untamable summer child inside even the most urbane adult seeks a sliver of country-in-the-city, with its bucolic and folksy underpinnings, and its tacit promise of fresh air.


Days of Dogs and Dinosaurs for the Boys and Girls of Summer
PEOPLE don't complain about the dog days of July and August for nothing.
Some children are home from camp, the vacation never materialized (or it has come and gone) and you can't stand one more trip to the beach.
But there's hope!
So many activities are stocked up for the next six weeks, you may lobby to have Labor Day postponed.


Corrections
An obituary last Sunday about Margaret Van Doren Bevans, author and illustrator of children's books, included a work among her credits erroneously.
"Pat the Bunny" (Golden Books, 1940) was illustrated by its author, Dorothy Kunhardt.


An Old, Established Firm
To the Editor:
David Margolick's article "The Cinematic Law Firm of Greedy, Vain &amp; Immoral"  [ July 4 ]  offers an interesting overview of Hollywood's depiction of lawyers, but his survey remains seriously incomplete.
In looking back only as far as 1943, Mr.
Margolick ignores the fertile ground of the 1930's.
He rightly cites the late 1950's and early 60's as a "golden age of the genre," but the years from 1931 through 1933 were equally golden.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Since there is no more Evil Empire, many authors of espionage fiction are now writing about terrorism.
Consider THE BRITANNIA CONTRACT, by Paul Mann (Carroll &amp; Graf, $21), in which terrorists take over the British royal yacht, with Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip on board.
Or CLOUDBURST, a first novel by Ryne Douglas Pearson (Morrow, $23), in which terrorists kill the President of the United States.
Or DESERT FIRE, by David Hagberg (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95), in which terrorists threaten to blow up a nuclear power plant in Germany if their demands are not met.
Books like these have certain built-in liabilities.
There are no shades between Good and Evil.
And one knows in advance that the down-to-the-wire convulsions are going to be settled with Good triumphant.
Characters in such novels are as black-and-white as the plotting: rather unbelievable heroes on one side, equally unbelievable villains on the other.


JULY 18-24: The Constitution vs. the Voters; Colorado Supreme Court Imperils Anti-Gay Measure
The Colorado Supreme Court last week dealt what may be a fatal blow to Amendment 2, a measure that would invalidate protections for homosexuals against discrimination in jobs and housing.
The State Supreme Court said the law, which triggered a boycott of Colorado that has cost the state more than $35 million in convention business, appeared to violate the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution.
A challenge to the law is still expected to go to trial in district court in Denver in October.
But even if Amendment 2 survives that court test, last week's ruling signaled that the State Supreme Court would likely strike the law down.
The court said that lawyers for the state must demonstrate that Colorado has a "compelling interest" that outweighs Amendment 2's constitutional problems.


Go Ahead, Get Stoked
To the Editor:
I can usually determine the meaning of an unfamiliar word from the context in which it is used.
But I got stuck on "stoked." This word appeared at least three times in your article about Amy Stewart and Chad Johnson ("Lollapalooza Love Story," July 11), who are selling their handmade jewelry and hair wraps on the Lollapalooza music festival circuit.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bay Shore  $131,500
24 Roland Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 29- year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,700.
Brentwood  $128,000
109 Barber Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 30- year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $3,600.
Islip  $137,500
1028 Broadway  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, den, 2-car garage, deck; taxes $5,500.
Manhasset Hills  $340,000
105 Brook Court South  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old splanch; dining room, den w/fireplace, finished basement; taxes $8,000.
Mineola  $173,000
119 Raff Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 40- year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
Searingtown  $317,000
51 Edgemere Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; dining room, den w/fireplace, maid's room and bath, 2-car attached garage; taxes $8,500.
OTHER AREAS Neptune, N.J.  $242,500
640 South Riverside Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, river view, basement; taxes $3,600 Rocky Hill, Conn.  $222,000
190 Countryside Drive  3- bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, on cul-de-sac, formal dining room, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,800.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $255,000
71 Sheridan Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old split level; tiled entry hall, bay window, office; taxes $5,066.


Suddenly, the Red Sox Are Squeezing 25 Guys Into One Cause
When the season began, Butch Hobson was the clear-cut choice as the first manager who would be fired.
The Boston Red Sox had finished in last place last season for the first time since 1932, and Hobson apparently was not especially liked by the players in his rookie season as manager.
Lou Gorman, however, was not among those predicting Hobson's early demise.


Wall Street; Divining the Market With the Advance-Decline Line
THE advance-decline line is one of the most watched technical indicators of the stock market, and lately some analysts have said it is sending a positive signal.
The line, which records the cumulative number of stocks advancing on the New York Stock Exchange, less the number declining, rose to a new high for the current bull market early this month, breaking out of a narrow range that had lasted several months.


Fireworks for All
A benefit for the 57th anniversary of Boys Harbor, which runs an educational center and summer camp for inner-city children, East Hampton, L.I., July 17.


Debra Klatskin And Jack Hauser
Debra Phillips Klatskin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Phillips of Parma, Ohio, was married last evening to Dr.
Jack Hauser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Hauser of Delray Beach, Fla.
Cantor Raymond Smolovar officiated at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Hauser, 33, graduated from Ohio State University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in developmental psychology at Columbia University and a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at Adelphi University.
The bride was a widow.


When Robert Rubin Talks . . .
Three days before President Clinton introduced his economic plan, his economic inner circle huddled for a debate: Should we settle for cutting the deficit by less than our goal of $140 billion in 1997 to avoid more politically unpopular spending cuts?
Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and George Stephanopoulos, the White House spokesman, argued that it wouldn't be so bad to fall short.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Leon Panetta, the Budget Director, pressed for sticking with the goal.
Then Robert E. Rubin, the Administration's point man on economic policy as director of the new National Economic Council, threw his weight behind the bigger cuts.


Faulty Rocket Forces Delay of Shuttle Launching
Warnings that a booster rocket was faltering today forced NASA to cancel the launching of the space shuttle Discovery just 19 seconds before the spaceship and its crew of five astronauts were to thunder into space.
It was the second aborted countdown in a week.
The shuttle's nine-day mission was put off for 7 to 10 days, which is how long the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said it would take to repair the problem.


A Wife Frets After Arrest Of Husband In Bomb Plot
About two hours after Matarawi Mohammed Said Saleh was arrested at a barbecue on the Jersey Shore on Thursday night, ending his month as a fugitive, he telephoned his wife, Stephanie, from jail to profess his love and his innocence.
"He just told me to take care of the baby and take care of myself," she said today in her apartment here, trying to comfort their crying, 5-month-old son, Omar.
"He was telling me he loves me so much. He even swore to God to me he didn't do it. It's hard not to believe him."


Hoedown in the Hamptons
A benefit for Miracle House, Amagansett, L.I., July 17.


There Once Was a Tenor Who Swallowed a Bug . . .
FOR the audience, a summer concert can be a picnic.
Literally.
But for the performers, going from a great stage to the Great Lawn in Central Park -- or some other place in the great outdoors -- can mean coping with everything from jets roaring over middle-of-the-city band shells to not-so-gentle summer breezes that whisk sheet music right off the stage.
And what's an outdoor concert without a siren in the distance during that intimate second-movement pianissimo, or a singer who swallows a bug, or a bird that dive-bombs the podium?
Outdoor concerts are more casual than indoor performances -- the conductor Jorge Mester let his dog sprawl on the podium, at least during rehearsals -- and often the repertory is more familiar.


Elizabeth Ackerman, Paul Howell 3d
Elizabeth Ackerman, the daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
John Ackerman of Minneapolis, was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul Howell 3d, a son of Sally Howell of Denver and the late Mr.
Howell Jr.
The bride's father, a Presbyterian minister, and the Rev.
Kim K. Crawford Harvie, a Unitarian minister, jointly officiated at the United Ministry Church in Aurora, N.Y.
Ms.
Ackerman, who is keeping her name, is a documentary film editor in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the minister of Bryn Mawr Church in Minneapolis.
Her mother, Helen Ackerman, teaches chemistry and heads the science department at the Blake School, a private high school in Minneapolis.


Japan's Leadership Fight Sets Off Difficult Shifts
By the time Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa left a crucial meeting of the Liberal Democratic Party on Thursday, this aging strategist in Japan's postwar economic miracle had resigned and suffered a humiliating verbal assault that left him looking sadly out of touch.
He had been beaten in a vast power play, but perhaps more important to the political shifts under way here, Mr.
Miyazawa's fall symbolized a deep philosophical change slowly gaining momentum, which some believe could affect Japan more than the next choice of prime minister.


Magna Carta
To the Editor: Madeline and Jake Sherman's letter on English tourism (June 13) commented (not unreasonably) on the lack of tourist facilities at Runnymede, where the barons forced King John to grant Magna Carta in 1215, and on the fact that the only memorial is one supplied by the American Bar Association in 1957.
I know a history student from the United States, who, with a friend, visited Runnymede one June 15, the anniversary of the issuing of Magna Carta.
They were the only two people present.


Correction
A picture last Sunday with the Find of the Week note in the Foraging column, about Evolution, a store on Spring Street, was published in error.
It showed an $850 giraffe's skull, not a $145 springbok's skull.


Loud and Proud
IMELDA FLORES, who is 19 and wears her bottle-blond hair in a crinkly jet spray and is fond of scarlet lipstick, is leaning on the rickety railing of the front porch of her Los Angeles home, simultaneously talking into her portable telephone and trying to silence her chirping beeper.
In the gang-ridden section of Inglewood where Ms.
Flores lives with her family, this flurry of activity might be confused with something illicit.
In fact, what she's trying to achieve, in her quick-clip combination of Spanish and English, is the organization of a car caravan to transport the members of Club Invasion Musical, the 100-plus member banda fan club of which she is president.
In a haphazard formation of packed automobiles, Ms.
Flores and her friends will spend this weekend night as they usually do -- zig-zagging across the city, hitting as many backyard banda dance parties as their gas gauges will allow.


Tartabull Goes Up And Far, Far Away
The players call it "the black." No one sits there, not ever.
The bleachers sit behind the center-field wall, between the bullpens, more than 425 feet away.
They are painted black to provide a backdrop for the hitters, and no fans are allowed in, lest they wear white and become distractions.
Almost no one hits the baseball to these seats in Yankee Stadium.
It is Reggie Jackson's spot, the place where he hit his mammoth home run in the 1977 World Series, a shot off Charlie Hough that just happened to be his third homer of the game.
Jackson landed another ball there during the 1981 season, but no other Yankee had been able to duplicate the feat.


Serbs Continue Assault on Sarajevo
Serbian nationalist troops renewed intensive artillery and infantry assaults on Bosnian forces defending strategic hillsides on the northern edge of Sarajevo today, apparently seeking a breakthrough that could bring large parts of the city under Serbian control.
Throughout the afternoon and past dusk, the city shook to the explosions of tank, artillery and mortar shells on Kobilja Glava, Slatina and Kromolj, hillsides that stand above a narrow valley leading to the heart of the city.


Rudolph Giuliani and the Color of Politics in New York
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the jutjawed lawman who would be Mayor of New York City, lopes onto the gymnasium floor of St.
Joseph's parochial school in Astoria, Queens, sober in his boxy brown suit and sensible brown loafers.
His audience of 450 students sits in silent, pink-cheeked ranks.
An old phonograph squawks a martial record and a pint-size honor guard presents colors.
Msgr.
George J. Ryan, the parish pastor, introduces the candidate, who has come, he says, to show these children "what the fundamentals of Catholic education can do to bring out the best in people." Giuliani, who nearly began studies for the priesthood before embarking on a legal career that made him the most celebrated Federal prosecutor of his generation, steps up to the podium and gets down to cases.


Store Night Manager Is Slain in Forest Hills
The night manager of an all-night grocery store in Forest Hills, Queens, was shot to death early yesterday morning.
The police said one or two men entered the Mini-Mart Grocery on 108th Street shortly after 2 A.M. and began shooting.
The night manager, George Poulopoulos, 54, of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, was shot once in the chest.
He was taken to St.
John's Episcopal Hospital, where he was pronounced dead on arrival.


But It's on Cable!
To the Sports Editor:
Much has been reported lately concerning the future of Yankee Stadium.
And only 17 years after the remodeled edifice has been used, the Yankees want to leave.
That's absurd.


Yipes!
Stripes -- vertical, horizontal and combinations -- are all over fashion.
In Greenwich Village, one man was seen camouflaged in broad stripes that resembled those on a beach chair.
His ensemble was of four different stripe patterns: tank top, scarf, duffel bag and trousers.
At another extreme are long, slim, jersey tube dresses in Roman stripes, those circles of brilliant colors in contrasting series that run across the fabric.
For others, the stripe story is graphic black and white or navy and white stripes.
Even the street performer Gustavo Sola has stitched himself a pair of black-and-white striped overalls for handing out restaurant fliers (when not stepping out on lower Broadway with his legs and stilts opening to form an arch that bicycle messengers whiz under for a bit of summer fun).


Howe's Effort Suggests That Relief Is On Way
There were boos as Steve Howe approached the mound to relieve Scott Kamieniecki in the seventh inning yesterday afternoon.
There were cheers when the inning ended without the Angels scoring off the often-beleaguered reliever.
After the Yankee victory, Howe's teammates had nothing but praise for the left-hander.
Still, Howe, who has a 6.83 earned run average, reacted defensively.


Corrections
A chart on July 11 with an article about whether boards of diqrectors protect the interests of shareholders misstated the date of payments by the Citizens Utilities Company of $520,200 in consulting fees to a director, Robert D. Siff.
The fees were paid in 1990 and 1991, not last year.


In Mississippi, Riverboat Gambling Rides Rougher Waters
MOST folks think of saturation on the Mississippi River these days in terms of the Midwestern floods.
But for investors in gambling stocks, it is more likely to refer to the overflow of riverboat casinos in the state of Mississippi.
Companies with riverboat casinos in Mississippi, such as Grand Casinos and Casino Magic, have been among the biggest winners in the market this year, with investors speculating that the hunt by states for new tax dollars will lead many to license casinos.


Get Those Pensions Funded!
To the Editor:
Representative J. J. Pickle ("Pensions: Grand Plans Short on Funds," Viewpoints, July 11) reminds us again that the invisible head of heedless self-interest is bad morals and bad public policy (with apologies to Adam Smith and F.D.R.).
The systematic under-funding of pension plans seems to lead inexorably to a situation similar to the savings and loan debacle.


THE DETOXING OF PRISONER 88A0802
In the story of Bill Giddens ("The Detoxing of Prisoner 88A0802," by Peter Kerr, June 27), it is interesting to note that after six years of incarceration (at $25,000 per year) and 14 months of substance-abuse treatment, he found himself in a job market in which he could not compete for more than part-time, temporary positions.
The discrimination he confronted and the limited opportunities were a major threat to his recovery.


Latin America in Flux; Argentines Escape an Economic Mire: A Success Story, Yes, but No Miracle
There was a time when Argentina represented much of what didn't work in Latin America.
Four years ago, inflation was so high that restaurant, taxi and clothing prices changed daily, and the currency so worthless that 10 peso bills had to be replaced by bills in denominations of 50,000, 100,000 and 500,000.
The country's debt equaled 55 percent of its economic output.


Farewell to Alarm: Goodbye George
To the Sports Editor:
I agree heartily with almost everything that Robert Lipsyte had to say in "Steinbrenner Is Just One More Car Alarm," (The Times, June 27).
We certainly don't need Steinbrenner.
But for this aging kid who also remembers watching DiMaggio "drift" under fly balls, to think of New York, and, more importantly, the essential world of baseball, without the New York Yankees, would be the ultimate violation and disillusionment with a sport that has already lost too much of those values that most fans regard as traditional, if not sacred.


PUMPED UP
It used to be called slumming -- a well-placed, woman-of-the-world infatuated with some lower-class stud finally devours him.
Norma Desmond in "Sunset Boulevard" and Lady Chatterley are classics of the genre.
Deborah Gimelson's Hers column "Pumped Up" (June 27) tells of a dangerously self-absorbed woman of the 90's who not only must have it all but also brag about her conquests in print.


THIS YEAR'S PROPHET
Michael Lerner, Tikkun magazine and practitioners of the "politics of meaning" speak and write a common language -- gibberish.
MORRIS B. ABRAM New York, N.Y.


Burn Victims Recovering
A 3-year-old boy from Brooklyn was in critical but stable condition yesterday, two days after he and his uncle were burned by a gasoline bomb.
The child, Benedict Reyes, was walking with his uncle, Jose Reyes, 23, to their home in Williamsburg on Thursday night when several shots were fired and two gasoline bombs were thrown, the police said.
One bomb was thrown into a window of the Reyeses' apartment on Grand Street.
The other fell on a canopy, and flaming liquid from the bomb scalded the boy and his uncle.
Benedict was burned over 20 percent of his body.
Mr.
Reyes was burned over 5 percent of his body.
He is in stable condition at New York Hospital, where they were both taken.


Standing Tall At the Intersection Of Clout and Pomp
When a charming B-movie actor became President of the United States, the cinematic aspects of life in Washington took on a surreal power.
The trappings of statecraft, the facades and icons, began to resemble movie sets.
The President really read his lines off cue cards.
He really confused film memories with historical events.
The great military fantasy of the era -- Star Wars -- took its name from a movie; it strongly resembled the doomsday device featured in a 1940 sci-fi two-reeler starring Ronald Reagan.
Hollywood and Washington still dance an elegant minuet.
Both churn out images intended to fire the collective imagination of Americans.
It can be argued that a snippet of film elected Bill Clinton: Those slowed-down, dream-time frames of the starry-eyed boy shaking hands with President Kennedy proved boffo at the polls.
Washington keeps learning illusory tricks from Hollywood, but rarely in recent years have movie makers trained a realistic eye on the capital.


From the Sea, Italian Style
WHEN it first appeared in bookstores this spring, "Cucina del Mare" by Evan Kleinman (Morrow) was inviting.
Now, in midsummer, the light, fresh touch it espouses with seafood is compelling.
Ms.
Kleinman, the owner of several restaurants in the Los Angeles area, has a way of deftly combining a few key ingredients that result in bright, savory dishes whose flavors have great integrity.
The subtitle of the book is "Fish and Seafood Italian Style." As anyone familiar with how fish and seafood are prepared in Italy already knows, simplicity is the rule.
Unlike many American restaurant chefs, Ms.
Kleinman avoids overburdening her creations with an excess of trendy items.


A Few Words From Citizens Utilities
To the Editor:  Thank you for mentioning, albeit at the end of an otherwise negative report on the Citizens Utilities Company board of directors, that our stock has enjoyed a 20.2 percent compounded annual appreciation since Leonard Tow became chairman, compared with Standard &amp; Poor's 11.2 percent.


A Spanish City's Year of Devotion
EVERY time St.
James's Day falls on a Sunday, as it does today, the Roman Catholic Church declares a Holy Year in Santiago de Compostela, the medieval city in northwest Spain that carries the apostle's name and has been one of Europe's principal shrines since the Middle Ages.
The day falls on a Sunday in a cyclical pattern of 11, 6, 5 and 6 years -- the last time in 1982, the next time in 1999.
While July 25 is a special day, the celebrations go on all year, drawing hundreds of thousands of pilgrims to embrace the statue of St.
James that stands over the altar in the cathedral or to pray before the ornate silver urn that is thought to contain his bones.
The difference this year, though, is that the remote and long-backward region of Galicia, which has Santiago as its capital, has decided to use Xacobeo '93 -- St.
James's Day in the language of Galicia -- to promote itself and the pilgrims' trail as a tourist destination.
The Church is not too happy with the competition.
Below the Monte do Gozo, the hilltop where pilgrims traditionally cried out with joy as they first caught sight of the cathedral towers, the local government has built an open-air auditorium that has already rocked to the sound of Bruce Springsteen.


A First-Day First: Less Bureaucracy
IN an effort to streamline the production of first-day covers for new stamps, the United States Postal Service now supplies envelopes with stamps affixed and bearing a cancellation with the name of the city and date of issue.
The Postal Service is hoping the service will attract new hobbyists who may have been discouraged by the bureaucracy involved in obtaining first-day covers themselves.
The covers are also available from stamp dealers, who charge a service fee.


U.S. Updates Sent by Fax
State Department warnings about travel to certain countries may now be obtained by fax, as may consular information sheets on any of 196 countries.
Travelers can get detailed information on conditions in countries they plan to visit without having to call and take notes from recorded information, or order the sheets and wait for them to arrive by mail.
The new service is more flexible than the telephone service because it can print out the material in State Department leaflets, such as "Your Trip Abroad," that are usually sold by the Government Printing Office for $1.
Other essential information on visa requirements and passport renewals is also available by fax.


In the Name of Justice, Don't Retry Child Sex Abuse Defendant
To the Editor:
The Essex County Prosecutor, after spending nearly $3 million of the taxpayers' money in a massively unfair trial that put an innocent woman in jail for five years, has decided to retry Margaret Kelly Michaels for alleged multiple child abuse in a New Jersey child-care center (news article, July 16).
The motive can only be an attempt to save face, rather than admit to such a gross injustice.
When the prosecutor was asked by the appeals court to comment on the leading and coercive questioning of the children by the Division of Youth and Family Services, she responded, "We don't do it that way anymore." Yet the prosecution is unwilling to give up the conviction earned by the admittedly coerced testimony.


ARTS
Don't Miss
DRAWINGS FROM THE J. PAUL GETTY MUSEUM, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
The youngest major-league collection of Old Master drawings is little more than a decade old and relatively small by European standards.
But the 130 works in this exhibition, which range from Raphael to van Gogh, suggest that what it lacks in quantity and longevity, it more than makes up for in quality.
Through Aug. 8.
Hours: Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $6; $3 for the elderly and students.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Karen Cise, Jude Flaherty
Karen Anne Cise and Jude Xavier Flaherty were married yesterday at St.
Teresa of Avila Roman Catholic Church in Summit, N.J.
Msgr.
John A. Koenig performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Flaherty, 37, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the national marketing director at APM Inc., a management consulting company in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Cise of Summit.


Sexism in Fees?
How come a British 100-meter Olympic champion gets three times as much money as a British Olympic champion in a 400-meter event to participate in a British track meet?
Because the 100 meters is a sexier event?
That's not the way SALLY GUNNELL sees it.
Gunnell is the Olympic champion in the women's 400-meter hurdles who learned last week that LINFORD CHRISTIE, the 100-meter champion, is paid $45,000 a meet while she gets only $15,000.
She sees the heavy hand of sexism.
"If the figures are correct," she told The Evening Standard, "then the situation is quite wrong and unfair." (AP)


Viewpoints; Some Regrets on the Decline of Brands
WHEN I heard that brands were dead or dying, I thought about the Cadillac Man.
His name was Steve Saccardo, and he lived across the street from us in our Long Island town.
He worked in a gas station, kept an immaculate lawn, and achieved some local notoriety one Thanksgiving when a cooked turkey came flying out an unopened window of his house.
But mostly he was the Cadillac Man.
Every year or two he'd buy a new Cadillac, usually a dark color.
The practice caused the expected notice in a town where Chevys and Fords were the norm.


Cozy Grape Arbor Plus Brick-Oven Pizza
IT is no coincidence that the new Via Sforza Trattoria in Norwalk has a decor similar to Il Forno in Stamford; the owners are brothers named Sforza.
Like the older, larger and slightly more formal Stamford establishment (which has a more elaborate menu), Via Sforza has artfully designed its smallish storefront interior to resemble an outdoor scene in Italy, with stuccoed walls with faux windows and doors (and even an advertising poster on one wall).
A trellised alcove suggests a cozy grape arbor.
In one corner of the dining room, chefs work at an open-to-view brick pizza oven.
Aptly dubbed a trattoria, Via Sforza is casual and informal, drawing heavily on pastas and pizzas, with a short list of seafood, chicken and meat dishes.
On the whole, the thin-crusted pizzas are the best bet.
While a large one seems pricey at $14, $15 or $16 (depending on the toppings), it can serve at least three ravenous diners.
A smaller one (averaging $8) is about right for one, with a salad or starter.
Most interesting of the pizzas was quattro stagione: four separate toppings of prosciutto, mushrooms, artichoke hearts and, best of all, capers (inspired!).
Napoli, with fresh garlic, scallions and fresh clams, was a pungent treat, while the lighter Margherita, with cheese, basil, tomatoes and olive oil, made a refreshing summer choice.


A Fake's Progress
DRAWN TO TROUBLE Confessions of a Master Forger: A Memoir.
By Eric Hebborn.
Illustrated. 380 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


Bonilla's In Right; No, Third; Try First?
Not that he is second in command, but Bobby Bonilla wants to hear a State of the Mets address.
So, before Joe McIlvaine sets out next month to scout the organization's teen-agers, Bonilla said he will ask the general manager for a "nice little talk to see what's happening here."
What is happening, besides last place, is that Bonilla is being moved from one corner of the field to another.
Thursday night he was in right field, Friday night he was at third base, today he split time between both positions and next week he could conceivably be minding first.
"Don't expect Brooks Robinson at third or Keith Hernandez at first," he said.


Disappointment In AIDS Battle
Hopes for a promising new three-drug therapy for AIDS were dimmed last week.
Researchers at the Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston said that they had made a serious error in the laboratory research supporting the theory underlying a national trial of the therapy.
In reporting their findings in February in Nature, a British scientific journal, the Harvard researchers said they may have found the Achilles' heel of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Federal health officials then rushed to test the theory on H.I.V.-infected volunteers.


Ellen Washburn, T. D. Martin Jr.
Ellen Virginia Washburn, a daughter of Diana J. Washburn of Cumberland Foreside, Me., and Kenneth W. Washburn of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Terence D. Martin Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin of New York.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Columba's Chapel in Middletown, R.I.
Mrs.
Martin and her husband graduated from Kenyon College, and she is a candidate for a master's degree in historic preservation at Columbia University.
Her father is the chairman and president of the Union Wadding Company, a maker of cotton products and Christmas ornaments in Pawtucket, R.I.


Lee R. Stevens, Mark A. Deitch
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Stevens of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Lee Rachel Stevens and Dr.
Mark Adam Deitch, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Deitch of Woodbury, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stevens, 28, is a vice president in funds management at J. P. Morgan in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, from which her fiance also graduated.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel of Lorillard Inc., the tobacco company in New York.
Her mother, Lois Stevens, is a training specialist at T.I.A.A.-C.R.E.F., a teachers' retirement and investment fund in New York.


Streamlining the Ungainly
We political reporters saw it coming, the true magnitude of the health-care crisis, the way it could tongue-tie even skilled professionals like ourselves who were accustomed to turning complex issues into simple buzzwords.


U.N. SEEKS A CURE FOR FISH DEPLETION
In a basement conference room a world away from the klieg-lighted talks upstairs on Bosnia, Iraq and Haiti, more than 150 diplomats here have been grappling with what most agree is a grave but less photogenic crisis: the threat to the earth's fisheries.
Alarmed by evidence that cod, tuna, mackerel, pollack and scores of other valuable species are being wiped out by overfishing, the United Nations opened a three-week conference on July 12 to try to lay the groundwork for a global system to manage and re-propagate the fish that are still left.


Your Home: Salability; A Slovenly House Is A Turn-Off
COOKIE crumbs hang from the upholstery in the family room.
The beds have been left unmade.
Dirty dishes sit for days in the kitchen sink.
The living room carpet is stained and frayed.
And underwear is scattered all over an upstairs bedroom.
What's so surprising about all of this?
The fact that the home in question may be on the market.
Indeed, buyers and brokers complain that an ever-increasing number of homes currently up for sale -- even expensive homes -- are being offered in a condition that is almost an embarrassment.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS It's Spain vs. Australia for the Cup
Spain, led by Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, beat France yesterday and Nicole Provis powered an Australian comeback over Argentina to set up the final of the Federation Cup in Frankfurt, Germany.
The top-seeded Spanish team, looking to repeat its 1991 victory in the women's version of the Davis Cup, won both singles against sixth-seeded France to take the best-of-three series, 2-1.
Australia last reached the final in 1984, losing to Czechoslovakia.


A Body of Work
Sheena Easton, for one, is putting her money where her midriff is.
"You give me seven minutes," says the undulating entertainer, as she hawks her new workout video on television, "and I'll give you a stomach you can bounce a quarter on."
Sheena's no fool.
In a season when fashion is revealing skin in all sorts of unexpected places, the midriff is just one of several highly exposed areas that could probably stand some help.
Common sense would suggest that exercise is the only solution.
But the beauty industry sometimes operates independently of common sense, offering a host of products and treatments to smooth, tighten and generally glamorize every inch of the anatomy.


Die-Hards in Opposite Camps on Abortion Fight On After Battleground Deserts Them
OPERATION RESCUE roared onto the scene in the late 1980's, when the Supreme Court seemed poised to overturn the constitutional right to abortion and both sides of the abortion debate were galvanized into the streets, the legislatures and the halls of Congress.
It was a rough, raw time, and Operation Rescue's human waves of clinic blockades were emblematic of it.
They laid siege to the abortion clinics of Wichita, Kan., in the summer of 1991.
Its members presented themselves as the heirs of the civil rights movement; its critics asserted that the group used the tactics of civil disobedience to deny rights, not protect them.


Editorial Notebook; Memo to Hillary


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMERICAN HISTORY WILDERNESS AT DAWN The Settling  of the North American Continent.
By Ted Morgan.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.


The Cannibals Have Got Potential
MISREADINGS  By Umberto Eco.
Translated by William Weaver. 180 pp.
New York: A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harvest/Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.
Paper, $12.95.


Wendy Goldberg, Mark Agnew
Wendy L. Goldberg, the daughter of I. Stanley and Nancy Goldberg of Trumansburg, N.Y., was married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y., to Mark S. Agnew, a son of Charles and Jane Agnew of Wilton, Conn.
Rabbi Alvin Roth and the Rev.
W.
Stewart MacColl, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Andrew Dickson White House on the Cornell University campus.
Mrs.
Agnew, 31, is a vice president in international fund management at General Electric Investments in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Cornell, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BASEBALL BALLPARK Camden Yards and the Building  of an American Dream.
By Peter Richmond.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ZARZUELAS IN YONKERS
It could be said that zarzuela is to Spanish-speaking people what operetta is to the Viennese.
A zarzuela is a romantic comic operetta, originally performed before royalty in castles and summer palaces.


A Menu of Water Views To Refresh Wilted Diners
"COOLER at the shore," the coda for every midsummer weather report, reflects more than the actual air temperature.
A water view is instantly refreshing, reviving the appetites of wilted urban souls beached miles from the sea.
It's time to seek out the restaurants and cafes scattered about Manhattan that have waterfalls, pools, fountains and giant aquariums, along with those that offer a riverfront or lakefront view.
AQUAVIT, 13 West 54th Street, (212) 307-7311.
An indoor waterfall spills down one wall of this soaring town-house dining room, offering restful distraction.
Seafood dominates the roster of Scandinavian specialties: delicate gravlax rimmed with spices, a plate of assorted herring dishes, sweet Scandinavian shrimp, rosy Arctic char enlivened with horseradish and Norwegian salmon either seared, poached or sauteed.
The flavorful roasted snow grouse and meaty loin of venison should please lovers of game and the berry-studded desserts, like intense lingonberry sorbet, feathery Swedish pancakes or blueberry tart, would satisfy the sweet tooth.


Swiss Museum For Olympics
The new Olympic Museum, which offers a historical look at the Olympic Games from classical times to the present, has opened this summer in Lausanne, Switzerland.
The museum houses the world's largest collection of art and artifacts relating to the Olympics, including ancient Greek and Etruscan objects, historic documents, Olympic coins, stamps, 200,000 photographs and a 15,000-volume library.
The five-story museum, constructed of white marble, has a section on the ancient Greek games that features Greek and Roman antiquities.
A section on the modern Olympics exhibits pins, uniforms and other memorabilia, such as Jean-Claude Killy's crash helmet and Carl Lewis's running shoes.
The extensive art collection includes "The American Athlete" by Rodin, commissioned sports-inspired sculptures by Fernando Botero and Eduardo Chillida and paintings by Roy Lichtenstein and Antoni Tapies.
The opening exhibition, "Art Treasures From Olympic Cities 2000," will feature a 2,200-year-old terra-cotta figure discovered in Xian, China, and other works from the potential Olympic host cities for the year 2000.


Russian Scientists Are an Endangered Species
To the Editor:
Like many of my colleagues, I am outraged with the irresponsible and arrogant statements of Dr.
Aleksei Abrikosov, which Sergei Leskov quotes in "America's Soviet Scientists" (Op-Ed, July 15).
I am another lucky survivor of the crash of Soviet science.
I got my tenure at Princeton University in 1989, at the same time that Dr.
Abrikosov became director of the Institute of High Pressures in Troitsk.
Like him, I am a son of an academician, though I hated the privileges I had and left the Soviet Union for freedom and independence, not for the "good food" he so values.


In Empty New York, August is the Coolest Month
MONDAY
Sang in my bath this morning.
Happy, so happy.
August is coming.
I'm at my very peak in August, and so, for my money, is New York.


Cupid in Prime Time
NAME: Ricky Paull Goldin.
IDENTITY: 26-year-old actor and producer.
A regular on the NBC soap opera "Another World."


Why Politics, as Usual, Is Not Helping the Mentally Ill
BY Albany standards, the recent jockeying between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature over mental health financing has made for an exceptional game of political chess.
But the debate at the heart of the maneuvering -- how to shift money away from costly psychiatric hospitals and into community mental health services -- has been played out in virtually every state capital, and rarely with resounding success.
The tragic result has been a big imbalance between supply and demand for community mental health services in most states.
Because of the nexus between mental illness, homelessness, substance abuse and crime, the costs to society and government have been immense.


One Woman Against the Snakes
SEX CRIMES By Alice Vachss. 284 pp. New York: Random House. $21.


Origin of 'Blimp'
To the Editor:
"A Busted Blimp Releases a Large Giggle Factor" (The Week in Review, July 11) speculates on the origin of the word "blimp." As I remember, it was a result of the Navy classification: Airship, class B, limp (as opposed to dirigibles, or Zeppelins, which had a rigid skeleton).
The Navy ended its dirigible program after the Shenandoah and Macon disasters.
JOSEPH D. SAPIENZA Closter, N.J., July 15, 1993 The writer served in the Army Air Corps in World War II.


Lauren E. Wright, Daniel J. Toal
Lauren Elizabeth Wright, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen W. Wright of Bennington, Vt., was married yesterday to Daniel John Toal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Toal of New York.
The Rev.
James Toal, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Catholic Church of St.
Jerome's in East Dorset, Vt.
Mrs.
Toal, 26, is a legislative correspondent in Washington for Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.
She graduated from Wheaton College in Norton, Mass.
Her father is the vice president and controller of H. Greenberg &amp; Son Inc., a housewares dealer based in Bennington.
Her mother, Barbara Wright, is a physical therapist with the Bennington Home Health Agency.


Arch Connelly, 43, East Village Sculptor
Arch Connelly, a sculptor prominent in the East Village art scene of the early 1980's, died last Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said his brother, Michael, of Blacksburg, Va.


More in Buffalo
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Buffalo" on June 27 was both accurate and enjoyable.
Yet I feel compelled to mention other things that visitors might not want to miss.
Allentown, close to downtown, is a historic district famous for its Victorian architecture.
The neighborhood also features art galleries, restaurants and cafes.


The Wrong Kind of Southerner
JAMES BRANCH CABELL AND RICHMOND-IN-VIRGINIA By Edgar MacDonald.
Illustrated. 373 pp.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. $39.95.


Currency Plot Steals Savings of Immigrants
Yvonne Du, a chemist, believed that she was starting a new career last year when she was hired as a trainee by a foreign currency trading company in Queens.
Instead, Ms.
Du saw her family's savings of $50,000 quickly wiped out.
Zheng Ming Hu, a chef at a Manhattan restaurant, invested $26,000 with the same Kew Gardens company after a friend promised him a huge profit.
He lost $24,000 in six weeks.


INSIDE
Politics and Crown Heights
To survive the damage from Crown Heights, Mayor Dinkins must frame the election as an active choice between him and Rudolph W. Giuliani, experts say.
Political Memo, page 29.
Political Destiny in Japan
The political turmoil in Japan, experts say, signals a farewell to its last old-guard Prime Minister and perhaps to the rigid adherence to the nation's economic policies.
Page 12.
Another Senate Filibuster
Senate Republicans have mounted their fourth major filibuster this year, refusing to schedule a vote on the national service bill.
Page 21.


BEST SELLERS: July 25, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
50
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
19
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
2
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
4
6
15
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
5
4
8
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
6
5
5
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
7
8
5
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
8
7
8
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
9
10
2
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $23.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal and destroy the Declaration of Independence.
10
12
2
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (HarperCollins, $23.) The plight of a woman whose estranged husband is found murdered in her house.
11
11
12
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
12
9
12
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
13
13
3
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $22.) Americans on a holiday in Italy learn a lot about their marriage and themselves.
14
14
3
THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II scandals that could embarrass the British.
15
15
2
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Doubleday, $25.) A German youth immigrates to Chicago and founds a family dynasty at the turn of the century.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
50
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
1
5
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
3
4
6
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
4
2
45
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
5
6
7
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
6
5
11
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
7
32
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
8
13
2
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
9
11
7
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town.
10
12
23
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
11 *
8
8
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
12
10
6
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
13
14
14
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
14
15
36
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
15
2
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
16 *
40
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Taoism explained through an A. A. Milne character.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
2
2
13
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice about beauty, age, relationships, sex, children and careers.
3
3
54
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
4
4
10
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest) ALMOST PERFECT, by Alice Adams. (Knopf, $23.) Social and business pressures drive emotions in this painful, funny novel about a young woman on the rise who loves a crazy man.
ANGELS &amp; INSECTS: Two Novellas, by A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $21.) Two long novellas, and very clever ones, in which insect life is an analogue of Victorian society and literary immortality is compared to the real thing.
CRUELTY AND SILENCE: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World, by Kanan Makiya. (Norton, $22.95.) The cruelty is that of the Saddam Hussein regime in the author's native Iraq; the silence, that of the Arab intellectuals who condone or assist it.
CUERVO TALES, by Robert Roper. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) Ten interlinked stories that follow a burned-out survivor of the luminous, excessive 1960's into the downer decades that followed.
DENYING THE HOLOCAUST: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory, by Deborah E. Lipstadt. (Free Press, $22.95.) A historian untangles the perverse and ingenious arguments of those who say there was no Holocaust.
DRUMS ALONG THE CONGO: On the Trail of Mokele-Mbembe, the Last Living Dinosaur, by Rory Nugent. (Houghton Mifflin, cloth, $21.95; paper, $10.95.) And was it found?
Well, something was, and the trip was loads of fun.
GAME OVER: How Nintendo Zapped an American Industry, Captured Your Dollars, and Enslaved Your Children, by David Sheff. (Random House, $25.) A nuts-and-bolts history of the world-bestriding Japanese video game colossus.
IF IT BE NOT I: Collected Poems, 1959-1982, by Mona Van Duyn (Knopf, $25), and FIREFALL: Poems, by Mona Van Duyn (Knopf, $20).
The first seven volumes of capacious, particular poetry by a vigorous Midwesterner, collected as one and published simultaneously with her eighth.
PICASSO AND DORA: A Personal Memoir, by James Lord. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) Life at the heart of the post-1945 artistic enterprise: what a genius, his mistress and a shrewd memoirist did and said to and about one another.
SELECTED POETRY, by John Hollander (Knopf, $27.50), and TESSERAE: And Other Poems, by John Hollander (Knopf, $20).
A selection from 14 earlier books of poetry by a subtle, learned, major American master; published simultaneously with his strong-as-ever new book.
SEPARATE ROOMS, by Pier Vittorio Tondelli. (Serpent's Tail, paper, $14.99.) An Italian novel of imperfect love and urgent grief, by a young writer who died of AIDS in 1991.
TSVETAEVA, by Viktoria Schweitzer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) The life and apocalyptic times (1892-1941) of a great Russian poet, a woman whom no revolution could contain.
UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In 40 years of essays and articles, the author expounds on sex, politics, literature, himself and other phenomena.


A Painter's Painter Whose Art Is About Art
The retrospective of Malcolm Morley here at the Pompidou Center is an excellent reminder of why Mr.
Morley is a painter painters admire.
Partly it is his restless, renegade spirit.
You can never be sure what he is going to do next.
Partly it is the fact that he brings to his work a combination of ambition and wit and technical derring-do that makes his art compelling even when it is not altogether convincing.
And it's not always convincing, as this simply and handsomely installed show of nearly 60 paintings and sculptures from 1962 to the present (on view through Sept. 19) cannot fail to demonstrate.
Yet his up-and-down quality is, in one respect, to Mr.
Morley's credit: he is a taker of risks, venturesome not just in the sense that he loves to paint fantastical landscapes and imaginary midair battles that border on the incomprehensible.


Rich Debtors Finding Shelter Under a Populist Florida Law
For an admitted felon who arrived here just a step ahead of the irate victims of his insider trading, Martin A. Siegel manages to live quite well.
The former Wall Street investment banker occupies a $3.25 million, 7,000-square-foot beachfront home whose purchase put Mr.
Siegel's assets out of reach of a $2.75 billion civil suit.
Just up the road at the Marsh Landing Country Club lives Bowie Kuhn, the former Major League Baseball commissioner who moved here in 1990 as his Manhattan law firm was going through bankruptcy proceedings.
Mr.
Kuhn enjoys the benefits of a Florida life style in his million-dollar, five-bedroom, five-bath house, just off the Intracoastal Waterway, which he bought after creditors seized his weekend house in the Hamptons and were just about to attach his $1.2 million home in Ridgewood, N. J.


Hiking Trails
To the Editor: With respect to "An Eastern Canyon -- Canoeing Into Pine Creek Gorge in Pennsylvania" (June 27), I would like to point out there already is a hiking trail system paralleling Pine Creek for its entire length, and it affords a more varied experience than the rail trail.
The West Rim trail starts near U.S. 6 and follows the edge of Pine Creek Gorge to Blackwell where it meets the Mid State Trail.
From Blackwell south to Little Pine State Park the Mid State Trail is the most remote and isolated trail in Penns Woods.
It climbs Gillespie Point above Blackwell for views of Pine and Babb Creeks and continues south over Oregon Hill to the Bark Cabin Natural Area, old growth hemlock, and Little Pine State Park near Waterville.
These trails can be hiked at any time as they are not dependent on the water level in Pine Creek.


Michael Maurer, Christa Sullivan
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Sullivan of Rockville Centre, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Christa Michelle Sullivan, and Michael Patrick Maurer, a son of Philip and Eleanor Maurer of Princeton Junction, N.J.
Ms.
Sullivan, 24, is a human resources assistant at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She and her fiance are graduates of Catholic University of America.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother, Jean E. Sullivan, is a lawyer in Rockville Centre.


Soiree On the Terrace
For the Museum of the City of New York, July 21.


Sports of The Times; Newest Jet Can Cite Montana and Rice
THIS is not just another football camp.
This is not just another sultry summer of large men bashing into each other.
This is the first year of real free agency in pro football.
This is different.
This gives many players the chance to move on for big money.
This gives teams the chance to change their direction by spending money, without waiting for draft choices to mature.
No talking about rebuilding.
You just do it.


Data Bank/July 25, 1993


New &amp; Noteworthy
CITY OF BOYS: Stories By Beth Nugent.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
The hard edges of bleak lives shine in these stories, which explore the fragility of relationships.
The best have "the strong tension of characters pulling away from one another," Sandra Scofield said here last year.
THE JOURNALS OF JOHN CHEEVER Ballantine, $14.
These diaries cover more than 30 years of the author's life, from the late 1940's to his death in 1982.
They reveal the inherent contradictions in a man who revered home and family as much as good writing, yet was inevitably tripped up by his alcoholism and impulsive sexuality.
In 1991 our reviewer, Mary Gordon, praised journals in general as literature for their "delightful small set pieces: descriptions for their own sake, character sketches, bits of philosophy, heartfelt cries" and called Cheever's "a treasure-trove of such riches."


In Transit


Streetscapes: 346 Broadway; A City-Owned Palazzo Now in Disarray
IT'S one of the most imposing of the 19th-century skyscrapers in downtown Manhattan, a marble palazzo with remarkably intact interiors, good light on four sides and designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White.
It is owned by New York City and used for municipal office space, but it's reasonably close to City Hall.
So just why aren't agencies fighting each other to get into the old New York Life Insurance Company, at 346 Broadway?
Why does what should be a polished jewel look like a piece of litter?


Town Rallies Behind Boys Who Killed Father
Rush Springs is the kind of place, as people say about countless small towns across America, where people know about it when you're born and care about it when you die.
Except when Lonnie Dutton died last week.
People here seem to care a lot more about gaining freedom for his accused killers -- his son Herman, who just finished the eighth grade here, and his son Druie, who finished the fifth.


Latin America in Flux; In Brazil, Wild Ways to Counter Wild Inflation
At a fashion industry fair, a clothing manufacturer and a boutique owner haggled recently over payment for blouses to be delivered in October.
Mistrusting Government-manipulated dollar exchange rates and inflation indexes, buyer and seller finally agreed on a neutral pricing unit: bars of margarine.
Pricing blouses according to the margarine standard is but one of a myriad of ways that Brazilians have developed to survive, and sometimes to thrive, amid high inflation.


Is 'Rising Sun' a Detective Story or Jeremiad?
Inevitably, the topic turns to Japan.
Philip Kaufman -- knowing that it will but wishing it wouldn't -- seeks a moment's reprieve.
"I just thought the movie should focus more on the plot, characters and the murder story" rather than on the reputed Japan-bashing in "Rising Sun," Michael Crichton's widely read and passionately debated novel.
Mr.
Kaufman's movie, based on the book and starring Sean Connery and Wesley Snipes, opens on Friday.
"I don't mean to claim innocence in the whole matter, but I saw a detective story that touched on a subject I wanted to know more about."


From the East, Indian Summer, of Course
EVERY so often, a trend in fashion actually makes sense.
So it is this summer, as designers look to India for inspiration in hot-weather dressing.
With its dry linens and paper-thin sari silks, India is more than esthetically inspiring.
It is practical, too.


Nancy Hennessee and John Costello
Nancy Suddreth Hennessee, a television producer for CBS News, and John Christopher Costello, a writer for ABC's "Good Morning America," both in New York, were married yesterday.
Anne Sayre, a town magistrate of Head of the Harbor, L.I., performed the ceremony there at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Timothy W. Costello.
Ms.
Hennessee, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Judith A. Hennessee of New York and Robert E. Hennessee of Maitland, Fla.
She graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University.
Her father publishes House and Home Inside Outside, a monthly newsletter in Maitland.
Her mother is a freelance magazine writer.


Redistricting Faces New Court Challenge
THE County Board of Legislators' latest attempt to draw new district lines following the 1990 census is also being challenged in court.
The League of Women Voters of Westchester -- in a suit filed on July 2 against Westchester County, the Board of Legislators and the County Board of Elections -- has asked the State Supreme Court to overturn the Board's second attempt to redistrict on the ground that it disregarded municipal boundaries and provided no rational basis for drawing new lines.


To See More Blooms, Kill Those Seeds
THE object of gardening now is to keep the plants going.
But the object of nature is to begin to shut them down, that is for annuals, perennials and shrubs to set seed and get ready for the cold season ahead.
The goal for the gardener then is to prevent plants from putting all their strength into developing seed.
The exception, of course, is those gardeners who are interested in home hybridizing or self-sowing of a certain species.
They may want their plants to set seed.


City Opera Turns 50, But Who's Counting?
Who can blame the New York City Opera for keeping its 50th-anniversary celebration low-key?
The company opens its season on Wednesday evening not with an attention-grabbing gala or a trendy premiere but with plain old "Carmen," followed by a few weeks of standard repertory and operettas.
There will be no exhibitions, picture books, film compilations, collaborations with other New York institutions or glittery evenings of self-congratulation.
"No, we aren't doing that," said Christopher Keene, the company's general director.
"After the 150th anniversary of the Philharmonic, the 100th of Carnegie Hall and the 100th of the Met, 50 doesn't really have that much resonance. And for me, at the tender age of 46, 50 seems younger every day."


Bosnian in U.S., Horror Behind and New Life Ahead
Kareem Jakubovic fights his memories, trying to push the atrocities of Bosnia's war from the forefront of his mind.
Perhaps his anxiety about starting a new life in the United States, he says, will distract him from worse thoughts.
Mr.
Jakubovic is among the first batch of 500 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina to land in the United States.
A survivor of two concentration camps in Bosnia, he arrived in New York last week on his way to resettlement in Detroit.
He was wide-eyed at the busyness on Manhattan streets, and scoffed at the flavor of his first beer, a Heineken, which he found watery.


There Once Was a Tenor Who Swallowed a Bug . . .
FOR the audience, a summer concert can be a picnic.
Literally.
But for the performers, going from a great stage to the Great Lawn in Central Park -- or some other place in the great outdoors -- can mean coping with everything from jets roaring over middle-of-the-city band shells to not-so-gentle summer breezes that whisk sheet music right off the stage.
And what's an outdoor concert without a siren in the distance during that intimate second-movement pianissimo, or a singer who swallows a bug, or a bird that dive-bombs the podium?
Outdoor concerts are more casual than indoor performances -- the conductor Jorge Mester let his dog sprawl on the podium, at least during rehearsals -- and often the repertory is more familiar.


From the Sea, Italian Style
WHEN it first appeared in bookstores this spring, "Cucina del Mare" by Evan Kleinman (Morrow) was inviting.
Now, in midsummer, the light, fresh touch it espouses with seafood is compelling.
Ms.
Kleinman, the owner of several restaurants in the Los Angeles area, has a way of deftly combining a few key ingredients that result in bright, savory dishes whose flavors have great integrity.
The subtitle of the book is "Fish and Seafood Italian Style." As anyone familiar with how fish and seafood are prepared in Italy already knows, simplicity is the rule.
Unlike many American restaurant chefs, Ms.
Kleinman avoids overburdening her creations with an excess of trendy items.


Brush Up Your Niebuhr
To the Editor:
In Stuart Sutherland's review of "Understanding the Present: Science and the Soul of Modern Man," by Bryan Appleyard (June 27), there are some amazingly superficial statements by both the author and the reviewer about religion.


Finish-Line Test for 'Running Doc'
"I think of dying as a blood sport, like bullfighting," said Dr.
George A. Sheehan, who is dying at 74.
"The bull, of course, is death, and I am defending myself, dancing with death, creating this beautiful esthetic. The blood sports show us that death is not defeat."
It was a day of gorgeous life, the sun splashing off the ocean and the beach, filling Sheehan's living room, glinting off his pale blue eyes.
On the road beneath the windows, joggers huffed by.
How many of them had begun to run, had gone on to race, because Sheehan's example and his elegant prose had nourished their spirits even as his practical advice had lifted them off the couch and over the hills?


Culinary Catch-Up in the Black Forest
I ALWAYS thought of the Black Forest as a place where evil witches and wolves pretending to be grandmothers lured innocent children into gingerbread traps.
Reality is far more pleasant.
The forest is simply the name for a conifer-clad range of low mountains that mirror the more benign-sounding Vosges in France, just across the Rhine.
In the foothills of both ranges grow some of the finest wine grapes in Europe, but for decades the Germans have not done as well by them -- or by the food that good wines are made to go with -- as the Alsatians have in France.
Instead, they have flocked to such French temples of gastronomy as the Auberge de l'Ill in Illhaeusern and the Crocodile in Strasbourg, both of which have three Michelin stars.


Latex Is Generally Appropriate Paint
OUTDOOR housepainting is among the most popular amateur home-improvement activities, but inexperience can lead to poor results.
Naturally it is important to select the rightpaint.
Latex generally is the most appropriate.
Choose alkyd only if the surface to be painted is heavily chalked and washing does little to stop that, if three or more coats of alkyd paint already adhere or if you plan to paint when temperatures are below 60 degrees or above 85, the the optimum limits for applying latex.


A SENSE OF PLACE
WHERE there's a town, there's a hardware store, but there is only one Thompson's.
Never will there be another.
For six decades, Thompson's Hardware has always been "the store that has everything," as its motto boasts.
Everything, yes.
But now, hour by hour, it's an everything that there's less and less of.
These days, the nondescript little two-story building at Park Street near Watchung Avenue in Upper Montclair is flying red distress flags that scream "Sale." Thompson's is blacking out its windows with red, green and ultrapink signs proclaiming "Retirement Sale" and "Quitting Business."


THE DETOXING OF PRISONER 88A0802
With annual costs of addiction estimated at up to $144 billion, it is increasingly hard to argue that treatment is not cost-effective.
Therapeutic communities for addicts do achieve tremendous changes in behavior, attitudes and emotional organization.
Nevertheless, they have often lacked a continuing-care component, which is crucial to avert relapse.
Some programs have begun to introduce residents to Narcotics Anonymous for this purpose, despite a large cultural gulf between the therapeutic community and 12-step movements.


A Charity Learns a $186 Lesson: Swindlers Read the Paper, Too
A team of con artists, apparently keeping up with current events, used an article in The Daily News on Friday morning to dupe a charity out of a quick $186 -- the cost of getting a car out of the pound.
Part of the mission of the charity, the Doe Fund, an organization on East 84th Street in Manhattan that helps the homeless, is to offer immediate assistance to those in need.
"You can't escape the irony," the fund's president, George McDonald, said yesterday.
"The con artists figure out very quickly who the good guys are."


Losing a Muse
To the Editor:
Is it possible that those who mourn the "loss" of Balanchine also mourn the loss of the ballets he didn't compose when his favorite muse, Suzanne Farrell, departed for five years?
KITA CZAP  Sherman, Conn.


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
If rape is no more than a successful verbal coercion that results in intercourse, I think I've raped several men.


Secrets Revealed
Deborah Laake is pretty darned flabbergasted by the way her book, "Secret Ceremonies," is being received.
After being turned down by 12 publishing houses, the memoir she wrote about her Mormon childhood and marriages and subsequent stay in a psychiatric hospital was released by William Morrow &amp; Company in April.
Within weeks, Ms.
Laake (pronounced LAKE) was playing the talk show circuit.
On "Tom Snyder," "Donahue," "Larry King Live" and "Sonya Live," staunch Mormon women like Beverly Campbell, the Washington-based director of international relations for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, kept accusing Ms.
Laake of blaming the church for her personal problems.


Dr. Abram L. Sachar, Historian And 1st Brandeis U. President, 94
Dr.
Abram Leon Sachar, a historian who led the Hillel Foundation for 22 years and was the founding president of Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., died yesterday at his home in Newton, Mass.
He was 94.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, according to Dennis Nealon, a spokesman for the university.


One-Act Comedies In Troupe's New Home
THEY took over an abandoned warehouse, put up walls, put in bathrooms and heat (air-conditioning is to follow) and stopped the water from dripping.
The renovations go on.
The Renegade Theater Company, having lost count of its previous sites -- remember the Veterans of Foreign Wars hall, the high school and the synagogue, where no Friday night performances were allowed? -- opened its "seventh or eighth annual one-act play festival" last week.
It is called "An Evening of One-Act Comedies."


In the Region: Westchester; County Airport Taxis for a New Take-Off
IN a move that took many people by surprise, construction contracts worth $15.5 million were awarded to four Westchester companies last month to start building the long-delayed terminal at the Westchester County Airport.
On June 28, at a special meeting called by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, the three-member County Board of Acquisition and Contracts voted unanimously to award the contracts.


Echoes Of Puccini
To the Editor:
A thought on Speight Jenkins's essay "The Operatic Overtones of 'Angels in America' "  [ June 27 ] .
The "quartet" in Act II of "Angels" is more accurately a "double duet," which exactly mirrors the one at the end of Act III of "La Boheme." Rodolpho leaves Mimi because he cannot deal with her fatal illness; Musetta leaves Marcello because she craves the love and attention of others.


Occupational Therapy Is More Than Relaxing
As an occupational therapist working in Westchester County schools, I read with interest "A Therapeutic Program for Troubled Students" (June 27).
I would like to correct a misconception in the story, however, one which does my profession a serious disservice.
Your reporter noted that "Students . . . have the opportunity to relax with such activities as gym and occupational therapy."


DATE RAPE'S OTHER VICTIM
In "Date Rape's Other Victim" (June 13), Katie Roiphe assumes that she would know about more than "one or two" rapes if they were really taking place.
But rape survivors are not the sympathy-seeking whiners she portrays them as being.
And they're not stupid.
They wisely avoid telling victim-blaming skeptics about their assaults.
If I had been date-raped, she is the last person I'd tell.


Trip Down Utah Canyon Becomes Survival Quest
After months of training and preparation, five teen-agers and three adults from a Mormon youth group set out on July 15 for a high-adventure expedition into Zion National Park that was supposed to be the highlight of their summer.
But within three hours of beginning their four-day trek into the Narrows of Zion, two adult leaders had been sucked into whirlpools and drowned.
The swift waters had swept away all but one of the party's backpacks and rope.
And the last leader and the five teen-agers were stranded at the bottom of a 700-foot-deep canyon fighting the cold, the hunger, the fright and the deafening roar of Kolob Creek.


Ranks Full of Promise
To the Editor:
I am glad there is a reasonable voice -- Anna Kisselgoff's -- among the negative commentary that the New York City Ballet has received of late.
For all their airs, New Yorkers are conservative and resistant to change, and those critics who have felt compelled to blame the company for carrying on after Balanchine's death have reflected this.


Bridging Divisions With the Fresh Air Fund
For 12 days, Tiffany Nurse, a 10-year-old from Staten Island, and Kimberly Lowery, a 12-year-old from Queens, played games, sang songs, made jewelry in arts and crafts, went on nature hikes and did everything else that best friends do at camp.
It made no difference that Kimberly was in a wheelchair.


Berry Nelson, John Ravitz
Berry Nelson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Nelson of Norwich, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John Ravitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Ravitz of New York.
Bishop Thomas Costello performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Roman Catholic Church.
He was assisted by Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman.
Mrs.
Ravitz, a graduate of Colgate University, was until recently an executive assistant in Manhattan for the New York State Assembly.
Her father is a lawyer in Norwich.


Stranded Boy Is Rescued After Flood in Cave Killed 4 Youths and 2 Adults
The bodies of a youth and a counselor from a home for troubled boys were pulled from a cave today by searchers who also found the only survivor in the party of seven alive on a rock ledge above water that had pooled and then receded in the cave.
In all, four counselors and 12 boys from the St.
Joseph's Home for Boys had been on an outing in Cliff Cave County Park, just south of St.
Louis, on Friday afternoon, when a sudden thunderstorm caused flash flooding.
The water trapped seven of them in the cave.


Sports of The Times; Old-Time Yank Advice And Opinion
THEY remembered Bucky Dent's playoff homer off Mike Torrez and they remembered Graig Nettles's glove at third base in the World Series, but they also remembered what Sparky Lyle fondly called "the rip sessions" on the team bus after a game.
At their Old-Timers Day reunion yesterday, many of the 1978 Yankees, the last Yankee team to win a World Series, were surveyed informally for an uncle's advice to the current Yankee players, many of whom are suddenly in a divisional pennant race for the first time.


Today, Mexico; Tomorrow, World Cup
A great deal of uncertainty surrounds the American team 11 months before the beginning of the first World Cup to be staged in the United States.
The partial success the Americans enjoyed in the U.S.
Cup '93 tournament last month was erased by the team's total collapse in the Copa America tournament in Ecuador two weeks later.
The Americans can regain some of the respect they lost with their last-place finish in the Copa America when they face Mexico in the Gold Cup final this afternoon at Mexico City's majestic Azteca Stadium.


Jean E. Jensen, Peter Polchinski
Jean Ellen Jensen, a saleswoman, and Peter Donald Polchinski, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Andre Papineau officiated at the SS.
Philip and James Roman Catholic Church in St.
James, L.I.
The bride, 27 and a Pace University graduate, works at a Salvatore Ferragamo shoe store in New York.
She is the daughter of Donald and Veronica Jensen of Smithtown, L.I.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van and foot that are scheduled during the summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"HARLEM ON SUNDAY." A bus tour that includes a church service with gospel music, the Hamilton Grange mansion, the Morris Jumel mansion (former headquarters of George Washington), and the Apollo Theater.
Proper dress required for church service.
Sponsored by Harlem Spirituals.
Meets at 9 A.M. every Sunday throughout the year.
Fee: $29; $23 for children.
Reservations and information: (212) 757-0425.


In-a-Gadda-da-Vida, Baby
It was 1968, the year Martin Luther King and Bobby Kennedy were assassinated, and the year Jackie Kennedy married Aristotle Onassis.
The summer of the Democratic convention in Chicago and the end of the democratic movement in Czechoslovakia.
In music, there was high culture (Placido Domingo making his debut at the Met), low culture (the Fugs at the newly opened Fillmore East) and culture that defied definition (Tiny Tim).
And so it went for movies, television, theater and books, as demonstrated by this selective listing.
MUSIC  Herb Alpert: "This Guy's in Love With You"  The Beatles: "Lady Madonna" "Hey, Jude," "Revolution"  James Brown: "Say it Loud -- I'm Black and I'm Proud"  Iron Butterfly: "In-a-Gadda-da-Vida"  Johnny Cash: "Folsom Prison Blues"  Joe Cocker: "With a Little Help From My Friends"  Judy Collins: "Both Sides Now"  Dion: "Abraham, Martin and John"
"Do Your Own Thing"
"Charly"  "Funny Girl"  "The Graduate"  "I Love You, Alice B. Toklas"  "The Lion in Winter"  "Oliver!"  "The Producers"  "Planet of the Apes"  "Psych-Out"  "Rosemary's Baby"  "Romeo and Juliet"  "2001: A Space Odyssey"  "Yellow Submarine"


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Hatch Act Reform Amendment A Vote to allow Federal workers to engage in partisan politics during off-duty hours.
Approved 68 to 31, July 20 1993.
2.
Helms Amendment No. 610 to National Community Service Act. : Vote to grant the extension of a patent to the United Daughters of the Confederacy whose insignia features the Confederate flag.
A yes vote was against the amendment, and the extension was denied.
Approved 75 to 25, July 22, 1993.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
YY Lieberman (D) . . .
Y...Y New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y...Y Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y...Y New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y...Y Moynihan (D) . . .
Y...Y KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
House Post Office Investigation: Vote to withhold the release of records of the former task force to investigate the operation and management of House Post Office.
Approved 244 to 183 with 1 voting present, July 22, 1993.
Connecticut
1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
Y  2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y  3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
Y  4.
Shays (R) . . .
N  5.
Franks (R) . . .
N  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Y New Jersey
1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Y  2.
Hughes (D) . . .
Y  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
N  4.
Smith (R) . . .
N  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
N  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Y  7.
Franks (R) . . .
N  8.
Klein (D) . . .
Y  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y 10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y 11.
Gallo (R) . . .
N 12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N 13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y New York
1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
N  3.
King (R) . . .
N  4.
Levy (R) . . .
N  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
Y  6.
Flake (D) . . .
Y  7.
Manton (D) . . .
Y  8.
Nadler (D) . . .
Y  9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y 10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y 11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y 12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y 13.
Molinari (R) . . .
N 14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y 15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y 16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y 17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y 18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y 19.
Fish (R) . . .
N 20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N 21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y 22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N 23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N 24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N 25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N 26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y 27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N 28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y 29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y 30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N 31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Baseball Comes to a Resounding Sigh
While driving to work the morning after the All-Star Game, I was listening to the local all-sports call-in show.
The host announced that the topics of concern to him were whether or not Cito Gaston was guilty of pouting in the first degree by not bringing in Mike Mussina; fears that a strike could jeopardize the playoffs and the World Series, and whether fans were pleased with the selection process of the All-Star squad.
After a string of testosterone-intensive commercials, the first caller, Dan from Mar Vista, chose to talk not about baseball but about whether the Lakers were making a serious effort to re-sign A. C. Green.
The next caller, John from Northridge, was deeply distressed that the Clippers were no closer to naming a head coach than they had been a month ago.
And so on, and so on, and so on.
When Paul from Long Beach called to discuss the trade of Eric Dickerson to the Falcons, the exasperated host asked him why he seemed so disinterested in baseball.
"It's a dead game, man," came the reply.


Grand National Bridge Teams Enter Final
Teams from Northern California and Ohio-Pennsylvania faced each other here this afternoon in the final of the Grand National Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The West Coast team is favored based on experience, for three of its California players, Hugh Ross of Oakland, Chip Martel of Davis and Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, have won world titles.
Their teammates are three rising young stars, Jeff Ferro, Brad Moss and Ravindra Murthy.


Just Be Neighborly
To the Sports Editor:
The area in the shadows of Yankee Stadium is on the upswing, no thanks to George Steinbrenner.
The neighborhood, which is also George's, like it or not, is inhabited by plain folk who live and work and struggle to make it in this world.


Fending Off the Food Court
For Christ Dhimitri, who owns a restaurant and jazz club a few blocks from City Hall here, two decades in the business has earned him a broad range of friends and acquaintances -- some the kind of characters who could populate the novels of Scott Turow, others the stories of Damon Runyon.
And on any given Saturday, he said, it seems as if he runs into all of them while doing his weekly shopping at the Reading Terminal Market.
On one recent Saturday, while buying potatoes for his restaurant, Chris's, and feta cheese for himself, Mr.
Dhimitri saw a public relations man he's known for years, the tuba player with a brass quintet and a doorman from a luxury high-rise.
"I go because it's Philadelphia and it's a cross section of everyone," he said.
"You walk in, you're comfortable and you know people."


6-1 Valley Crossing Shuffles Title Chase
Devil His Due outran Bertrando in the $500,000 Philip H. Iselin Handicap today in their continuing duel for racing's highest honors.
But while they were duking it out, both were outrun in the final yards by Valley Crossing, a horse with a 14-race losing streak, who rocketed through the deep homestretch to win by the length of his head.
It was the first time that Valley Crossing had won since March 22, 1992, and he picked a good time to do it: Devil His Due, with four stakes victories already this year, seemed to be taking giant strides in the direction of the ultimate honor, the title Horse of the Year.
All the candidates still have some milestones to pass, and Devil His Due still has shining credentials, but some mischief was added to the rankings today by the outsider who ran past the two favorites in the Iselin.
A Blur From Outside
It was a rousing race, the seventh in the American Championship Racing Series, and Bertrando tried to win wire to wire, as he has won in the past.
But in the deep homestretch, Devil His Due made his move at the prompting of Herb McCauley, as he has done in the past, and nailed Bertrando -- only to be nailed a few yards later by Valley Crossing, who was charging up on the outside at the prompting of Chris Antley.
And as they flashed home, Valley Crossing poked his head in front of Devil His Due just in time while Bertrando was fading to third place, two-and-a-quarter lengths back.


In Praise Of a 'Marvel'
To the Editor:
As an old-time fan of City Ballet (I was there when it was being formed -- $1.50 for a balcony seat), I am grateful for Anna Kisselgoff's encouraging overview of the troupe and its recent celebration of George Balanchine's works  [ "How City Ballet Gave New Life to the Legacy of Balanchine," July 4 ] .


Elena Kugler, Geoffrey Sands
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Kugler of New Bedford, Mass., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Elena Kugler and Geoffrey Keating Sands, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Sands of Wawa, Pa.
Miss Kugler is a consultant with Cambridge Associates in Boston, a financial advisory firm serving nonprofit organizations.
She graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and her fiance received master's degrees in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father retired as the director of the New Bedford Whaling Museum.
Her mother, Elizabeth Kugler, is a topiary specialist with Allan C. Haskell &amp; Son, a horticulturist and rare plant grower in New Bedford.


Prom Night Excesses Can Be Dangerous
To the Editor:
Re "Prom: The Production" (July 4), I believe you did readers a great disservice by not addressing the increasingly problematic downside to the prom season.
As a teacher for more than 20 years, I have seen a lovely spring dance degenerate into a weekend potentially fraught with danger.
Allow me to address some of the issues that you did not.


Sarah Rivelli, Xavier Preud'homme
Sarah Kerry Rivelli, the daughter of William R. Rivelli of New York and the late Margaret C. Rivelli, was married on Wednesday to Dr.
Xavier A. Preud'homme, a son of Francine M. Preud'homme and Serge G. N. Preud'homme of Brussels.
Judge William Mogulescu of Criminal Court in Manhattan officiated at the faculty club of the Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York.
Ms.
Rivelli, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and is a research assistant in the department of psychiatry at Columbia and in the department of psychopharmacology at the New York State Psychiatric Institute, both in Manhattan.


Stanley Dry Lives
To the Editor:
Come on now, guys.
Was the reviewer of "Straight Up or on the Rocks: A Cultural History of American Drink" (June 6) really named Stanley Dry?
SAUL SCHACHTER  Sea Cliff, L.I.
The Editor replies:
Stanley Dry is a contributing editor at Food &amp; Wine magazine.


Alexandra Piper, Jonathan H. Seed
Sarah J. Piper and Alexander R. Piper 3d, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra Piper, to Jonathan H. Seed, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Seed of Stillwater, Minn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Piper, 26, is an account executive at Gaper's Caterers in Chicago.
She and her fiance graduated from Hamilton College, he magna cum laude.
Her father is a senior consultant for D. E. Shaw &amp; Company, a stock brokerage in New York.
Her mother is the vice president of client services at the Research Board, a private research and consulting concern in New York.


TELEVISION
Next Sunday
"A YEAR IN PROVENCE: SUMMER." The television adaptation of the Peter Mayle best seller reaches its third episode with the author now besieged by guests from London but still involved enough with the locals to take part in the wagering on the annual goat race.
John Thaw as Peter and Lindsay Duncan as Annie.
Arts &amp; Entertainment Channel, 8 P.M.


Autumn Gardens Extend a Bounty
I HAVE to dig up more lawn this weekend -- because I don't have room for my fall garden.
I blame Ellen and Shepherd Ogden, who own the Cook's Garden up in Vermont.
They're testing sunflower varieties for next year and sent me a few billion seeds for my own little trial garden down in Maryland.
Then Cousin Janice came over with a dozen melon plants to prove that I, a non-melon-grower, could grow humongous melons if I would stoop to using a black plastic mulch and a little Miracle-Gro. ("Only on the leaves, Anne, I'm telling you," she said, knowing my aversion to chemical fertilizers. "Only on the leaves. It won't even go into the ground.")
If not for these fanatics, I'd have plenty of room for a few cabbages, a little spinach and lettuce.


Let's Stop Buying a Secret Foreign Policy
To the Editor:
We were disappointed by "Can It Be Happening?" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, July 13).
Not only did Mr.
Rosenthal not grasp our concerns about the National Endowment for Democracy, but he also misrepresented the arguments in the debate.
Few Americans know that arms of the Democratic Party, the Republican Party, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and the Chamber of Commerce have received hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars to carry out their version of United States foreign policy.


Dinkins's Radio Message Draws Civil-Rights Fire
Two civil-rights lawyers in New York City sternly criticized Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday for remarks he made on a radio station aimed primarily at black listeners, calling them "extremely troubling, divisive and demagogic."
In a sharply worded letter to the Mayor, Norman Siegel of the New York Civil Liberties Union and Michael Meyers of the New York Civil Rights Coalition denounced Mr.
Dinkins for saying that support from "a lot of brothers and sisters" had sustained him amid criticism last week over his handling of the Crown Heights disturbances in 1991.


Dining Under the Spell of Islands
SUMMERTIME is for islands.
Whether Shelter Island, Block Island, Long Beach Island or the South Sea islands, the alchemy of surf, breeze and informality gently unwinds the workaday circuitry that tightens the shoulders and clenches the neck.
Of course, not everyone is lucky enough to have summer house, plane tickets or vacation time.
These stay-at-homes still have Manhattan island.
And that's not such a bad thing.
When the islanding crowd is away, the stores aren't crowded, there are tables in restaurants, there are parking spots, there are even cabs in midtown.


True Confession: Steamy Books Are Best in the Heat
IT beckons, the color of poppies.
Its opium curls through the air, fixing you in its path.
You cannot resist -- you never could -- and when surrender comes, you want to cry for joy because now, against all odds, you will finally be together.
Always.
So you reach out, fingers trembling, and grasp it eagerly, in both hands.
"Scruples Two."


For the Beach Boys, It Wasn't All Platinum
As anyone with even a passing interest in the band probably knows, the shimmering beauty of the Beach Boys' harmony-filled music has not come without an exacting, tragic price.
While the band's lineup still includes the original members Mike Love and Al Jardine, only Carl Wilson, the youngest of the three Wilson brothers who founded the group in 1961, is still a Beach Boy.
Dennis, the middle Wilson brother and the one authentic surfer in the band, drowned in shallow waters by a Marina Del Ray, Calif., pier in 1983.
And Brian Wilson, the oldest brother and creative force behind virtually all the Beach Boys' best work, has spent most of the last 25 years battling emotional problems that eventually destroyed his relationship with the group.


A la Carte; The Chefs Are Moving in 2 Directions
THE traffic in chefs between Long Island and Manhattan is fast becoming a two-way proposition.
It is not unusual to hear of city chefs, some with impressive credentials, coming to Nassau and Suffolk.
Currently the migration is in the opposite direction.
Two recent appointments are typical.
Keith Rennie, who worked for Brendan Walsh, a former Manhattan chef at the Coyote Grill in Island Park, is the new chef and manager of Pisces in the East Village, and Tom Miner, who was executive chef at the Patio Restaurant in Westhampton Beach, is now the No. 1 man at the revamped Boathouse Cafe Restaurant on the Lake in Central Park.


Washington's Airline Answer: Keep Oil Cheap
WHAT this country needs is oil price controls.
So suggests the Government commission formed to save airlines from the problems brought on by debt, recession and price wars.
Virtually unnoticed in last week's preliminary report of the National Commission to Ensure a Strong Competitive Airline Industry was a recommendation that "when jet fuel prices rise more than 10 percent in any 12-month period, then the U.S. Government shall release crude oil from the  [ Strategic Petroleum ]  Reserve to the extent necessary to reduce such prices to the level of a 5 percent increase, provided that such action is not inimical to the national defense or security."


The Sound Gets Cleaner
FROM Kristine Fontana's lifeguard chair on the beach at Branford Point, Long Island Sound looked murky.
And the ribbon of seaweed at the water's edge stretched from one end of the beach to the other.
"I only go in to cool off," Ms.
Fontana said.
"I don't stay in."
But from Bert LaPlante's Munch Wagon, an umbrella-shaded stand stocked with hot dogs and soda, the water looked fine.
"Branford water is clean. It's a nice little resort here. There's not much floating around except for jellyfish and a little seaweed," said Mr.
LaPlante, who parks his concession at the beach just about every day.


Latex Is Generally Appropriate Paint
OUTDOOR housepainting is among the most popular amateur home-improvement activities, but inexperience can lead to poor results.
Naturally it is important to select the rightpaint.
Latex generally is the most appropriate.
Choose alkyd only if the surface to be painted is heavily chalked and washing does little to stop that, if three or more coats of alkyd paint already adhere or if you plan to paint when temperatures are below 60 degrees or above 85, the the optimum limits for applying latex.


From the Sea, Italian Style
WHEN it first appeared in bookstores this spring, "Cucina del Mare" by Evan Kleinman (Morrow) was inviting.
Now, in midsummer, the light, fresh touch it espouses with seafood is compelling.
Ms.
Kleinman, the owner of several restaurants in the Los Angeles area, has a way of deftly combining a few key ingredients that result in bright, savory dishes whose flavors have great integrity.
The subtitle of the book is "Fish and Seafood Italian Style." As anyone familiar with how fish and seafood are prepared in Italy already knows, simplicity is the rule.
Unlike many American restaurant chefs, Ms.
Kleinman avoids overburdening her creations with an excess of trendy items.


THE DETOXING OF PRISONER 88A0802
Too bad the city can't figure out how to employ Bill Giddens in the middle schools to explain to youngsters how hard it is to find a job -- with a prison record and without an education -- and how dangerous and frightening prison is.


The Hat Trick
First, pull one on.
Then twitch, tweak and tilt it any which way.
And when you're through wearing it, just crumple it up and stuff it in your tote or pocket.
That's a modern hat.
Here's one example.


Carole Zawarski, Raymond Tellini
Carole Jean Zawarski, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Zawarski of Bethlehem, Pa., was married there yesterday to Raymond Peter Tellini, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Tellini of Tiburon, Calif.
The Rev.
Daniel Gurovich officiated at St.
Joseph Ukranian Catholic Church.


Images in Black and White, From Sentimental to Absurd
AT the Stamford Museum and Nature Center is a score or more of Elliott Erwitt's black-and-white photographs, which were presented to the museum by Martin and Juliana Mortensen, in 1986.
The pictures, taken between 1950 and the early 1980's, come without documentation and do not need any.
Mr.
Erwitt's subjects, though they may invite questions, invariably speak for themselves, since more often than not they are elegant sight gags.


POSTINGS: Riese Pays $20,000; Fifth Avenue Sign Suit Settled
A small victory in taming the esthetic jumble has been claimed by Mayor David N. Dinkins, who announced the settlement of three lawsuits against the Riese Organization for violating sign rules along Fifth Avenue.
The three food outlets run by Riese and cited in the lawsuits were 479 Fifth Avenue, at 41st Street; 560 Fifth Avenue, at 46th Street and 604 Fifth Avenue, between 48th and 49th Streets.
Like so many Riese outlets, these stores were festooned with banners and pennants for the various franchises within: Roy Rogers, Pizza Hut, Del Taco and Houlihan's.


Baby Boomer Blues
To the Editor:
As a member of the post-baby boomer generation now struggling in the workplace and also coming to the realization that a declining living standard is to be expected, I have little empathy with the plight of the baby boomers.


Coming Apart
THE wire hanger was vibrating like a sewing machine in the trembling hand of Hans Schreiber.
Dancing joltingly from it was a pearly transparent dress with swatches of fabric sewn to it like so many wads of cotton on shaving cuts.
After four years of studying cut, draping, anatomy, drawing, marketing and design at one of Europe's most prestigious fashion schools, the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp, Belgium, Mr.
Schreiber was presenting his pieces to a jury last month.
The judges included Jean-Paul Gaultier, France's leading avant-garde designer, who is credited with discovering the academy's most notorious graduate, Martin Margiela.


Who's in Charge Here?
To the Editor:
So Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, opposes a chip allowing parents to block certain television shows, because "that is not making individual judgmental decisions"  [ "Labeling Prime-Time Violence Is Still a Band-Aid Fix," July 11 ] .


Mutual Funds; When Contests Drive Sales Pitches
THERE is an old saying in the mutual fund industry: Funds are sold, not bought.
Why?
Largely because of a commission structure that rewards salespeople for volume sales -- but also because of an ad hoc system of sales contests, incentives and awards offered by the funds to motivate their salespeople to push a particular fund.
"Many fund groups try to gain market share or a toehold in a new market by offering incentives or sales contests," said Geoff Bobroff, a senior vice president with Lipper Analytical Services in Denver.


THEATER
Don't Miss
"FOOL MOON." Call them what you will -- clowns, new vaudevillians, mischief-makers -- David Shiner and Bill Irwin have come up with two acts' worth of silent comedy sketches that are as funny as anything on Broadway.
The sound is provided by the Red Clay Ramblers, which plays such oddities as "Hiawatha's Lullaby" and "I Crept Into the Crypt and Cried." Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $25 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN." A straight Marxist firebrand and a gay window dresser, thrown together in a cell in a Latin American dictatorship, become unlikely soulmates in the most thrilling musical of the season.
The work by John Kander, Fred Ebb and Terrence McNally celebrates the power of the imagination to remake the world, however brutal.
In his riveting Broadway debut, Brent Carver, playing the window dresser, gives the sort of performance people talk about years later.
Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $35 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"LATER LIFE." In A. R. Gurney's wry and rueful comedy, a staid, middle-aged Boston banker runs into a woman with whom he had a brief romance 30 years earlier and tries to rekindle the affair.
The occasion is a lively cocktail party, populated by some eccentric guests.
A success at Playwrights Horizons earlier this season, the production moves to the Westside Theater on Aug. 9 with Carole Shelley and Maureen Anderman reprising their original roles, and Josef Sommer taking over for Charles Kimbrough.
The comedy will have an official re-opening in September.
Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays through Saturdaysat 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"SHAKESPEARE FOR MY FATHER." Sir Michael Redgrave was much celebrated as an actor, but according to Lynn Redgrave, the youngest of his offspring, he was decidedly less successful as a father.
In this fascinating autobiographical one-woman show, the actress makes her peace with the man who ignored her as a child but whose remoteness also prompted her to enter the theatrical profession.
Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Performances (through Sept. 6): Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednedays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"THREE HOTELS." Three monologues, set in three different hotel rooms, make up this drama by Jon Robin Baitz.
The first and third are delivered by a fast-rising trouble-shooter (Ron Rifkin) for a firm that peddles baby formula in third-world nations.
The second is spoken by his wife (Debra Monk), who is having troubles reconciling herself to corporate life.
By the end of the play, Mr.
Baitz has given us a vivid picture of a marriage and a career in shambles.
Circle Repertory Theater, 99 Seventh Avenue South (between West Fourth and Bleecker Streets), Manhattan.
Performances (through Sept. 5): Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $32.
Information: (212) 924-7100 Now Running
"A PERFECT GANESH." Two women, portrayed by Frances Sternhagen and Zoe Caldwell, take a trip to India in the newest play by Terrence McNally.
Fisher Stevens turns up as the various men -- some 20 of them -- they encounter along the way.
Ganesha is the Hindu god of good fortune, who also puts in an appearance.
The director is John Tillinger, who has staged such successful McNally dramas as "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" and "The Lisbon Traviata." Manhattan Theater Club at City Center, Stage One, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Closes Aug. 21.
Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays, 2:30 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
August
"IN THE SUMMER HOUSE." Jane Bowles's 1953 drama about a group of maladjusted Southern Californians and their efforts to evade reality was once described by Tennessee Williams as "the most original play I have ever read." This is the first directorial undertaking of JoAnne Akalaitis since she was deposed last spring as the artistic director of the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Philip Glass is composing new music for the play, and George Tsypin is designing the scenery.
Previews began July 8; opens Aug. 1.
Limited engagement through Aug. 22.
Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL." After marrying Helena, Bertram decides that "a young man married is a man that's marred" and bolts for the wars.
Helena chases after him.
All manner of complications ensue before the two finally settle down.
The British director Richard Jones, who staged "La Bete" on Broadway a few seasons ago, will bring his distinctive eye to bear on the Shakespearean comedy.
Aug. 5 to 29.
Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance at Central Park West and 81st Street.
Performances: Tuesdays through Sundays, 8 P.M.
Free.
Tickets are distributed at 6:15 the night of the performance; early arrival is recommended.
Information: (212) 861-7277.
"ANNIE WARBUCKS." The on-again, off-again sequel to "Annie" is on again, although the story has been through so many incarnations, who knows what lies in store for the famous redhead and onetime orphan, now living in the lap of Daddy Warbucks's luxury?
You've got to hand it to the director and lyricist Martin Charnin, the composer Charles Strouse and the book writer Thomas Meehan.
They don't give up.
Previews began July 7.
Opens Aug. 9.
Variety Arts Theater, 110 Third Avenue (at 13th Street), Manhattan.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3:30.
Tickets: Sundays through Thursdays, $35, $40; Fridays and Saturdays, $40, $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"BLACK COMEDY" and "THE WHITE LIARS." Nancy Marchand is to star in this revival of two one-act plays by Peter Shaffer, first presented on Broadway in 1967.
The latter piece, the curtain raiser, involves a young man and a fraudulent fortuneteller.
The former is about a sculptor, hoping to exhibit his wares to a wealthy buyer, until the lights in his apartment go out.
Mr.
Shaffer's trick is to reverse light and dark.
When the electricity is on, the stage is dark.
When it goes off, the stage lights come up, allowing the audience to observe a variety of characters stumbling over one another and the furniture.
Gerald Gutierrez directs.
Previews begin Aug. 11; opens Aug. 26; closes Oct. 10.
Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center.  1530 Broadway, at 45th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $38 to $42.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


Latin America in Flux; Economic Ills Sap Brazilians' Faith in Democracy
Burdened by one of the world's highest inflation rates and economic growth that lags population growth, Brazilians' fabled patience is starting to fray.
Last month, only eight years after the last army general left the presidency, a conservative congressman jolted public opinion by calling for a suspension of Congress and a return to military rule.


A Learning Experience?
To the Editor:
Karen Schoemer's article "The Best, or Maybe Worst, of the Talk-Show World"  [ June 27 ]  quotes Aileen Gram, senior producer of "Talk Soup," as saying that you learn from watching television talk shows.


MOVIES
Don't Miss
"IN THE LINE OF FIRE." Clint Eastwood in the summer's best movie, an action-romance in which he plays an aging but still enticing Secret Service agent bound to save the President from a mad killer (John Malkovich).
With Rene Russo as the agent he loves.


Bosnia Loses Any Hope of Being Saved
AS the besieging Serbian forces draw the noose ever tighter around this shattered city, there is less and less talk of the man once regarded as a potential savior.
When he was inaugurated six months ago, and more so after he warned of possible American military action against the Serbian forces in April, Bill Clinton's name was invoked all over town.
"Clinton dobro" -- Clinton is good -- became a common greeting extended to Americans, and was usually followed by a disparagement of European leaders, who were seen as finding every excuse not to come to Bosnia's aid.
Now, if Mr.
Clinton is mentioned at all, it is usually only to place him in the villains' gallery alongside the leaders of Britain and France.


NOTES
Harper's Bazaar jumped the gun in a profile this month of Joycelyn Elders, President Clinton's nominee for Surgeon General.
The five-page feature called her "Bill Clinton's new Surgeon General," though she has yet to be confirmed by the Senate.
"We took a risk," said Betsy Carter, the magazine's executive editor.
"The magazine has a three-month lead time and at the time, she looked like a shoo-in."
Fabrizio Ferri, the Italian photographer and fashion designer, has asked Martha Stewart to model at his spring/ summer show on Wednesday at his Industria Superstudio in Manhattan.
"Our models are our friends," Mr.
Ferri said.
"They are doing the show to support us and not to show themselves." Ms.
Stewart, in turn, plans to wear Mr.
Ferri's clothing on her new syndicated television show, "Martha Stewart Living Television," which premieres in September.


Kings' Coach Rewarded
BARRY MELROSE is the first of the Los Angeles Kings to receive a significant financial benefit from the team's improbable run to the Stanley Cup final.


ARTS
Don't Miss
DRAWINGS FROM THE J. PAUL GETTY MUSEUM, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
The youngest major-league collection of Old Master drawings is little more than a decade old and relatively small by European standards.
But the 130 works in this exhibition, which range from Raphael to van Gogh, suggest that what it lacks in quantity and longevity, it more than makes up for in quality.
Through Aug. 8.
Hours: Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $6; $3 for the elderly and students.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Coaches Lose Out
Imagine JERRY TARKANIAN and JIM BOEHEIM recruiting the same high school star -- and neither getting him.
Sure it's far-fetched, but this isn't real life, it's the movies, specifically a movie called "Blue Chips" in which Tarkanian, the former Nevada-Las Vegas coach, and Boeheim, the longtime Syracuse coach, play big-time college coaches.
They were both on location last week for filming in French Lick, Ind., the hometown, not coincidentally, of LARRY BIRD, who has a bit part.
And how do the scriptwriters manage to make it convincing that neither Tarkanian nor Boeheim land their fish?
Well, NICK NOLTE is the star.(AP)


DANCE
Tomorrow
"P.S. 122's BIG ROOM," Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan. .
Performance and partying in the vast old rock palace.
Reno in a performance art piece and Charles Dennis in "Maelstrom," a communal dance experience.
Performance is at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Reservations: (212) 477-5288.
Charge: (212) 307-7171.
July
"DANCES FOR WAVE HILL," 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Dance leaps, dashes and rolls out over this sprawling green environmental center.
Sara Pearson/Patrik Wedig and Company and Sham Mosher, with the children from Riverdale Neighborhood House, on Wednesday at 6:30 P.M. and Saturday at 3 P.M.
Admission free on Wednesday; admission Saturday: $4; $2 for the elderly and students; children free.
Information: (212) 989-6996.
ELIZABETH STREB, Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, at the foot of the bridge, Cadman Plaza West and Old Front Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Rehearsals of Ms.
Streb's "Lookup," a wall-climbing piece that opens Sept. 17, will be open to the public on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays through Sept. 4, from 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
DANCING IN THE STREETS.
Joanna Haigood performs in "Cho-Mu/Butterfly Dreams," Roosevelt Island Community Garden, next to the Roosevelt Island subway station.
Thursday and Friday.
A collaborative installation and performance piece created with Reiko Goto and the Zaccho Dance Theater, all of San Francisco, with the audience moving through seven sculptures. 6:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
NIKOLAIS: REMARKABLE RETROSPECTIVE.
The Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company perform pieces choreographed by Alwin Nikolais from the 1950's through the 1980's.
"Imago" today, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday; "Pond," "Mechanical Organ," and "Gallery" on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday matinee.
Performances are Mondays through Fridays, 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2 and 8 P.M.
Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
August
LINCOLN CENTER OUT OF DOORS, in Lincoln Center's parks, plazas and open spaces, Aug. 3 to 24.
New this year are two series: Playdays, on Aug. 14 and 15 beginning at 2 P.M., features performances and participatory events for families; the Great American Cities Program begins with a tribute to Philadelphia, Aug. 17 to 21, featuring performances by Philadanco and Steve Krieckhaus.
The festival opens on Aug. 3 at 8:15 P.M. with the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company (also on Aug. 4 at 8:15).
The festival continues with dance on social issues by Marlies Yearby and Amy Pivar; Montreal Danse performing Japanese Butoh, and dance from Taiwan, Brazil, Israel, Ukraine, India and Cambodia.
Performance times vary.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5400.
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER, at Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, midpark at 72d Street, Aug. 10.
A program of "Revelations," the Ailey signature piece, "Shelter," choreographed by Jawole Willa Jo Zollar of Urban Bush Women and "The Winter in Lisbon," choreographed by Billy Wilson, to the music of Dizzy Gillespie. 8:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 360-2756.
FELD BALLET, at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Aug. 9 through 21.
The Summer Preview Season includes revivals of "Charmed Lives," "Skara Brae," "Play Bach," "Contra Pose" and "Ion." There will be premieres of "Arcana," much of which is performed on a high bar suspended eight feet above the stage, and "Doo Dah Day/No Possum, No Sop, No Taters," which is set to songs of Stephen Foster.
Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays, at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about dissent within the State Department over policy toward Bosnia misidentified the Secretary of State who established a formal channel in 1971 to present opposing views to senior officials.
He was William P. Rogers, not Dean Rusk.
Mr.
Rusk took less formal steps, in the 1960's, to encourage unorthodox thinking.


Just Rewards for Hubris on Wheels
On a bicycle, as elsewhere, acts of hubris court reward and retribution alike.
It was Wednesday, about 5 P.M., and I was in Lodge Grass, Mont., a rickety outpost on the Crow Indian Reservation, having already pedaled about 90 miles southeast from Billings, Mont.
The day had been overcast but unthreatening, the air damp and still.
There was a motel in Lodge Grass, and for nearly a week the weather in the region's cool, rainy, summerless summer had been delivering on the promise of scattered evening thundershowers.
Usually, I would have stopped for the night.


The Ups and Downs of Latin Economies
Four years ago Argentina had a shrinking economy and an annual inflation rate of 6,000 percent.
But by embracing budget cuts, reducing tariffs and selling off state companies, the country has shed its reputation as an economic pariah and has achieved a growth rate of nearly 9 percent.
In contrast, Brazil, which was ranked eighth among 15 major developing nations for economic competitiveness five years ago, is burdened by an inflation rate of 1,800 percent and a tradition of political patronage.


City Opera Turns 50, But Who's Counting?
Who can blame the New York City Opera for keeping its 50th-anniversary celebration low-key?
The company opens its season on Wednesday evening not with an attention-grabbing gala or a trendy premiere but with plain old "Carmen," followed by a few weeks of standard repertory and operettas.
There will be no exhibitions, picture books, film compilations, collaborations with other New York institutions or glittery evenings of self-congratulation.
"No, we aren't doing that," said Christopher Keene, the company's general director.
"After the 150th anniversary of the Philharmonic, the 100th of Carnegie Hall and the 100th of the Met, 50 doesn't really have that much resonance. And for me, at the tender age of 46, 50 seems younger every day."


Styles of Life And Civil Rights
In their letter of June 13 both Drs.
Lisa Whitten and Wanda J. Whitten-Shurney attempt to make a legitimate case for preferential treatment toward blacks.
It is worth noting that during the mid-60's, when the civil rights bill was being debated, the venerable and late Senator Hubert H. Humphrey explained the intent of the bill was to create color blindness on the part of both lawmakers and policymakers.
Yet, affirmative action, reverse discrimination and quota systems appear to be inconsistent with Senator Humphrey's understanding of civil rights.
Moreover, what might be the effect if other major groups of people tried to cash in on affirmative action, if indeed they could prove discrimination against members of their groups?
For example, on Jan. 19, 1973, the United States Department of Labor published "Guidelines on Discrimination" in the Federal Register.
It stated in Part (b) 60-50.1 that "Jews and Catholics, Italians, Greeks, and Slavic groups" are victims of bias in employment because of their background.
Yet, none of these groups receive "affirmative action" consideration for targeted goals in hiring or promotion.


Corrections
A picture caption on June 27 about the Star Trek Federation Science exhibit at the Buffalo Museum of Science misidentified the figure on a viewing screen.
It was a Klingon, not a Ferengi.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about jazz festivals misstated dates for the three-day Long Island Festival at Planting Fields in Oyster Bay.
The event, sponsored by Friends of the Arts, will be held next Friday, Saturday and Sunday; it is not this weekend.
The article also misstated the date of Dave Brubeck's appearance.
It is Aug. 21, not Aug. 23.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Monroe
MONROE, once known for its bungalows where summer people came to enjoy mountain breezes and lakes, is now a commuter town still offering the beauty that attracted the visitors of the past.
Situated at the southeastern end of Orange County, the town encompasses three villages -- Harriman, Monroe and Kiryas Joel, a Hasidic community of some 7,500.
Entering the village of Monroe on route 17M, a road known by many who have traveled to the Catskills resorts, there is a sign next to a pond that announces, "Welcome to Monroe, The Lake Region."


U.N. Flight From Bosnia's Reality
When reports first reached here Thursday that Serbian nationalists were advancing on Sarajevo, the Security Council condemned the offensive and demanded "an immediate end to all attacks."
The statement had a familiar ring, reaffirming "the unacceptability of ethnic cleansing," the destruction and forced relocation of population groups by nationality or religion.
It urged the combatants to meet in Geneva "to negotiate in earnest."


The Trouble With Teams
To the Editor:
"Managing by Team Is Not Always as Easy as It Looks" (July 18) alludes to a fundamental issue confronting today's organizations: individual accountability.
Often, newly adopted organizational practices are taken too far and, in the process, attempt to downplay this issue.


Learning to Live With Symptoms
The "Q &amp; A" on Jacqueline Rotteveel ("Building a Life in Spite of Mental Illness," June 20) had a very nice line: "the kind of symptoms people can live with and work with are really unbelievable." I've tried to communicate that myself, but not nearly so directly and assuredly and simply as Ms.
Rotteveel seems to.
GREGORY LUDWIG Highland Lakes


Pride, Politics and Puerto Rico From El Museo del Barrio
MUSEUMS undergoing renovation commonly send parts of their collections on the road.
The tours can cover a lot of ground and last a year or more.
In the case of El Museo del Barrio, at 104th Street and Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, the excerpt is small and the journey begins and ends at the Lehman College Art Gallery here.
But that does not lessen the significance of the show, which is summed up in its title, "Pa'lante." This exhortation to "move forward" was coined in the early 1970's and became a rallying cry for militant Puerto Rican groups like the Young Lords.
Though it may have seemed like a byproduct of "West Side Story" to the rest of the world, the group was a serious political organization devoted to bettering the lot of Hispanic-Americans, and, in the heady days of the Civil Rights struggle, members expressed solidarity with black Americans.


Deng's Failing Health Wracks China's Body Politic
In a country where the body politic is barely distinguishable from the five-foot frame of an 88-year-old retiree named Deng Xiaoping, perhaps the greatest mystery these days is this: is that body healthy?
Mr.
Deng has not appeared in public or on television for six months, and the whispers in Beijing are that he is seriously ill.
By some accounts he recently underwent surgery for cancer.


World Markets; Following the Music, and It Shows
JANET JACKSON is giving a boost to the shares of Thorn EMI.
The singer's new album, "janet," went straight to the top of the Billboard charts after its release in May.
Its continued strong sales are helping to convince skeptical investors that Thorn EMI's recording business is living up to the promises made by its executives when they acquired Virgin Records from the entrepreneur Richard Branson last year for nearly $1 billion.


Feeding Time for People (and Plants)
Keep picking beans, summer squash and cucumbers before they get tough.
Plant one last crop of each so you'll have a new supply when the old ones lose steam or the vine borers discover them.
Cut back basil and parsley so plants can produce new leaves.
Freeze or dry the harvested leaves or make lots of pesto and feed it to your friends -- immediately.
Make salsa out of tomatoes, hot peppers, cilantro and tomatillos. (No cilantro, no tomatillos? Make a note to order the seeds next year.)


One-Week Stand
Some best-selling American novels, like "Uncle Tom's Cabin" and "Gone With the Wind," portend tumultuous changes in the country or the world.
Others serve up chills and sex.
"The Bridges of Madison County" seems to fall into the "Jonathan Livingston Seagull" category.
It is a cult -- but in this case, far from harmless.
Millions of American women read this slim first novel and weep.
Men, however, get the last laugh.
None more so than the book's author, Robert James Waller, a 53-year-old management professor at the University of Northern Iowa.
"Bridges" will soon finish its first year on the best-seller list, most of it at No. 1.
Its publisher, Warner Books, predicts it will be the largest-selling novel in hard-cover of all time, with three million copies in print by Christmas.
One store alone, Book Passage in Corte Madera, Calif., has sold 3,000 copies, 60 of them to a single enthusiast.
Oprah Winfrey recently moved her talk show to rural Madison County, Iowa, for a day, to salute her "favorite book of the year," which she called "a gift to the country."


A Brave New World Of Electronic Art And Images
Artists like to fiddle with technologies developed for something else, and many an art has stood tall on the back of industry and invention.
Julio Gonzalez and Picasso changed the course of sculpture with common metalworking techniques.
Dan Flavin makes art of fluorescent light bulbs and Nam June Paik of televisions; back in 1966, Experiments in Art and Technology was founded "to catalyze the inevitable involvement of industry, technology and the arts."
Some technologies have not been very accommodating -- there is no telephone art, no telegraph art, little important helium balloon art (unless you count Andy Warhol's levitating silver pillows).
But the digital revolution and the development of videotape have proved massively alluring to artists and produced some unexpected romances.


Of Europeans And Extraction
RECENT political changes in Eastern Europe had a substantial impact on the European Championships in Menton, France, a month ago, and one surprising non impact.
In the past, only Poland and Hungary made regular appearances from behind the Iron Curtain, and the Poles were victorious this year.
Romania made its first appearance, and Bulgaria sent a women's team.
Russia competed for the first time in 1989 but did not go to Menton.
From the former Soviet Union, there were squads from Belarus, Latvia and Lithuania.
Croatia and Slovenia were represented despite the upheavals in the Balkans.


The Executive Computer; For Expert or Novice, More Choices for Desktop Publishing
STOP the presses.
Several new editions of desktop publishing software have appeared that make it easier to create impressive business documents.
Pagemaker from the Aldus Corporation and Quark Xpress from Quark Inc., the two most popular desktop publishing programs for Macintosh and Windows computers, have added powerful features for graphics professionals.
And for computer novices who have been drafted to produce the company softball team's newsletter, the Microsoft Corporation's Publisher 2.0 for Windows is a solid hit.


She's No Jockette
Outside it had been madness, everyone screaming her name.
Then Julie Krone, having just crossed the finish line at Belmont Park aboard a 13-to-1 long shot named Colonial Affair, came in to the small room beneath the grandstand to meet the press.
There was a moment's holy hush; maybe even, among the old-timers, a quiver of spiritual dislocation.
This sprout, after all; this squirt, this squiggle who looked as if she should be home eating Twinkies, not steering 1,200 pounds of horse down the homestretch at 40 miles an hour: on this June day she had become the first woman to win the 125-year-old Belmont Stakes and the first ever to win any of the Triple Crown races (the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness, the Belmont).
You would have had to be well beyond the reach of the news media not to know that her triumph had been marred by the fate of Prairie Bayou, the favorite who had fractured a leg and had to be destroyed.
Still, there had been 12 horses left and a mile to go; Krone had ridden the winner home by two and a quarter lengths.


Parish Recalls Priest in a Sex Case
MEMBERS of the parish of a Roman Catholic church in northern Westchester reacted with anger and anguish last week after the arrest of their former priest on charges of child molestation.
The Rev.
Edward A. Pipala, 54, had been charged with sexual abuse while serving as pastor at St.
John the Evangelist Roman Catholic Church in Goshen and as assistant pastor at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Monroe, both in Orange County.
But the priest had also served at St.
Joseph's Church in Croton Falls for five years, from 1977 to 1981.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Franklin Lakes  $980,000
832 Winton Gait Lane  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; 3 fireplaces, 1.8 acre, 3-car garage; taxes $12,611.
Montvale  $562,000
10 Candlelight Drive  4-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; c/a, pool, fireplace, 3-car garage; taxes $8,203.
Neptune  $242,500
640 South Riverside Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, river view, basement; taxes $3,600.
Tinton Falls  $70,900
77 Frontier Way  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 10-year-old condominium; fireplace, patio, common charges $118, taxes $2,013.
Wayne  $205,000
161 Beechwood Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; stone front, lake community, fireplace, screened patio; taxes $3,500.
Westwood  $242,000
13 Gritman Court  4-bedroom, 2.5-bath, 43-year-old split level; patio, pool, 1 -car garage, family room; taxes not available.
OTHER AREAS Rocky Hill, Conn.  $222,000
190 Countryside Drive  3- bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, on cul-de-sac, formal dining room, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,800.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $255,000
71 Sheridan Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old split level; tiled entry hall, bay window, office; taxes $5,066.
Bay Shore, L.I.  $131,500
24 Roland Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 29- year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,700.


Taxing and Spending
Thrashing out a Congressional compromise on President Clinton's five-year, $500 billion package of tax increases and spending cuts, a job that only recently seemed impossible, now looks to be merely Herculean.
After the requisite threat displays, House and Senate Democrats moved behind doors last week and made surprising progress toward resolving the $60 billion difference between their separate versions of the economic package.
By week's end, about half that gap had been made up, and what once seemed the single prickliest issue on the agenda -- the size of a proposed energy tax -- seemed almost a done deal.
The biggest remaining task is making peace between party conservatives who want more spending cuts and liberals who want more spending, period.
So far, House and Senate bargainers have sidestepped that dispute, making speedy progress by splitting the difference on a handful of simple, but big-money, tax items.


The Pine-Tar Incident: 10 Years Ago Brett Lost His Grip and a Home Run
Ten years later, Tim McClelland would like to make one thing perfectly clear.
"We didn't call him out for an illegal bat," McClelland said.
"That's always been misinterpreted. We called him out for an illegally batted ball."
George Brett would like to make another thing perfectly clear.
"I'm stupid, but I'm not dumb," he said.


As Heavy Rains Continue, Floods Spread to New Areas
The great flood of 1993, already one of the most disastrous in the country's history, is getting worse.
The rain continues to fall almost without ceasing across the disaster zone -- Nebraska City, Neb., got more than 12 inches over the last two days -- and disaster officials say the flooding is spreading west and north to areas that until now had escaped serious harm.


To See More Blooms, Kill Those Seeds
THE object of gardening now is to keep the plants going.
But the object of nature is to begin to shut them down, that is for annuals, perennials and shrubs to set seed and get ready for the cold season ahead.
The goal for the gardener then is to prevent plants from putting all their strength into developing seed.
The exception, of course, is those gardeners who are interested in home hybridizing or self-sowing of a certain species.
They may want their plants to set seed.


True Confession: Steamy Books Are Best in the Heat
IT beckons, the color of poppies.
Its opium curls through the air, fixing you in its path.
You cannot resist -- you never could -- and when surrender comes, you want to cry for joy because now, against all odds, you will finally be together.
Always.
So you reach out, fingers trembling, and grasp it eagerly, in both hands.
"Scruples Two."


Catharsis: Sweat, Drinks and Rock-and-Roll
ROCK-AND-ROLL is a sweaty enough enterprise without summer figuring into the picture.
Think of it: the long hair, the energy, the jacked-up beat, the floor crammed with writhing, distortion-crazed revelers.
Ultimately, the archetypal rock experience for any generation is going into some small, tightly packed club, dancing and losing oneself for an hour or two, and re-emerging sweat-soaked and transformed.
The image might not be a pretty one, but there's nothing polite or demure about shared catharsis.


Jill E. Jusick, Mark Bentley
Jill Ellen Jusick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen F. Jusick of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Bentley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bentley of Pawling, N.Y.
The Rev.
Rene Barczak, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Lawrenceville (N.J.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Bentley, 25, and her husband, graduated from the University of Richmond.
She is a senior administrative assistant at Educational Testing Service, the college examination service in Princeton, N.J.
Her father is a managing director of Tucker Anthony Inc., an investment brokerage firm in Princeton.


Maija T. Smith, John P. Arbolino
Maija Tuulikki Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Philip Smith of Katonah, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John Paul Arbolino, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Arbolino of Harrington Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Bruce Younkin performed the ceremony at the United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Arbolino, 31, is an assistant vice president at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is the president and chief operating officer of the Lewco Securities Corporation, a securities clearing concern, and a managing director of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, an investment bank, both in New York.


POP
Thursday
DWIGHT YOAKUM.
Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas.
A true honky-tonker with a country-rock edge, Dwight Yoakum sings with a down-home ache in his voice, while his songs make most new traditionalist country singers sound sugar-coated. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
Friday
RAY CHARLES.
Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas.
The great American singer transmutes pop warhorses into cries from the heart. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
Next Sunday
FESTIVAL NEW ORLEANS.
Jones Beach Theater.
A traveling version of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, headlined by the funk and rock of the Radiators and also featuring New Orleans food; try the Crawfish Monica. 6 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (516) 221-1000.
Aug. 3-8
CLASSICAL JAZZ AT LINCOLN CENTER.
A series of concerts, films and lectures.
On Aug. 3 at Alice Tully Hall, "Monk's Point" commemorates a 1963 concert by the Thelonious Monk big band.
On Aug. 4 at Bruno Walter Auditorium, there is a free illustrated lecture about Billie Holiday by a biographer, Robert O'Meally.
On Aug. 5 at the Walter Reade Theater, the clarinetist and musicologist Dr.
Michael White presents a selection of New Orleans jazz on film.
On Aug. 6, "Battle Royale: Trumpets and Tenors," a jam session and cutting contest, brings together trumpeters (among them Wynton Marsalis, Nicholas Payton and Red Rodney) and saxophonists (David Murray, George Coleman, Joshua Redman).
On Aug. 7, two pianists, Geri Allen and Marcus Roberts, perform works for septet and octet commissioned by Lincoln Center.
And on Aug. 8, the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra plays Duke Ellington works inspired by places, including the "Deep South Suite" and the "Paris Blues Suite." Concerts begin at 8 P.M.
Tickets for concerts: $35.
Lecture on Aug. 4 at 6 P.M. is free; film on Aug. 5 at 7 and 9 P.M. is $10.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
Aug. 10
BLUES MUSIC FESTIVAL '93.
Paramount.
A Memphis and Chicago blues summit, with two guitar patriarchs -- B. B. King and Buddy Guy -- heading a bill that includes the brawny blues of Koko Taylor and Lonnie Brooks and the singing and harmonica playing of Junior Wells. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $29.50 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
Aug. 18 and Aug. 24-25
STEELY DAN.
Madison Square Garden (Aug. 18; 8 P.M.; $28.50 and $27.50; 212-307-7171) and Jones Beach Theater (Aug. 24-25; 8 P.M.; $25.50 and $35.50; 516-221-1000).
Steely Dan hadn't reached the arena circuit when its masterminds, Donald Fagen and Walter Becker, decided they preferred the studio to the stage.
But Steely Dan's cool, sinuous, enigmatic songs have held up brilliantly since their 1970's heyday, and Mr.
Fagen has new songs to add to the canon.
Aug. 21
MIDNIGHT OIL AND ZIGGY MARLEY.
Jones Beach Theater.
A double bill of political fervor with a beat.
Midnight Oil are steeped in mainstream rock, with some Australian idiosyncrasies; Ziggy Marley honors the reggae of his father, Bob Marley, by putting his own twists into it. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (516) 221-1000.
Sept. 3
SADE.
Jones Beach Theater.
Supple, understated songs about love and obsession. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.50.
Information: (516) 221-1000.


Dining Under the Spell of Islands
SUMMERTIME is for islands.
Whether Shelter Island, Block Island, Long Beach Island or the South Sea islands, the alchemy of surf, breeze and informality gently unwinds the workaday circuitry that tightens the shoulders and clenches the neck.
Of course, not everyone is lucky enough to have summer house, plane tickets or vacation time.
These stay-at-homes still have Manhattan island.
And that's not such a bad thing.
When the islanding crowd is away, the stores aren't crowded, there are tables in restaurants, there are parking spots, there are even cabs in midtown.


Even Japan Can't Tell What It Has Elected
IN the tales of Japan's aristocracy, the Hosokawa clan has a history of rebellion.
When the Japanese tired of centuries of feudal rule by the Tokugawa shoguns in the 1860's, the Hosokawas rode up from the hinterland to join the battle; Morihisa Hosokawa soon took a post in the first government after the Meiji Restoration.
Historians still argue over whether that revolution was truly an effort to modernize Japan, or simply a nasty power struggle.
This week the Japanese are asking the same question about Morihiro Hosokawa, great-grandson of Morihisa.
When he created the Japan New Party last year, he was dismissed as a high-minded crank, an amusing annoyance to the invulnerable Liberal Democratic Party, which had ruled Japan for nearly 40 years.
This weekend, with the scandal-ridden L.D.P. reeling from the loss of its majority in Parliament and unable to contain a revolt by its own younger members, newspapers are speculating whether Mr.
Hosokawa may be the next prime minister.


Fielding Dupuy and Constance Hunter
Constance Louise Hunter, the daughter of John S. Hunter of Chestnut Hill, Pa., and the late Theodora vanPelt Hunter, was married yesterday to Fielding Davis Dupuy, a son of Col.
Trevor N. Dupuy, U.S.A., retired, of McLean, Va., and Christine G. Dupuy of Dennis, Mass.
The Rev.
Charles Carter, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
Paul's Church in Chestnut Hill.
Mrs.
Dupuy graduated from New York University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in economic development at Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was an investment banker at W. H. Newbold and Sons, a Philadelphia brokerage and investment banking firm.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
May 93
Apr. 93
May 92
Nation
$ 106,100
105,800
$ 103,100
Northeast
138,600
142,100
142,500
Midwest
86,200
85,800
81,600
South
94,700
91,300
92,400
West
140,100
144,000
144,000
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.29
7.37
8.34
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.51
4.56
5.58
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.16
7.26
8.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.39
4.42
5.34
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.17
7.27
8.19
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.25
4.26
5.26
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.43
7.48
8.41
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.21
5.27
6.06
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.41
3.42
3.53
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.08
7.08
8.20
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


TELEVISION
Next Sunday
"A YEAR IN PROVENCE: SUMMER." The television adaptation of the Peter Mayle best seller reaches its third episode with the author now besieged by guests from London but still involved enough with the locals to take part in the wagering on the annual goat race.
John Thaw as Peter and Lindsay Duncan as Annie.
Arts &amp; Entertainment Channel, 8 P.M.


Arrangements And Harmonies For a Folk Cuisine
In "The Angel in the House," the gorgeous title song of the Story's second album, a young woman remembers her mother's futile attempts to win back the love of a husband who has grown indifferent.
Describing the mother's frantic efforts, the narrator compares the campaign to a losing game of Monopoly overseen by a deceitful angel.
Cooing and flattering a man are the ways to keep him, the spirit advises.
But that advice doesn't pay off.
While telling the story, the daughter realizes to her dismay that she has absorbed too many of her mother's feelings that women should be men's angelic supporters and nurturers.
"I thought I was by myself, but I cannot kill the angel in the house," she reflects with some bitterness.


Aswers to Summer's Idle Mysteries
A casual primer on summer: two dozen things to muse upon when it's too hot for deep thinking.
1.
LONG DAYS BUT SHORT WEEKS: The average number of phone calls made by Manhattan businesses each summer weekday is about 20.5 million, except on Fridays; then, said New York Telephone, it is 17.1 million.


Where History Meets Art
HISTORY AND ITS IMAGES Art and the Interpretation of the Past.
By Francis Haskell.
Illustrated. 558 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $50.


Tallying Crown Heights Toll, in Votes
Savoring the respite from the hammering sun, Sal Margolis plopped into a swivel chair inside the Margolis Stationery Store in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, where he meditated with some melancholy on his possible political defection.
"I'm a lifetime Democrat, but I may change my voting habits for the first time," he said.
"For 40 years I voted Democratic, but the string may be ending."


Rape and the Mentally Retarded
ANNETTE R. did not know the word "rape." So when the 41-year-old mentally retarded woman was driven home one day by a co-worker, she was not sure what was happening when he pulled his car into a vacant lot, forcibly removed her clothing and had sexual intercourse with her.
She came home, cried all night, said nothing to her parents and then got up and went to work the next day.
While she was at her job at a fast-food restaurant in Larchmont -- where she wiped tables, filled ketchup and mustard bottles and made change for video games -- the same man approached her.
Annette, who has an I.Q. of 63 and whose last name is being withheld to protect her identity, broke down and called a friend.
Since she did not understand the sexual act, she complained that the man had urinated on her the night before.
Her friend explained to Annette that she had been raped.


Thruway Rest Stop Provides Place for Jews to Pray
Approaching the newly renovated Sloatsburg rest stop on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway this summer, the weary traveler sees many signs offering services and comfort: "Burger King," "TCBY," "Sunoco," "Tourist Information," "NYCE," "Mincha Area."
Mincha Area?


Queen's Guard Cuts Schedule
The guard is changing less often.
On July 16, the famous sentries protecting Buckingham Palace, home of Queen Elizabeth II, were put on their winter schedules: the palace guard now changes every other day, rather than every day.
Until a few years ago, the guard changed daily from April to mid-September.
With the Queen's consent, the army then decided the guard should change daily from April to mid-August only.
Last year, however, mid-August became early August and this year, mid-July.


Perpetuating A Stereotype
To the Editor:
"Prom: The Production" elicited a response from Doretta Katzter Goldberg (Letters, July 11) indicating that she was "embarassed that the stereotypical Jewish American Princess is still alive and well and living on Long Island." I suggest that this catchy stereotype and slur will continue to live and be well on Long Island and elsewhere as long as people continue to use it.
DANIEL M. GRODEN Water Mill, L.I.


Return to the Old Stadium Values
To the Sports Editor:
As a dyed-in-the-wool Yankee fan, I will tell you what would bring me back to the Stadium.
It is the same thing that brought me to the Stadium in the first place: Yankee tradition.
It's the house that Ruth built.
It's where Lou Gehrig once drove in 175 runs.
It's where Mantle hit a 527-foot drive off the facade in right field that was the closest anyone has ever come to hitting a ball out of the park.


Corrections
A map caption last Sunday with an article about foreign workers in Saipan misstated the year in which Washington exempted the Northern Mariana Islands from the Federal minimum wage.
It was 1976; 1984 was the year Saipan set its minimum hourly wage at $2.15.


Gardening as a Form of Children's Therapy
SUNLIGHT poured into the Rhoda Goldstone Weiler Greenhouse at the Blythedale Children's Hospital here, as 5-year-old Jessica Phillips and 8-year-old Angelic Brown pulled blood-red radishes from a dirt-filled gardening trough.
Then, from their stretchers, the girls, who both have meningomyelocele -- an abnormality of the spinal canal -- washed off the radishes in a plastic tub and saved them for later use in a cooking program.
Nearby, 16-year-old Christina Meneses, who was weakened by Guillain-Barre syndrome, watered pots filled with wildflowers, caladium and devil's ivy, lining a countertop high enough to accommodate her wheelchair.


No Easy Path for Legal Assault on New Gay Policy
Even before the White House released its new policy on homosexuals in the military last week, a group of civil rights lawyers began laying the groundwork to challenge any regulations that fell short of a complete repudiation of the older and broader ban on gay troops.
But as they spent the past few days completing their briefs for a new round of lawsuits that they say will begin to be filed this week, the lawyers acknowledged that the heat of the debate was drawing them onto a battlefield they would not have chosen as a matter of legal strategy.


Michele Schipani, James Jeffrey
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph M. Baruch of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michele Schipani, to James P. Jeffery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Perry Jeffery of Southbury, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schipani, who graduated from Sweet Briar College and received a master's degree in international communications and law from American University, is an account supervisor at Grey Advertising in New York.
Her father is the founder of Viacom International, the communications concern with headquarters in New York.
He is now a consultant to the company.
The future bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending July 10  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $410,000
30 West 15th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, dining area, exposed-brick walls, c/a, 11 1/2-ft. ceilings; maintenance $1,325, 65% tax-deductible; maintenance $1,325, 65% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Corcoran Group)  East Midtown  $1.23 million
641 Fifth Avenue (51st St.)  (Olympic Towers)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,795-sq.-ft. condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, dining area, marble baths, Central Park and East River view; common charge $1,417, taxes $18,628 (Broker: Sandy Nuringer &amp; Associates)  Fort Washington  $95,000
116 Pinehurst Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining room, dinette, private entrance; maintenance $595, includes gas and electricity, 21% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  Upper East Side  $585,000
170 East 79th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar duplex co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,171, 38% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Halstead Property Co.)  Upper West Side  $3.82 million
145 Central Park West (74th St.)  (San Remo)  4-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 5,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, manned-elevator, fireplace, library, Central Park view; maintenance $3,675, 43% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Edward Lee Cave)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area  $104,000
3330 Bronxwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, ranch; dining area, enclosed porch, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $928 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Riverdale  $220,000
5823 Fieldston Road  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex; 1-bedroom, 1-bath, dining area in simplex; 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,652 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Carroll Gardens  $380,000
352 Union Street
3-family, 4-story, brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, eat-in kitchen, study, jacuzzi and rear deck in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area, den in others; full basement, 20- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Paul Gertz Realty)  Gerritsen Beach  $210,000
1-3 Keen Court  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, double 40- by 45-ft. lots; taxes $900 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Park Slope  $280,000
369 8th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, family room, 6 marble mantels, 12.6- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills  $58,000
99-45 67th Road  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dinette, renovated kitchen and bath; maintenance $346, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  Woodhaven  $136,000
91-24 88th Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, detached, frame colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 24- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  New Dorp  $185,000
292 Ross Avenue  2-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)  New Springville  $280,000
118 Amsterdam Avenue  2-family, detached, brick and asbestos framed house; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 60- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $2,614 (Broker: Wonica Realtors &amp; Appraisers)


Warsaw
In contrast to the East European capitals of Prague and Budapest, Warsaw seems uncertain, even shy, about touting itself as a city to visit.
This makes it a place of surprises for those who venture here.
Situated almost exactly in the center of Continental Europe, Warsaw is definitely looking westward these days.
Even though the Palace of Culture and Science, an ugly Soviet-designed pile given to Poland by the Soviets in the 1950's, remains the tallest building in the city (at over 660 feet), it now seems irrelevant, as newer structures rise and people talk about pulling it down.
In many ways, Warsaw has been too busy getting on with its own commercial life to bother with tourism.
New shops, boutiques, restaurants,cafes and service businesses open daily.
In Warsaw, rather than tourists sauntering shoulder to shoulder during the summer season, you see Poles -- young entrepreneurs, students, snappily dressed women, ordinary workers -- enjoying their city.


2 Men Are Charged With Killing 4 People in Manhattan Thefts
Two men arrested in Nevada arrived in New York City early yesterday and were arraigned on charges that they killed four people, including a man known as an Indian prince, in two robberies.
The suspects, George Cobo, 56, and Tony Lee Simpson, 21, did not enter pleas in a brief hearing before Judge Jay Gold in Criminal Court in Manhattan yesterday afternoon.
They were held without bail, and at their own request in protective custody, for a court hearing later this month.


Near Nudes, Toy Chicks And Historic Echoes
Getting a jump-start on its 60th anniversary, the American Dance Festival began a two-year celebration this summer in Durham, N. C., by emphasizing the contrasts between past and present.
There were premieres commissioned from masters like Paul Taylor and Merce Cunningham and revivals, most notably a reconstruction of a "lost" social-protest work from the 1930's.
But equally vivid differences in esthetics were defined by the variety of activity pouring out of the festival's workshops, performances and six-week school.
In one class, Ofra Levy, a young Israeli choreographer, explored the deep recesses from which violence can erupt.
Sitting demurely, she lovingly handled a stuffed bird.
Then she lifted her skirt to reveal a flock of toy chicks.
On a screen behind her, the actress Tippi Hedren was being attacked by a less-benign avian species in a scene from Hitchcock's film "The Birds." The juxtaposition of sweetness and ferocity was powerful and disturbing.


Sorting Out A New World Of Mortgage Possibilities
ONCE upon a time, a mortgage was forever.
But no more.
Homeowners on average now change mortgages more often than they buy a new car; some do it almost as often as they change the batteries on their smoke alarms.
Of about $3 trillion in mortgage debt on one- to four-family houses around the country, $894 billion, or nearly a third, was written last year.
This year that total may top $1 trillion.


The Deadly Sins/Despair; The One Unforgivable Sin
What mysterious cruelty in the human soul, to have invented despair as a sin!
Like the seven deadly sins, despair is a mythical state.
It has no quantifiable existence; it is merely part of an allegorical world view, yet no less lethal for that.
Unlike other sins, however, despair is by tradition the sole sin that cannot be forgiven; it is the conviction that one is damned absolutely, thus a repudiation of the Christian Saviour and a challenge to God's infinite capacity for forgiveness.
The sins for which one may be forgiven -- pride, anger, lust, sloth, avarice, gluttony, envy -- are all firmly attached to the objects of this world, but despair seems to bleed out beyond the confines of the immediate ego-centered self and to relate to no desire, to no thing.
The alleged sinner has detached himself even from the possibility of sin, and this the Catholic Church, as the self-appointed voice of God on earth, cannot allow.
Religion is organized power in the seemingly benevolent guise of the sacred, and power is, as we know, chiefly concerned with its own preservation.
Its structures, its elaborate rituals and customs and Scriptures and commandments and ethics, its very nature, objectify human experience, insisting that what is out there in the world is of unquestionably greater significance than what is in here in the human spirit.
Despair, surely the least aggressive of sins, is dangerous to the totalitarian temperament because it is a state of intense inwardness, thus independence.
The despairing soul is a rebel.


Melissa Moore, Richard Abate
Melissa Moore, a doctoral candidate in politics, and Richard R. Abate, a doctoral candidate in American studies, both at New York University, are planning an October wedding, the parents of the bride-to-be, Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Moore of Maplewood, N.J., have announced.
Ms.
Moore, 24, is an honors graduate of Smith College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Her mother, MaryAnn Moore, is the municipal welfare director of Maplewood, South Orange, Millburn and Chatham Boroughs, all in New Jersey.


Poets on a Jaunt
To the Editor:
David Lehman's demand, in his review of "City Poet: The Life and Times of Frank O'Hara" (June 20), that Brad Gooch stand and deliver on the deep-dish thoughts that presumably passed between O'Hara and John Ashbery on their 1960 European jaunt is a hoot.
If Mr.
Lehman really wants to know what went on, short of a phone call or fax to Mr.
Ashbery he might consider -- as Mr.
Gooch did -- simply reading the poem O'Hara wrote in the wake of that trip, whose opening lines go: "HAVING A COKE WITH YOU / is even more fun than going to San Sebastian, Irun, Hendaye, Biarritz, Bayonne."


William Inge's 'Bus Stop' in Revival in Simsbury
WHEN 12 tickets for the Centennial Theater Festival's production of "Bus Stop" by William Inge were sold to one James A. Mahan, the theater's management was curious.
Delighted, of course, but curious.
After all, sales for the summer season, the fourth professional one for the $6.5 million entertainment center on the grounds of the Westminster School in Simsbury, were off by about 20 percent.


Focus: St. Simons Island, Ga.; Sea Grass, Tidal Creeks and New Homes
NOT too many years ago, the grassy wetlands between this picturesque island and the mainland was considered wasteland, good only for filling in so it could be built upon.
Some islanders, like the novelist Eugenia Price, have lived on large tracts beside the marshes here for decades.
But now dozens of housing developments have been built on the mainland sides of the long string of barrier islands on the nation's Southern shore.


Liberty Theater
To the Editor:
What to do about the Liberty Theater curtain, thought to have been designed by Joseph Urban of Metropolitan Opera and Ziegfeld Follies fame  [ "Unlikely 42d St. Revival," July 11 ]  should not be such a problem.
Copy the asbestos original on modern fire-resistant material and hang it where it belongs -- in the Liberty Theater.


Days of Dogs and Dinosaurs for the Boys and Girls of Summer
PEOPLE don't complain about the dog days of July and August for nothing.
Some children are home from camp, the vacation never materialized (or it has come and gone) and you can't stand one more trip to the beach.
But there's hope!
So many activities are stocked up for the next six weeks, you may lobby to have Labor Day postponed.


THEATER
Don't Miss
"FOOL MOON." Call them what you will -- clowns, new vaudevillians, mischief-makers -- David Shiner and Bill Irwin have come up with two acts' worth of silent comedy sketches that are as funny as anything on Broadway.
The sound is provided by the Red Clay Ramblers, which plays such oddities as "Hiawatha's Lullaby" and "I Crept Into the Crypt and Cried." Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $25 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN." A straight Marxist firebrand and a gay window dresser, thrown together in a cell in a Latin American dictatorship, become unlikely soulmates in the most thrilling musical of the season.
The work by John Kander, Fred Ebb and Terrence McNally celebrates the power of the imagination to remake the world, however brutal.
In his riveting Broadway debut, Brent Carver, playing the window dresser, gives the sort of performance people talk about years later.
Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $35 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"LATER LIFE." In A. R. Gurney's wry and rueful comedy, a staid, middle-aged Boston banker runs into a woman with whom he had a brief romance 30 years earlier and tries to rekindle the affair.
The occasion is a lively cocktail party, populated by some eccentric guests.
A success at Playwrights Horizons earlier this season, the production moves to the Westside Theater on Aug. 9 with Carole Shelley and Maureen Anderman reprising their original roles, and Josef Sommer taking over for Charles Kimbrough.
The comedy will have an official re-opening in September.
Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays through Saturdaysat 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"SHAKESPEARE FOR MY FATHER." Sir Michael Redgrave was much celebrated as an actor, but according to Lynn Redgrave, the youngest of his offspring, he was decidedly less successful as a father.
In this fascinating autobiographical one-woman show, the actress makes her peace with the man who ignored her as a child but whose remoteness also prompted her to enter the theatrical profession.
Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Performances (through Sept. 6): Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 P.M.; Wednedays and Saturdays at 2 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"THREE HOTELS." Three monologues, set in three different hotel rooms, make up this drama by Jon Robin Baitz.
The first and third are delivered by a fast-rising trouble-shooter (Ron Rifkin) for a firm that peddles baby formula in third-world nations.
The second is spoken by his wife (Debra Monk), who is having troubles reconciling herself to corporate life.
By the end of the play, Mr.
Baitz has given us a vivid picture of a marriage and a career in shambles.
Circle Repertory Theater, 99 Seventh Avenue South (between West Fourth and Bleecker Streets), Manhattan.
Performances (through Sept. 5): Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $32.
Information: (212) 924-7100 Now Running
"A PERFECT GANESH." Two women, portrayed by Frances Sternhagen and Zoe Caldwell, take a trip to India in the newest play by Terrence McNally.
Fisher Stevens turns up as the various men -- some 20 of them -- they encounter along the way.
Ganesha is the Hindu god of good fortune, who also puts in an appearance.
The director is John Tillinger, who has staged such successful McNally dramas as "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" and "The Lisbon Traviata." Manhattan Theater Club at City Center, Stage One, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Closes Aug. 21.
Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays, 2:30 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
August
"IN THE SUMMER HOUSE." Jane Bowles's 1953 drama about a group of maladjusted Southern Californians and their efforts to evade reality was once described by Tennessee Williams as "the most original play I have ever read." This is the first directorial undertaking of JoAnne Akalaitis since she was deposed last spring as the artistic director of the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Philip Glass is composing new music for the play, and George Tsypin is designing the scenery.
Previews began July 8; opens Aug. 1.
Limited engagement through Aug. 22.
Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL." After marrying Helena, Bertram decides that "a young man married is a man that's marred" and bolts for the wars.
Helena chases after him.
All manner of complications ensue before the two finally settle down.
The British director Richard Jones, who staged "La Bete" on Broadway a few seasons ago, will bring his distinctive eye to bear on the Shakespearean comedy.
Aug. 5 to 29.
Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance at Central Park West and 81st Street.
Performances: Tuesdays through Sundays, 8 P.M.
Free.
Tickets are distributed at 6:15 the night of the performance; early arrival is recommended.
Information: (212) 861-7277.
"ANNIE WARBUCKS." The on-again, off-again sequel to "Annie" is on again, although the story has been through so many incarnations, who knows what lies in store for the famous redhead and onetime orphan, now living in the lap of Daddy Warbucks's luxury?
You've got to hand it to the director and lyricist Martin Charnin, the composer Charles Strouse and the book writer Thomas Meehan.
They don't give up.
Previews began July 7.
Opens Aug. 9.
Variety Arts Theater, 110 Third Avenue (at 13th Street), Manhattan.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3:30.
Tickets: Sundays through Thursdays, $35, $40; Fridays and Saturdays, $40, $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"BLACK COMEDY" and "THE WHITE LIARS." Nancy Marchand is to star in this revival of two one-act plays by Peter Shaffer, first presented on Broadway in 1967.
The latter piece, the curtain raiser, involves a young man and a fraudulent fortuneteller.
The former is about a sculptor, hoping to exhibit his wares to a wealthy buyer, until the lights in his apartment go out.
Mr.
Shaffer's trick is to reverse light and dark.
When the electricity is on, the stage is dark.
When it goes off, the stage lights come up, allowing the audience to observe a variety of characters stumbling over one another and the furniture.
Gerald Gutierrez directs.
Previews begin Aug. 11; opens Aug. 26; closes Oct. 10.
Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center.  1530 Broadway, at 45th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $38 to $42.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


Culture Clash


Maria Melendez and Alan Hinkley Jr.
Maria De Los Angeles Melendez, the daughter of Maria Delgado of Worcester, Mass., was married yesterday to Alan James Hinkley Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hinkley of Hallstead, Pa.
The Rev.
John H. Dabback performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Hallstead, Pa.
Mrs.
Melendez Hinkley, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Breed, Abbott &amp; Morgan.
She graduated from Syracuse University, as did her husband, and received a J.D. from Albany Law School.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
YO, HUNGRY WOLF!
A Nursery Rap.
By David Vozar.
Illustrated by Betsy Lewin.
Unpaged.
New York: Doubleday Books for Young Readers. $15.  (Ages 4 to 7)


Candidate's Coupons Won't Bring Charges
The District Attorney in Orange County, N.Y., says he has found no basis for filing criminal charges against a candidate who gave out discount coupons for Dairy Queen treats as a campaign gimmick.
The candidate, Peter Panse, 42, a high school teacher running for Town Supervisor in Wallkill, handed out coupons for discounts at a Dairy Queen in neighboring Middletown as he gathered signatures for his nominating petitions.
Next to the coupon a message said, "Help yourself to delicious savings from Dairy Queen and vote yourself a brighter future in the Democratic primary."


Abortion: The Fight For the Ambivalent Center


Are Free Lunches A Sign of the Future?
"Surge in Free Lunches at Schools a Sign of Tough Times"  [ June 20 ]  mirrors to a large degree the true state of the economy on Long Island as it affects a growing part of the population.
The economic recovery has lagged, and the absence of a stimulus to spark movement is apparent, as any program to create jobs regardless of their deleterious effect on the future of Long Island is heralded and acclaimed.
Ironically or pathetically, one of the largest areas that are applying for the free or reduced-price lunches are in districts that are considered upper middle class and beyond.
This should effectively quiet those who would worry about "welfare queens in their Cadillacs and Mercedeses trying to beat the system."


Sound Bytes; Building Virtual Reality for the Smithsonian
David K. Allison is a historian of science and technology and curator of the computers, information and society collection at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
Before joining the Smithsonian six years ago, he worked as a civilian historian for the Naval Research Laboratories. ("They think about the future all the time, and my job is to think about the past.")
Recently, working with the Microsoft Corporation and other computer companies, Dr.
Allison has been assembling a collection of personal computer hardware and software.
The first two acquisitions were Microsoft Word, a word processing program, and the first Microsoft Mouse.


Free Range Couch Patatoes
The enthusiasts are said to include Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, who uses one at home in rural Virginia.
In fact, some 3.8 million American households now have backyard dish antennas for receiving more than 250 channels of cable television and network broadcast programs disseminated via satellite.
That's 400,000 more dishes than last year, according to a recent survey by the viewer's guide Satellite TV Week, based in Fortuna, Calif.


A Menu of Water Views To Refresh Wilted Diners
"COOLER at the shore," the coda for every midsummer weather report, reflects more than the actual air temperature.
A water view is instantly refreshing, reviving the appetites of wilted urban souls beached miles from the sea.
It's time to seek out the restaurants and cafes scattered about Manhattan that have waterfalls, pools, fountains and giant aquariums, along with those that offer a riverfront or lakefront view.
AQUAVIT, 13 West 54th Street, (212) 307-7311.
An indoor waterfall spills down one wall of this soaring town-house dining room, offering restful distraction.
Seafood dominates the roster of Scandinavian specialties: delicate gravlax rimmed with spices, a plate of assorted herring dishes, sweet Scandinavian shrimp, rosy Arctic char enlivened with horseradish and Norwegian salmon either seared, poached or sauteed.
The flavorful roasted snow grouse and meaty loin of venison should please lovers of game and the berry-studded desserts, like intense lingonberry sorbet, feathery Swedish pancakes or blueberry tart, would satisfy the sweet tooth.


After 8 Years, Coliseum May Be More Than Issue
It has been eight years since Mortimer B. Zuckerman won the right to demolish the New York Coliseum and build something else on its site.
But finally, the next few days or weeks may reveal the shape of the building that will be built -- if anything is to be built there at all.
The coming week is likely to see a flurry of negotiations over the fate of the Coliseum site, at 59th Street and Columbus Circle, a prime location that makes it probably the best development site left in the city.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
107.04
107.55
128.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7195
1.7170
1.5044
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2805
1.2773
1.1918
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5045
1.4855
1.8942
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$390.10
$392.25
$359.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


To See More Blooms, Kill Those Seeds
THE object of gardening now is to keep the plants going.
But the object of nature is to begin to shut them down, that is for annuals, perennials and shrubs to set seed and get ready for the cold season ahead.
The goal for the gardener then is to prevent plants from putting all their strength into developing seed.
The exception, of course, is those gardeners who are interested in home hybridizing or self-sowing of a certain species.
They may want their plants to set seed.


Postwar Hanoi
To the Editor: Having recently returned from there myself, I found Philip Shenon's "Hanoi Two Decades After the War" (April 25) fascinating.
Mr.
Shenon was absolutely correct when he mentioned the dangers of the chaotic traffic; I was hit by a bicycle near Hoan Kiem Lake.
Travelers should take heed when crossing the street.
Regarding the "Hanoi Hilton": Unlike Mr.
Shenon, I had no problem getting photographs though I noticed some of the old women did not want to have their picture taken.
I guess after a lifetime of fear it is difficult to change.


JULY 18-24: A Blow to Major; Ambivalence About Europe Unnerves the Tories
What must the rest of Europe think of Britain?
That was what pundits in London were asking after the Maastricht Treaty to form a European union suddenly reared up and bit the Conservative Government of John Major.
For the rest of Europe -- 11 other countries have approved it and German ratification appears near -- the treaty is still the means of combining into a transnational entity with great economic power.
For England, it's a rattlesnake that won't stay in the sack.


Ryan's Line of Defense Is Up Again in N.F.L.
No, Buddy Ryan recalled, it was not fear.
No, it was more like a "healthy respect" for the only person he has ever met in his 59 years who could easily make him zip his loose lips.
"My dad was D. A. Ryan, but some called him Red," Ryan said the other day after a group of Houston Oilers, most of them rookies, had practiced for nearly three hours in gripping Texas heat.
"He used to ride in rodeos, and later he made his living painting houses. He was a no-nonsense guy. There was no question he was the boss. You didn't debate anything with my dad. It was, 'yes sir, no sir.'


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Signed Storm Davis, pitcher.
Designated John Hudek, pitcher, to Toledo of the International League for assignment.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Manuel Lee, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Jeff Huson, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Kevin Mitchell, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Waived Greg Cadaret, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Recalled Marcus Moore, pitcher, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Scott Fredrickson, pitcher, to Colorado Springs.
NEW YORK METS -- Recalled Ryan Thompson, outfielder, from Norfolk of the International League.
Placed Darrin Jackson, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Placed Mike Jackson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Tim Layana, pitcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Released Brian Casey, offensive tackle.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Michael Strahan, defensive end, to a two-year contract.
Waived Hassan Bailey and Mike McFarland, defensive backs.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed James Joseph, running back, to a two-year contract.
Released Robert Doherty, offensive lineman.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Gill Byrd, cornerback, and Mike Zandofsky, offensive lineman, to one-year contracts.
FRIDAY Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Waived Ted Power, pitcher.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Recalled Mark Hutton, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
Optioned Kevin Maas, first baseman-designated hitter, to Columbus.
National League  LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Sent Rod Nichols, pitcher, outright to Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Placed Howard Johnson, third baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Kevin Baez, shortstop, from Norfolk of the International League.
Football National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Lemuel Stinson, cornerback, to a one-year contract.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Named Gary Reynolds administrative assistant.
Signed Ron Lewis, wide receiver, to a one-year contract.
Waived Louis Clark, wide receiver.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Released Joe Washington and Curtis Gaspard, wide receivers; Jerone Davison, running back; and Nick Subis, offensive tackle.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Mike Kerr and Chris Slade, linebackers.
Released Scott Van Bellinger, linebacker.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Corey Miller and Marcus Buckley, linebackers.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Marcus Perry, offensive tackle.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Signed Ivory Lee Brown, wide receiver, to a two-year contract; Ernest Dye, offensive tackle, to a four-year contract; and Mark Tucker, offensive lineman.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Waived Everett McIver, defensive tackle; Keith Embray, defensive end; and Art Malone, safety.
Placed Louis Balady, wide receiver; Reginald Davidson, guard-tackle; and Chuck O'Brien, linebacker, on the waived-injured list.


Bailey Grinds It Out As New Career Begins
Carlton Bailey was sitting on a sofa the other day, minding his own business, talking about the potential of a glorious future as a Giants linebacker when . . .
"Ask him about the money. Ask him about that fat signing bonus."
The money.
The green.
These days, when people talk about Carlton Bailey, they inevitably bring up the M word.


Foreclosure Evictions Disputed
IMAGINE living quietly in an apartment, faithfully paying your rent and obeying the landlord's rules.
Now imagine that the landlord stops making his mortgage payments, and the bank that holds the mortgage forecloses.
And suddenly you are evicted so the bank can sell the property unencumbered.
Tenant advocates and some state legislators say that because of a loophole in the state's anti-eviction statute, such a situation is not uncommon.
In fact, they say, thousands of tenants have already been evicted while tens of thousands more may face similar fates.


Flight-Deck Dancing
National Multiple Sclerosis Society, on the U.S.S. Intrepid, July 15.


State Has Taken 4 Months to Tell Simple Tale in Bank Fraud Trial
When he first addressed the jurors nearly four months ago, John W. Moscow, the lead prosecutor in the trial of the Washington lawyer Robert A. Altman, warned that they would be asked to sift through "a lot of facts and a lot of names." But, he went on, the case was a simple one.
"Ask yourself, What did Altman know?" Mr.
Moscow said in his opening remarks.
"When did he know it? And what did he do? Because the actions he took in the past are the best evidence of what he knew at the time."


Latex Is Generally Appropriate Paint
OUTDOOR housepainting is among the most popular amateur home-improvement activities, but inexperience can lead to poor results.
Naturally it is important to select the rightpaint.
Latex generally is the most appropriate.
Choose alkyd only if the surface to be painted is heavily chalked and washing does little to stop that, if three or more coats of alkyd paint already adhere or if you plan to paint when temperatures are below 60 degrees or above 85, the the optimum limits for applying latex.


No Headline
I want to make it absolutely clear that I have commited no crime and have engaged in no illegal or unethical conduct.
REPRESENTATIVE DAN ROSTENKOWSKI, the Ways and Means chairman.  [ 1:3. ]


RUSSIA WITHDRAWS OLDER BANK NOTES
Apparently in a move to reassert control over the money supply, Russia's central bank announced today that with the Government's support it was withdrawing all bank notes issued before the beginning of the year.
The announcement in the middle of a summer weekend set off panic, with many Russians dashing to banks and shops to try to exchange or spend their old notes before Monday, when they will no longer be valid.


The Soul of Joubert Jones
DIVINE DAYS By Leon Forrest. 1,138 pp.
Chicago: Another Chicago Press/W.
W.
Norton. $32.50.


A Recuperating Visser Aims for N.F.L. Opener
A month after she broke her hip in a bizarre jogging accident in Central Park, LESLEY VISSER is recuperating at home, looking forward to a return to her CBS broadcast duties by fall.
It won't be easy.
Visser tripped over buckled pavement and skidded face-first, dislocating her hip and shattering her pelvis.
Since then she has had two operations plus plastic surgery on her face and must still remain flat on her back.


Basketball Hall Taps 10
Six players, two coaches, a referee and a reporter have been elected to the New York City Basketball Hall of Fame.
Four of the six players, SID TANNENBAUM, MAX ZASLOFSKY, TONY JACKSON and JIM MCMILLIAN, played for Jefferson before making names for themselves elsewhere: Tannenbaum, who died in 1986, at New York University and Zaslofsky, who died in 1985, at St.
John's in the 1940's; Jackson at St.
John's in the 1950's, and McMillian at Columbia in the 1960's.


'What We Have We Hold'
To the Editor:
As the editor and translator of "Hope Dies Last," the memoirs of Alexander Dubcek, I was very pleased to see Karl E. Meyer's review (June 27).
May I point out that during my extensive research when working on the book, I did not run across the statement attributed to Leonid Brezhnev by the reviewer: "Don't talk to me about 'socialism.' What we have we hold." Dubcek can therefore hardly be described as "polite to a fault" for omitting to mention it.


Sweat -- Manual Laborers of the (Mostly Third) World: A Gallery of Portraits
The eyes do not invite pity.
Smiling or quizzical or unblinkingly direct, they give little away -- neither what they have seen nor what they have endured.
The worker in a motorcycle factory in Madras, India (below), may look like an enigmatic Darth Vader, but the protective mask is of his own devising.
After polishing a gearbox part, he blasts metallic debris free with pressurized air, and safety masks are not a standard issue.
By comparison, the peasant women of the sea in Galicia, Spain (opposite, top), have an almost idyllic job.
Every October at low tide, they wade into the water near the coast, harvesting shellfish for two to three months.
A tea picker in a plantation high in the mountains of Rwanda (page 35) may labor in an area that is strikingly beautiful.
But it can get cold and wet up there, and a child has to work like an adult filling his basket with tea leaves.
In Brazil, a new class of migrant labor has arisen, known as boias-frias, or cold food, so named because workers in the cities are picked up by truck in the morning and taken to sugar cane fields, where they have a cold meal at lunchtime; at night they are driven back to the cities.
The women have one of the hardest jobs.
Following carts from which stalks are dropped, they chop the sugar cane and then plant the cuttings in trenches.
To salute these and other laborers of the world, the Brazilian-born photojournalist Sebastiao Salgado recently completed an epic project: "Workers: An Archeology of the Industrial Age." With an accompanying catalogue published by Aperture, the exhibition of 250 photographs is traveling to several American cities at the same time that it is being shown in Europe, Asia and Latin America.
Six years in the making, "Workers" documents the often fearful, sometimes wondrous and always elemental nature of sweat-from-the-brow labor.


New Life for an Old Critter
I WAS going to say that the latest car to come trotting my way was a new Ford Mustang, but then I realized that that wasn't right.
Aside from being a cheap play on words, the car actually came galloping with a great amount of thunder.
But that doesn't quite work either.
No, this thing came snarling.
Unfortunately, snarling is out, too.
I have owned both horses and Fords, and none of them snarled.
Slithered, that's what.


Profile: Anne K. Bingaman; Rousing Antitrust Law from Its 12-Year Nap
"COULDN'T you publish in September?" says Anne K. Bingaman as she greets a reporter in her new office on the third floor of the Justice Department.
"By then things are really going to be happening."
Barely a month in office as the nation's top antitrust cop, Ms.
Bingaman has already begun to turn on the lights in an area of law enforcement left in the dark for much of the last 12 laissez-faire years.
With her background as a plaintiff's lawyer added to the Administration's expressed commitment to more aggressive enforcement, 1993 could well mark the beginning of a new era in antitrust law -- an era that will find it in a prominent role in international trade policy and the domestic economy.


Car Rental Cutbacks
Business losses have led to the demise of at least one rental car business and cutbacks in another company in recent weeks.
In France, Thrifty Car Rental said it had temporarily stopped taking reservations because of the liquidation of the French company that operated Thrifty there.
Through its international reservations system, Thrifty is now accepting reservations in Avignon and 10 other cities, but not at de Gaulle or Orly airports in Paris, the two busiest rental spots in the country.


Jill N. Paolini, Joshua H. Epstein
Jill Noel Paolini, the daughter of Carol J. Stannard of Miami and Ronald C. Paolini of Auburn, Calif., was married in New York last evening to Joshua Harry Epstein, the son of Judith R. Epstein of Wesport, Conn., and Marc I. Epstein of New York.
Judith S. Kaye, the Chief Judge of the State of New York, officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Epstein, 26, is a candidate for a master's degree in early childhood education at the Bank Street College of Education.
She graduated from the University of Nevada at Las Vegas.


Business Diary/July 18-23
COMPANIES Compaq Plugs In for High Sales and High Profits


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 25, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1.
78
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
53
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
3
23
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
67
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
5
30
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
6
7
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
7
5
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
8
4
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
9
3
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
10
14
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
11 *
5
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.50.) Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
12
3
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A television star encounters shades of her past on a visit to the Napa Valley.
13
4
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $6.99.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store.
14
3
MCNALLY'S LUCK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) The quest for a kidnapped cat leads to cases of ransom and homicide.
15
12
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
2
13
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
4
THE MAKING OF "JURASSIC PARK," by Don Shay and Jody Duncan. (Ballantine, $18.) An account of the production of the current hit film.
4
5
I, TINA, by Tina Turner with Kurt Loder. (Avon, $5.50.) The rock star tells her life story.
5 *
10
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President of the United States.
6
507
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
7
23
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8
93
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9
11
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
10
6
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
11 *
4
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
12 *
114
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
13
2
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $9.95.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the 1980's.
14
12
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
15
24
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
127
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
102
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
143
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
16
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More of the author's tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 10, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


PUMPED UP
'Good for her!" was my first reaction, after reading Deborah Gimelson's Hers column. My boyfriend was appalled: If a man had written that article, referring to the power he felt in being "the Provider, the Sophisticate, the Worldly One," he would be labeled a sexist.


THIS YEAR'S PROPHET
Prophets are unsettling ("This Year's Prophet," by Thomas Fields-Meyer, June 27).
They rage and rail and prod us into remembering the difference between what is and what should be -- disturbing equilibriums, pricking consciences.
Hence, they're rarely popular.
And saints are just plain hard to live with.
So this article on Michael Lerner and Michael Kelly's on Hillary Rodham Clinton ("Saint Hillary," May 23) are predictable but disappointing responses to the challenges their subjects pose: to end the futile dance between a conservative neocapitalism and a well-meaning but passionless liberalism.
The generation of new political language that can speak of emotional, existential and spiritual needs -- the politics of meaning -- is revolutionary rather than reactionary.
As such, it deserves the sort of thoughtful discussion that your journalists are trying to avoid.
REBECCA ADAMS, M.D.
Stanford, Calif.


Cheryl Strauss, David Einhorn
Dr.
H.
William Strauss and Dr.
Judith Strauss of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cheryl Beth Strauss to David Michael Einhorn, a son of Stephen and Nancy Einhorn of Milwaukee.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Strauss, 24, is a magna cum laude graduate of Cornell University.
She is a reporter at Investment Dealers Digest, a weekly magazine in New York.
Her father, a pioneer in nuclear medicine, is a vice president of diagnostic drug discovery at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in Lawrenceville, N.J., and a professor of radiology at the Harvard Medical School in Boston.
Her mother, a pediatrician, owns Strauss Healthcare Consulting in Princeton, a consulting concern in the field of health-care management.


POSTINGS: At the Corner of 8th and 43d; A Hotel Renovation, And Ice-Cream Parlor
The tough corner of Eighth Avenue and 43d Street.
The city's largest single-room-occupancy hotel.
Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream.
Incongruous as this combination may seem, construction of the ice-cream parlor in the ground-floor corner of the Times Square Hotel is to begin this fall, following the recent grant of $234,050 by the New York State Urban Development Corporation.
"It should be ready for the next ice-cream season," said Rosanne Haggerty, executive director of the nonprofit Common Ground Community Housing Development Fund Corporation, which is renovating the hotel and received the grant through its Times Square Jobs Training subsidiary.


Laura Walton, Andrew Hirschfeld
Laura Cathlyn Walton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Lauck Walton 3d of Woodstock, Va., was married yesterday to Andrew Bruce Hirschfeld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Hirschfeld of Massapequa Park, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian minister, and Rabbi Ari Fridkis officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Hirschfeld, 27, is an associate with Everett, Johnson &amp; Breckinridge, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She also received her law degree there.
Her father is an assistant general counsel with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in Washington.


Poetry Gets Real, Flashing Its Form on MTV
The distance between rap and poetry has always been as thin as the page of a book.
That gap disappears in "Spoken Word," an energetic and wry all-poetry edition of the smash MTV series "Unplugged" (to be shown Wednesday at 10 P.M.).
The show is full of MTV moments.
Maggie Estep stands center stage, wearing tight black jeans, a black tank top and no shoes.
Lights flash in the background, bass-heavy backup music plays and she yells out a self-mocking poem about "the stupid jerk I'm obsessed with." The camera swirls and tilts as she talks about how the stupid jerk looks over her shoulder as she talks to another guy "Who adores me/ And would bark like a dog/ And wave to strangers/ If I asked him." Here is poetry as performance, poetry as video.
And though most purists would prefer to ignore this truth, here is poetry returned to its roots in song and chant.
There's nothing to say an MTV moment can't be poetic, as long as you don't think Matthew Arnold and T. S. Eliot own the poetry franchise.


Sallie Stockton, Andrew Bunn
Sallie Bradley Stockton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Stockton of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Andrew Overman Bunn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Freeman Bunn of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
William H. Strain performed the ceremony at the Calvary Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Bunn, 26 and a graduate of William Smith College, teaches the fourth grade at the Kent Place School in Summit.
Her father is the general manager of NYT Custom Publishing, a division of The New York Times Company.


One Poet's War
A MOMENT OF WAR A Memoir of the Spanish Civil War.
By Laurie Lee.
Illustrated. 178 pp.
New York: The New Press.


Health Care's 'Gang of Five'
To the Editor:  Leonard Orland ("Health Reform Runs Antitrust Risk," Viewpoints, July 11) clearly cautions all of us about the importance of antitrust laws.
The economic incentives that allowed the "Gang of Five" large national insurance companies -- Aetna, Cigna, Metropolitan Life, Prudential and Travelers -- to gain wealth and power during the last 30 years are precisely those that have placed many of our citizens at unacceptable financial risk when seeking health care today.


Sea Grass, Tidal Creeks and New Homes
Not too many years ago, the grassy wetlands between this picturesque island and the mainland was considered wasteland, good only for filling in so it could be built upon.
Some islanders, like the novelist Eugenia Price, have lived on large tracts beside the marshes here for decades.


'Cry, the Beloved Country' Teaches A Tragic Lesson
When it was first produced on Broadway in 1949, Maxwell Anderson and Kurt Weill's "Lost in the Stars" was admired for its artfulness, its daring and its conscience.
Here was "a musical tragedy" that dealt unflinchingly with the race problem in South Africa and called for compassion from men of every color, if "the beloved country" was not to turn into a living hell.
By 1972, the situation in South Africa had worsened considerably.
Curiously, though, "Lost in the Stars," which enjoyed a brief Broadway revival that year, didn't seem more prophetic than ever.
It seemed phony.
While Weill's music hadn't lost its melodic ache, the passage of time had brought out the melodrama in Anderson's book about a black youth who kills a white man, and emphasized the self-consciousness of his lyrics.


Corrections
A chart on July 11 with the Wall Street column, about analysts' worst five "sell" recommendations, included an erroneous stock listing supplied by Bloomberg Business News.
After a sell recommendation by Eli S. Lustgarten of PaineWebber, the stock of TRW rose 4.1 percent, not 28.3 percent.


POSTINGS: 154 East 70th Street; A High School In a Town House
An Upper East Side schoolhouse that has been empty for three years is to be reopened this fall as a new private school.
The five-floor limestone building, at 154 East 70th Street, between Third and Lexington Avenues, was purchased last month for $2.62 million by a group of investors who wish to remain anonymous, according to Ed Winslow, a broker with Massey Knakal Realty Services of Manhattan, the agent for the transaction.


The Pleasure of Their Companies
THE AMERICAN EAGLE The Ascent of Bob Crandall and American Airlines.
By Dan Reed.
Illustrated. 302 pp.
New York:  A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $23.95.
KING ICAHN The Biography of a Renegade Capitalist.
By Mark Stevens.
Research by Carol Bloom Stevens. 326 pp.
New York: Dutton. $23.
DANGEROUS DREAMERS The Financial Innovators From Charles Merrill to Michael Milken.
By Robert Sobel. 260 pp.
New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons. $27.95.
CONTROL YOUR DESTINY OR SOMEONE ELSE WILL How Jack Welch Is Making General Electric the World's Most Competitive Corporation.
By Noel M. Tichy and Stratford Sherman. 384 pp.
New York: Currency/Doubleday. $24.


Long Hearings on Ireland's Beef Scandal End
As only the 25th richest country in the world, Ireland can hardly be expected to produce corruption scandals on the scale of those in the United States, Japan or Italy.
But accusations of fraud involving more than $300 million in the beef industry -- one of the country's most important -- have portrayed Ireland as the bad butcher of Europe in the longest, costliest public investigation in the country's 71 years of independence.


POP
Thursday
DWIGHT YOAKUM.
Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas.
A true honky-tonker with a country-rock edge, Dwight Yoakum sings with a down-home ache in his voice, while his songs make most new traditionalist country singers sound sugar-coated. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
Friday
RAY CHARLES.
Radio City Music Hall, 1260 Avenue of the Americas.
The great American singer transmutes pop warhorses into cries from the heart. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-4777.
Next Sunday
FESTIVAL NEW ORLEANS.
Jones Beach Theater.
A traveling version of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, headlined by the funk and rock of the Radiators and also featuring New Orleans food; try the Crawfish Monica. 6 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (516) 221-1000.
Aug. 3-8
CLASSICAL JAZZ AT LINCOLN CENTER.
A series of concerts, films and lectures.
On Aug. 3 at Alice Tully Hall, "Monk's Point" commemorates a 1963 concert by the Thelonious Monk big band.
On Aug. 4 at Bruno Walter Auditorium, there is a free illustrated lecture about Billie Holiday by a biographer, Robert O'Meally.
On Aug. 5 at the Walter Reade Theater, the clarinetist and musicologist Dr.
Michael White presents a selection of New Orleans jazz on film.
On Aug. 6, "Battle Royale: Trumpets and Tenors," a jam session and cutting contest, brings together trumpeters (among them Wynton Marsalis, Nicholas Payton and Red Rodney) and saxophonists (David Murray, George Coleman, Joshua Redman).
On Aug. 7, two pianists, Geri Allen and Marcus Roberts, perform works for septet and octet commissioned by Lincoln Center.
And on Aug. 8, the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra plays Duke Ellington works inspired by places, including the "Deep South Suite" and the "Paris Blues Suite." Concerts begin at 8 P.M.
Tickets for concerts: $35.
Lecture on Aug. 4 at 6 P.M. is free; film on Aug. 5 at 7 and 9 P.M. is $10.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
Aug. 10
BLUES MUSIC FESTIVAL '93.
Paramount.
A Memphis and Chicago blues summit, with two guitar patriarchs -- B. B. King and Buddy Guy -- heading a bill that includes the brawny blues of Koko Taylor and Lonnie Brooks and the singing and harmonica playing of Junior Wells. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $29.50 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
Aug. 18 and Aug. 24-25
STEELY DAN.
Madison Square Garden (Aug. 18; 8 P.M.; $28.50 and $27.50; 212-307-7171) and Jones Beach Theater (Aug. 24-25; 8 P.M.; $25.50 and $35.50; 516-221-1000).
Steely Dan hadn't reached the arena circuit when its masterminds, Donald Fagen and Walter Becker, decided they preferred the studio to the stage.
But Steely Dan's cool, sinuous, enigmatic songs have held up brilliantly since their 1970's heyday, and Mr.
Fagen has new songs to add to the canon.
Aug. 21
MIDNIGHT OIL AND ZIGGY MARLEY.
Jones Beach Theater.
A double bill of political fervor with a beat.
Midnight Oil are steeped in mainstream rock, with some Australian idiosyncrasies; Ziggy Marley honors the reggae of his father, Bob Marley, by putting his own twists into it. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (516) 221-1000.
Sept. 3
SADE.
Jones Beach Theater.
Supple, understated songs about love and obsession. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.50.
Information: (516) 221-1000.


Catharsis: Sweat, Drinks and Rock-and-Roll
ROCK-AND-ROLL is a sweaty enough enterprise without summer figuring into the picture.
Think of it: the long hair, the energy, the jacked-up beat, the floor crammed with writhing, distortion-crazed revelers.
Ultimately, the archetypal rock experience for any generation is going into some small, tightly packed club, dancing and losing oneself for an hour or two, and re-emerging sweat-soaked and transformed.
The image might not be a pretty one, but there's nothing polite or demure about shared catharsis.


In the Dark, in the Park, Communing With the Stars
NEW YORKERS have some strange ideas about nature.
Who else would surround miniature gardens with barbed wire, roast pigs on the top of Sanitation Department parking depots or try to feed empty crack vials to hapless, innocent squirrels?


Jeanne Kuester, Richard Markey
Jeanne Marie Kuester, a vice president of the Merrill Lynch Insurance Group in Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard C. Markey, a senior manager in Philadelphia, with the accounting and consulting firm of Arthur Anderson &amp; Company.
The Rev.
Paula Curtis performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Union Chapel on Shelter Island, L.I.


Immigrants Forgoing Citizenship While Pursuing American Dream
For most of his 12 years in this country, Armando Espinosa, an immigrant from Ecuador, had absolutely no intention of becoming a United States citizen.
What would be the purpose? he asked himself.
With a green card in his wallet, he led a comfortable life in Queens, working as an industrial mechanic while his two children flourished in public schools.
He certainly did not consider himself American.
"I am Ecuadorean in my blood and my gut," he said. "I do not even like apple pie."


Fighting to Save 120-Year-Old Levee That Protects Farmers Livelihoods
To understand the importance of the fight to save the Sny Island levee, one has to drive 50 miles, down a winding highway that runs along a rugged limestone ridge, through half a dozen tiny towns and acre after acre of high corn.
For the entire stretch, the Sny levee looms in the distance.
At 54 miles long, this monster levee system is the second biggest on the Mississippi River.
If it were not for the Sny, all this land would now be under water, a six-mile-wide lake stretching from the ridge to the river bank on the Missouri side.


Henry L. Jamieson, 81; Headed Mutual Funds
Henry L. Jamieson, chairman of the Franklin Group of Funds in San Mateo, Calif., who was in the mutual fund business from its early days, died on Tuesday at his home in Menlo Park, Calif.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, his company said.


Off-Duty Correction Officer Slain in His Car
An off-duty correction officer was killed when a gunman fired into his car at a stoplight in Harlem early yesterday morning, the police said.
The officer, Reynard T. George, 26, of Brooklyn, was driving on 125th Street with another correction officer at 3:50 A.M. when he stopped for a red light at Frederick Douglass Avenue and a man on the corner fired several shots into the car, the police said.


On Sunday; Rubble Buries New Yorkers, Even in Death
FOR the living, New York has become such a city of routine co-existence with debris -- abandoned cars skeletonized like prairie oxen, housing towers arising on odoriferous garbage fill, human wreckage napping and ranting in doorways -- that Assemblywoman Catherine T. Nolan's new law banning the burial of dead amid construction and demolition debris seems to strike at the heart of this city's sense of self.
Fittingly, this law originated in Queens, where F. Scott Fitzgerald and Robert Moses separately fixated on brooding ash heaps as a possibility for literary metaphor and landfill progress.
Ms.
Nolan's concern is no less mortal.


Next Stop on the Tour: The Levi's Store
IT'S not that you can't buy Levi's jeans in Brazil, New Zealand or hundreds of other places on this planet.
But they won't be stacked 18 feet high, in 23 styles and two dozen colors, the way they are at the Original Levi's Store on Lexington Avenue, across the street from Bloomingdale's in midtown Manhattan.
The 6,300-square-foot emporium sells the hard-working, American output of the Levi Strauss company -- shirts, jackets and jeans.
Since it opened seven months ago, the store has become a certifiable tourist attraction.


Perspectives: Manhattan Office Assessments; Weaker Shoulders for the Property Tax
DON'T talk assessments to Peter S. Duncan.
It is true that the building he runs as executive vice president of George Comfort &amp; Sons -- 200 Madison Avenue, at 35th Street -- is down in value from past years.
But what matters to him is that he is in a leasing mode again.
The 550,000-square-foot office building is out from limbo after having been purchased by George Comfort and a partner, Loeb Realty and Development Corporation, of Manhattan.
It was one of the properties that was forced into receivership when the Government froze the assets of the late President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines.


How to Think About Science
THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE Science Without Legend,  Objectivity Without Illusions.
By Philip Kitcher. 421 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press.


Aswers to Summer's Idle Mysteries
A casual primer on summer: two dozen things to muse upon when it's too hot for deep thinking.
1.
LONG DAYS BUT SHORT WEEKS: The average number of phone calls made by Manhattan businesses each summer weekday is about 20.5 million, except on Fridays; then, said New York Telephone, it is 17.1 million.


Fernandez Shakes Off Those Post-Paris Blues
She'll always have Paris, but Mary Joe Fernandez is more than ready to move on in her tennis career.
And the French Open runner-up has had the perfect opportunity to do so as the top-seeded player at the Pathmark Women's Tennis Classic.
"Mahwah is like a new start for me," said the 21-year-old Fernandezbefore defeating Mary Pierce, 6-3, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4 in the semifinals tonight.
"It's my first event in preparation for the United States Open. My goal is not to play great or win here. I'm really just interested in warming up and in getting the practice I'm going to need for the U.S. Open in the next couple of weeks."


A Touch of Class for the Court
While members of the Senate Judiciary Committee droned through Ruth Bader Ginsburg's hearings last week, the nominee could have been forgiven for thinking, Don't scoff, hang on a little longer and you're in.
Endure she did, showing not only knowledge, but also the patience and courtesy befitting a justice of the highest court.
No thanks to the committee, the hearings displayed the workings of a focused legal mind.
She dwarfed not only her questioners but all the recent nominees to the Supreme Court she will soon join.
Fortunately the senators realize this much: She deserves speedy confirmation.


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring special summer activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
On permanent display are items relating to film, television and video, like costumes, sets and filming equipment.
On exhibition through August is "Changing Faces," more than 450 photographs and artifacts that examine the work of hair stylists and makeup artists.
Through Aug. 1: "All in the Family: The Classic Melodramas of John Stahl and Douglas Sirk," movies by Hollywood's masters of the family melodrama.
Aug. 6 through Sept. 5: "Gossamer Garbage: A George Kuchar Film and Video Retrospective," poverty-row classics by a master of underground film and video.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children under 12; free for children under 4; $2 additional fee for screenings.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, Central Park West at 79th Street.
"Barosaurus," a permanent display, features a freestanding dinosaur more than 40 feet high.
Naturemax theater: Through January, "Antarctica," a film about the world's highest, driest, windiest and coldest continent.
Hours: 10:30 A.M., 11:30 A.M., 1:30 P.M. and 3:30 P.M.
"Tropical Rain Forest," a film exploring the evolution of the rain forest and the recent threat to its existence.
Hours: 12:30, 2:30 and 4:30 P.M.
Double feature, Fridays and Saturdays at 6 and 7:30 P.M.
Movie admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children under 12.
Museum hours: Sundays through Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 769-5100.
BROOKLYN'S HISTORY MUSEUM, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
On permanent display are photographs, paintings, drawings and memorabilia relating to Brooklyn.
On display through 1993 is "AIDS/Brooklyn," a collection of photographs, taped interviews and personal belongings of Brooklyn residents with AIDS.
Saturday, "Beyond Kielbasa: Polish Greenpoint," a tour of Polish butcher shops, bakeries and food markets, led by Annie Hauck-Lawson, an expert in the preparation and consumption of food.
The tour ends with an optional lunch at a local restaurant; Aug. 15, "Under the Boardwalk: Coney Island Memory Walk,", John Kriskiewiez, an urban historian, leads a walking tour of the Boardwalk.
Tours: $10 with reservations, $12 without reservations; $5 for children under 12.
Aug. 7, "Gallery Adventures: Bats, Hats and Stats," a day for Dodgers fans, 1 to 4 P.M.; $3 (includes museum admission).
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; $1 for the elderly and children under 12; free on Wednesdays.
Information: (718) 624-0890.
CHINATOWN HISTORY MUSEUM, 70 Mulberry Street, Chinatown.
On permanent display is "Remembering New York Chinatown," a collection of oral histories, photographs and other artifacts.
Through October: two photography displays, "The People of Chinatown," by Nina Kuo, and "From Canton to New York: The Broken Tradition," by Leh-Chyun Lin.
Today, Aug. 8 and Aug. 22, 10:30 A.M., the museum is offering a historical walking tour of Chinatown, including a 25-minute slide show.
Tour: $10, reservations are necessary.
Open Tuesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Admission: $1; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 619-4785
THE CLOISTERS, Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights.
A branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art with medieval art and architecture, including sculpture, tapestries, manuscripts and crafts.
Summer gallery talks include: Saturday: "The Old World for the New: The Cloisters as Architecture"; Aug. 7: "Four Cloisters"; Aug. 14: "The Cult of the Virgin Mary"; Aug. 21: "Water and Its Symbolism in Medieval Art"; Aug. 28: "The Arts of Medieval Monasticism"; Sept. 4: " "Outsiders": Medieval Depictions of Jews and Non-Europeans." Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
All lectures are at noon and 2 P.M. on Saturdays and are free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12 accompanied by an adult.
Information: (212) 923-3700.
CONEY ISLAND, Astroland Amusement Park, 1000 Surf Avenue, Brooklyn.
Hours: Noon to midnight daily, through Sept. 6.
Rides are $1.50 to $3; a pay-one-price admission of $12.99 allows unlimited access to the major rides in scheduled sessions.
Information: (718) 265-2100.
ELLIS ISLAND IMMIGRATION MUSEUM, photographs, artifacts and displays documenting immigration to the United States from 1892 to 1924.
Circle Line ferries to Ellis Island leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan every 30 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily; boats also leave Liberty State Park in Jersey City every 45 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. daily.
All ferries stop at Liberty Island.
Round-trip fare: $6; $5 for the elderly, $3 for ages 3 to 17; free for children under 3.
Free admission to the island and museum.
Information: (212) 269-5755 or (201) 435-9499.
EMPIRE STATE BUILDING OBSERVATORY, Fifth Avenue at 34th Street.
Views of the metropolitan region from more than 1,000 feet above street level.
The observatory is open daily from 9:30 A.M. to midnight.
Admission: $3.50; $1.75 for the elderly and children 5 to 12; free for children under 5.
Information: (212) 736-3100.
HAYDEN PLANETARIUM, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 81st Street.
Daily through March: "Orion Rendezvous: A Star Trek Voyage of Discovery," a Sky show, narrated by LeVar Burton, which takes you on a voyage of the universe in the 24th century, Mondays through Fridays, at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, hourly from 1 to 4 P.M.; "The Star Trek Exhibit: A Retrospective of the 60's," alien costumes, Starfleet uniforms, Vulcan ear tips and assorted props and photographs from the original 1960's television series.
"Laser Drive 3-D," a laser show with animation and pop music, is presented Fridays and Saturdays at 7, 8:30 and 10 P.M.
Admission: $8.50.
Planetarium admission: $7; $6 for students and the elderly; $4 for children 2 through 12; free for children under 2.
Information: (212) 769-5921.
INTREPID SEA-AIR-SPACE MUSEUM, Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, at the Hudson River.
This converted World War II aircraft carrier features an A-12 Blackbird, the world's fastest plane, and a 1936 lightship, No. 112 Nantucket.
Also on view are items from the Persian Gulf war, including Patriot missiles, an A-6 bomber and Scud missile wreckage.
Through Sept. 6: "Seafest '93" lets visitors board police boats, fire boats, tugboats, antique sailing ships and lightships docked at a 330-foot barge.
Through Sept. 7: "The Battle of the Atlantic," 50th anniversary exhibit including photos and artifacts that commemorate the forced withdrawal of German U-Boats from the North Atlantic during World War II.
Through Oct. 12: "The Age of Exploration," features models, costumes, tapestries, maps and video presentations that chronicle the exploration of the "New World." Hours (through Sept. 6): daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; last ticket sold at 4 P.M.
Admission: $7; $6 for the elderly; $4 for children 6 to 12; free for children under 6.
Information: (212) 245-0072.
MUSEUM OF TELEVISION AND RADIO, 25 West 52d Street.
A collection of historic radio and television broadcasts, as well as exhibitions of other media, including drawings, posters and photographs.
Through Oct. 3: "Star Trek: The Next Generation," a screening series along with gallery displays, including the Emmy Award-winning costumes and masks.
Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.; until 8 P.M. on Thursdays.
Admission: $5; $4 for students; $3 for the elderly and children under 13.
Information: (212) 621-6800.
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT MUSEUM AND MARKETPLACE, 14 Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
This 19th-century port district has a large fleet of historic vessels as well as an array of restaurants, shops and bars.
Museum, 207 Front Street, lower Manhattan.
Special events include: Through Sept. 6: "The Original Cash Machines," a collection of mechanical banks from 1865 to 1915; Aug. 5 through March; "Twelve Ties to Tradition," model ships made in New York, toys and working design models.
Museum hours: weekdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; weekends, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed holidays.
Museum admission: $6; $5 for the elderly, $4 for students, $3 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 669-9400 for the museum; (212) 732-7678 for the marketplace.
STATUE OF LIBERTY, on Liberty Island.
Visitors can climb stairs to the statue's crown daily, from 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Circle Line ferries to Liberty Island leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan every 30 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; ferries also leave from Liberty State Park in Jersey City every 45 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
All ferries returning from Liberty Island stop at Ellis Island.
Round-trip fare is $6; $5 for the elderly; $3 for children 3 to 17 years old; children under 3 free.
Admission is free to Liberty Island.
Information: (212) 269-5755 or (201) 435-9499.
UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, entrance at First Avenue and 46th Street, Turtle Bay.
Hourlong tours with visits to the Security Council and the General Assembly leave every 15 minutes from the main lobby.
Tours cost $6.50; $4.50 for the elderly and students, $3.50 for children aged 5 to 15.
Children under 5 not permitted on tour.
Groups of 15 or more require reservations.
Information: (212) 963-7713.


Shakespeare and Other Messages on Stage
WHEN Lisa Gay Hamilton was sent by her agent to audition for Doll Tearsheet, the rowdy prostitute, in the New York Shakespeare Festival production of "Henry VI, Part II," she objected to the stereotyping of black actors, but showed up anyway.
"Excuse me, I'd like to do Lady Percy instead," she remembered saying to the director, JoAnne Akalitis.
The next thing she had a call back to read for Joseph Papp.
And the role was hers.
"They may not have thought of me in the first place," Ms.
Hamilton said.
"But then I felt if actors of color can challenge the system and get directors and producers to see new possibilities -- well, they did."


Clinton's Gay Policy: Cave-In or Milestone?
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S compromise solution last week for allowing homosexuals to serve in the military highlighted two questions that often crop up with his Presidency: should we judge a President by what he says he intends to do or by what he gets done?
When is a compromise legitimate, and when is it just another broken promise?
The new policy for the military could best be labeled "Don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue -- and don't read the fine print." Formally, the policy changes little.
Homosexuals may serve in the military only if they agree to be celibate and silent regarding their sexual orientation.
Implicitly, though, it changes a lot, by encouraging commanding officers to be restrained -- not to read the fine print, in effect -- in dealing with homosexuals who are discreet about their sexual practices.


Private School, Public Need
The stunning news last month that Peddie, a small private secondary school here, had just received a $100 million gift provoked two responses from this tiny, tax-weary borough of 5,000 people: First, congratulations.
Second, can you help us out?
"When they received the money, I called them up the following day to congratulate them," said Mayor Ernest Turp, a Peddie graduate.
"Then a couple of weeks later, I said I'd like to sit down with the headmaster and review their relationship with the borough. The people are very concerned. They would like to see Peddie make a good-sized contribution."


Kathryn Bowen, D. W. Poole 3d
Kathryn Moore Bowen, a daughter of Robert M. Bowen of Princeton, N.J., and Marcia M. Jones of Fort Washington, Pa., was married yesterday to Donald Whitman Poole 3d, a son of the Rev.
Poole Jr. of Rye, N.Y., and Carole H. MacKenzie of Hartford.
The Rev.
Carol Brandt, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton.
Mrs.
Poole, 28, teaches math and English at the Buckley School in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did her husband, and she received a master's degree in education from Manhattanville College.
Her father is president and chief executive of Dreman Value Management, an asset management concern in Jersey City.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Marion Bowen of Princeton and James Jones of Fort Washington.


Latex Is Generally Appropriate Paint
OUTDOOR housepainting is among the most popular amateur home-improvement activities, but inexperience can lead to poor results.
Naturally it is important to select the right paint.
Latex generally is the most appropriate.
Choose alkyd only if the surface to be painted is heavily chalked and washing does little to stop that, if three or more coats of alkyd paint already adhere or if you plan to paint when temperatures are below 60 degrees or above 85, the the optimum limits for applying latex.


THE DETOXING OF PRISONER 88A0802
I am a young woman who worked in a men's prison for two years.
Inmates can be taught life skills ("how to be a person," as one told me) and walked through rehabilitation programs, one step at a time.
With a little caring, guidance and encouragement, those who really want to change can do so.


From the Sea, Italian Style
WHEN it first appeared in bookstores this spring, "Cucina del Mare" by Evan Kleinman (Morrow) was inviting.
Now, in midsummer, the light, fresh touch it espouses with seafood is compelling.
Ms.
Kleinman, the owner of several restaurants in the Los Angeles area, has a way of deftly combining a few key ingredients that result in bright, savory dishes whose flavors have great integrity.
The subtitle of the book is "Fish and Seafood Italian Style." As anyone familiar with how fish and seafood are prepared in Italy already knows, simplicity is the rule.
Unlike many American restaurant chefs, Ms.
Kleinman avoids overburdening her creations with an excess of trendy items.


How Mary Shelley Wrote Her Ghost Tale
GRANTED, the Stageworks/ Summit production of "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein" does not resemble any of the 30-something film versions of the classic tale of terror.
That much is apparent, not just from the emphatic title, though we are spared its subtitle: "The Modern Prometheus." From the first utterings of the dour authoress (circa 1818), one senses that scholarship, not sensation, is to be the evening's intent.
That is reinforced by the pedantic tone, academic language and slavish attention to presumed authenticity by Robert Pridham, the director, who also adapted Mary Shelley's novel.
And it's compounded by Cynthia Boorujy's prim and grim performance as Mary.


Johnson Plans to Go to Camp On Day When Giants Are Off
The Giants scrimmaged for an hour today and Coach Dan Reeves liked what he saw.
But at the end of the scrimmage came the real news: Reeves said linebacker Pepper Johnson told him he was going to report to camp on Sunday.
Johnson, who has wanted to renegotiate his contract, has missed camp so far, amassing $24,000 in fines.
Now he is supposedly going to show up when the team has the day off.


JULY 18-24: Plain Soot; The E.P.A. Discovers The Worst Killer in the Air
Twenty-three years after the Environmental Protection Agency was created, it is near to figuring out which air pollution is the most important.
It appears not to be anything chemically fancy like sulphur dioxide or ozone.
Rather, it is soot: breathable particles appear to be causing 50,000 to 60,000 deaths a year, according to studies reviewed by the E.P.A. and researchers at the Harvard School of Public Health.
No other pollutant even comes near.


Rominger Races to 2d in Tour de France
With an impressively powerful ride, Tony Rominger jumped from fourth place to second in the Tour de France today as he won a long time trial and dealt Miguel Indurain his first defeat in a Tour race against the clock in three years.
Rominger, a Swiss who rides for the CLAS team from Spain, was irresistible.
He covered the 48 kilometers (30 miles) from Bretigny sur Orge to Montlhery in 57 minutes 2 seconds, a dazzling speed of 50.4 kilometers an hour (a bit more than 31 miles an hour), despite a flat tire with 2 kilometers to go.
Just Friday, Chris Boardman of England set a world record of 52.2 kilometers in an hour's race against the clock and he used a special bicycle on a flat track, not a rolling road with two hilly climbs.


The Pleasures Of Self-Discovery
They say if you want to find happiness, look in your own backyard.
After reading "Plying the Road to Rescue All Those Who Are Stuck"  [ June 20 ]  I was reminded of a time many years ago when I signed up for an adult-ed course in Great Neck about automobile repairing.
I was taught how to fix a flat tire and also, what to do if your car overheats.
There were 30 people in the class; I was not only surrounded by car buffs but I was, indeed, the oldest of the lot.


Postwar Hanoi
To the Editor: In the year since I returned from six weeks exploring Vietnam, I have read perhaps a dozen articles on this country, mostly focused on points of interest in the southern half of Vietnam.
It was with great interest that I read Philip Shenon's article on Hanoi.
Though he detailed his trip to the Ho Chi Minh mausoleum, Mr.
Shenon did not even mention the Ho Chi Minh Museum next door.
The museum was designed by a team of three architects from Vietnam, Russia and Czechoslovakia and has been open since late 1991.
Far from being a boring propaganda showcase, it is an unusual masterpiece presenting the life of a Vietnamese leader in the context of world events -- cultural, political, scientific and artistic.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
EDWARD HOPPER
Edward Hopper did not want for public appreciation of his work during his lifetime, but since his death in 1967 he has achieved classic stature among American painters.
The Whitney Museum, which gave him his first one-man show in 1920, received his entire estate of 2,500 paintings, drawings and prints from his widow in 1970.


Francis Bouygues, Building Mogul And Media Executive, Dies at 70
Francis Bouygues, a hard-nosed French businessman who built one of the world's largest construction groups and later diversified into the media business, died today at his vacation home in St.
Malo, Britanny.
He was 70.
The cause of death was a heart attack, medical officials said in a statement.


Miss Paradise, Mr. Ferrarie
Christine Paradise, an analyst, and Dante Francis Ferrarie, a trader, both at Salomon Brothers, the New York stock brokerage, were married yesterday at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Msgr.
Edward Connors officiated.
The bride, a daughter of Robert and Camille Paradise of Scarsdale, graduated from the Catholic University of America.
Her father is the publisher of Barron's magazine in New York.


Simmons Relaxes
Since suffering a heart attack at age 43 on June 8, TED SIMMONS has been going all out to live the healthy life.
But to hear Simmons tell it, the major boost he has given his health has been quitting his job as general manager of the financially strapped Pittsburgh Pirates.
Simmons said he would like to return to baseball, but not as a general manager, and especially not with Pittsburgh.
"Being general manager of the Pirates is big stress management," he said. (AP)


South Asia Toll: 2,100
The death toll in four weeks of flooding in South Asia has exceeded 2,100, according to the authorities, as Nepal said more than 1,100 were dead or missing, India reported 700 killed and Bangladesh cited about 300 fatalities.
At least 30 of the 64 districts in Bangladesh were described as flooded.
Article, page 12.


How to Recognize and Avoid Flood Dangers
As flooding in the Midwest continues to claim lives and cause millions of dollars in damage, officials are issuing warnings to residents.
Some dangers are natural, like the flash floods and pools of water that can conduct deadly electricity.
Others are man-made, like the scams perpetrated on homeowners trying to rebuild.
Safety officials say most flooding victims have died because they underestimated the danger of high water.
Even small amounts of water can be deceptively dangerous, especially for motorists and homeowners.


The Heart Of the Matter
To the Editor:
To those critics who say that the New York City Ballet that now dances Balanchine has lost its soul, I ask those same critics: Where are your hearts?
Certainly not with City Ballet.
RONA WARHAFTIG Forest Hills, N. Y.


The Coin of the Underground Realm: A Brief History
Today is the 40th birthday of the New York City subway token, "and there'll never be a 50th," said Jared Lebow, a spokesman for the Transit Authority.
Tokens will soon be replaced by plastic fare cards, which are essentially pre-paid credit cards read by a card-swipe turnstile.
Fare cards are already in experimental use.


You'd Be Surprised Pulls Off a Surprise
You'd Be Surprised ran down Looie Capote in a stirring stretch duel yesterday to win the $150,000 Top Flight Handicap by a nose at Belmont Park and pleasantly surprise some of the 13,138 in attendance.
You'd Be Surprised was the 5-2 second choice behind Deputation, the even-money favorite who finished fifth.
You'd Be Surprised laid off the pace, content to let Looie Capote fight for the lead with Spinning Round, and then made her move on the outside at the top of the stretch.


First They Spin a Tale, Then They Spin a Disk
"The Bridges of Madison County" is the "Love Story" of the 90's -- and I say that with the greatest possible horror.
It is a tiny but pretentious novel about a roving photographer and his four-day love affair with a farmer's wife, and like some sugar-coated blob from another planet, it is set to take over the world.
The book has been on the best-seller list for nearly a year and is still No. 1.
A film is in the works, but before it attacks the big screen it intends to invade your CD player.


Correction
An article on July 11 about the PBS children's show "Ghostwriter" misstated the number of viewers who watched the series during its first 13 weeks.
It was more than 18.75 million.


Erin E. Foster, Jeffrey A. Blatt
Erin Elizabeth Foster, a daughter of Peter and Judith Foster of Oakland, Me., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Allan Blatt, the son of Harold and Bernice Blatt of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Cindy Lepley, a Congregational minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Foster is keeping her name.
She is the manager of technical services at the information resources center at BBDO, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in library and information science from the University of Texas.


Commercial Property: Town House Headquarters; Foreign Banks Pay a Premium for a Smart Address
SLOWLY but surely foreign banks are snapping up Manhattan town houses for use as their New York headquarters, so much so that they are becoming the defining presence in the East 50's.
Banco di Roma, LBS Bank (a Slovenian bank), Bank of the Philippine Islands, Banco Mercantil de Venezuela, Banco di Napoli, all have bought East Side buildings in the last two years.
And brokers report any number of searches in progress for European and Asian banks that also want East Side homes of their own.


Into the Woods


Another View On 'Arms and the Man'
Having totally enjoyed the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival production of Shaw's "Arms and the Man," I was most upset reading the review by Alvin Klein on July 11.
I did not see or read the play beforehand.
I often don't read reviews for all the reasons I encountered in the review.
It is as if each production has to be measured against an impossible standard.
I often wonder why a reviewer can't come as a participant and then rehash when it is over.


VIDEO
Don't Miss
"BRAM STOKER'S 'DRACULA.' " Playing like one long hallucinogenic special effect, Francis Ford Coppola's film takes a faithful adaptation of the novel and fills it with over-the-top frenzy and opulence.
Gary Oldham is the count who might want to rethink his denunciation of God centuries earlier.
Winona Ryder is his love and Anthony Hopkins the vampire battler in a wild dream of a movie that "transcends camp to become a testimonial to the glories of film making as an end in itself" (Vincent Canby). 1992.
Columbia Tri-Star. $94.95. 130 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.


Sarah Judd, Peter Branscombe
Sarah Larkin Judd, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Judd of New Britain, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Ogilvy Branscombe, a son of Robert F. Branscombe of New York and the late Jean M. Branscombe.
The Rev.
Richard Simpson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel of the Avon Old Farms School in Avon, Conn.
Mrs.
Branscombe, a graduate of Johns Hopkins University, teaches the fourth grade at the Foote School, a private school in New Haven.
Her father is a vice president of Central Connecticut State University in New Britain.
Her mother, Nancy Judd, is the director of admissions and development at the Mooreland Hill School, a private school in Kensington, Conn.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Elizabeth A. Mousseau; The Fine Art of Responsible Bartending
WITH summer comes barbecues and beach parties, and often a few too many drinks.
Elizabeth A. Mousseau is president of Dram Shoppe Consultant, a company in Danielson that takes its name from the state Dram Shop act, which provides penalties up to $50,000 when a bar serves someone to the point of intoxication, who then goes out and kills or injures someone.
Ms.
Mousseau is the state's master trainer in Training for Intervention Procedures by Servers of Alcohol, or TIPS, working with the State Department of Liquor Control to train thousands of bartenders and other servers each year how to recognize when someone has had too much to drink, and how to intervene.


JULY 18-24: Sparring With Iraq; Saddam Hussein Yields To the U.N. (Well, a Little)
Another round of the endless boxing match between the United Nations and Iraq's Saddam Hussein came to an end last week, with the Iraqis down on one, but only one, knee.
The issue was surveillance cameras on Iraqi missile test sites, which the U.N. hopes will assure that Iraq does not build long-range missiles.
Three weeks ago, Iraq refused to allow installation, even after the Security Council warned of "serious consequences." Iraq refused again two weeks ago.
But last week, the U.N.'s chief arms inspector, Rolf Ekeus of Sweden, spent four days in Baghdad talking with Tariq Aziz, Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister.
This time, Iraq agreed to have the cameras installed, which led some U.N. officials to say that a solution was in place.


'Too Shocking' Sends Urgent Messages
AN advocate of gay rights muses on his "point of origin swimming upstream as a queer spermlet."
A playwright still tries to explain her work as an artist and her identity as a lesbian and to reconcile a relationship with her father three weeks after his death.


No Exit: Young Loses His 27th Straight
Anthony Young had two dozen bodyguards today.
His last fastball walked in the winning run, practically every Met but him argued the call and then the team told him to run, run from the reporters.
Young is in the record books with 27 straight losses now, has swallowed hard and accepted it, but the Mets conversely have not.
Feeling guilty and mostly flustered that they could not punch out a run for him in this afternoon's 5-4, 10-inning defeat to the Dodgers, New York took the setback more personally and profanely than Young did.
Dallas Green took one look at a swarm of out-of-town reporters -- who came to see how the patient, Young, was doing -- and the 6-foot-5-inch, 260-pound manager went on a tirade that gurgled the clubhouse water cooler.


Russian Scientists Are an Endangered Species; Some Will Go Back
To the Editor:
"America's Soviet Scientists" by Sergei Leskov (Op-Ed, July 15) juxtaposes the contrasting views of Aleksei Abrikosov and Roald Sagdeev on the ways of saving Russian science, but clearly gives primacy to Mr.
Abrikosov's opinion that it is "useless to help science in Russia" and that the only way to maintain science in Russia is to help the talented scientists to leave.


Get the Stats on Straphangers
To the Sports Editor:
Claire Smith may be right in saying that traffic and parking problems are holding down attendance at Yankee games ("Looking at New Jersey, but Thinking of Queens," The Times, June 20).
But before we pave over more of the South Bronx to appease George Steinbrenner, can we see the stats on fans who don't drive to games?
Thousands of us take mass transit.
I would attend more games if the Transit Authority ran extra trains at the end of games.
Train schedules and better signs would help, too.
I might even bike if the Yankees provided secure racks.
CHARLES KOMANHOFF New York


Business Losses and Personal Anguish
This spring, Binh Nguyen realized his dream of opening a Vietnamese restaurant in the small town of Coralville, Iowa.
But his 70-seat restaurant had been open only a couple of months when the Clear Creek overflowed behind the one-story wood building, drenching the carpet.
Mr.
Nguyen closed the restaurant.
He and his 17-year-old son, Hieu, cleaned the carpet, dried the building out and reopened on July 6.
Later the same day, the creek overflowed again, this time rising until it reached the window sills.
The water has not receded since then, and is not expected to do so for another two weeks because it flows into the swollen Iowa River.
Mr.
Nguyen has laid off both his waitresses and is worrying about who will lend the additional $12,000 he needs to reopen yet again.


Alfredsson Leads by 2 On 3-Hole Surge
In a three-hole burst culminating with an eagle 3, Helen Alfredsson of Sweden seized the lead in the 48th United States Women's Open today, taking a two-stroke advantage into Sunday's final round.
The 28-year-old Alfredsson shot a three-under-par 69 over the Crooked Stick Golf Course for a 54-hole total of nine-under 207, a record for three rounds in the Open.
Her closest pursuer is Hiromi Kobayashi of Japan, who managed a 71 despite nearly becoming ill in the middle of her round.


Seminary Faces Fight In Eviction of Lesbian
Just about any poll would affirm that high among the burning issues that unite or divide New Yorkers are sexual orientation, religion and the city's unrelenting preoccupation with subsidized housing.
Then add the never-ending debate over the separation of church and state and mix in the charge of discrimination.


Dr. John M. Culkin, 65; Scholar Studied Media's Effect on Society
Dr.
John M. Culkin, a leading critic of the pervasive influence of films and television on modern life and proponent of using the mass media for society's benefit, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from cancer, friends said.


PUMPED UP
I have a bachelor's degree in music, a master's degree in psychology and am certified as a fitness instructor by four national organizations, including the American College of Sports Medicine.
I have traveled extensively through the United States, Europe and Japan and am a contributing editor to a magazine on fitness.
And I make my living as a full-time personal trainer.
Introduced to my "first sushi" and correct use of silverware by a career woman from a higher socioeconomic class?
I think not.
JONNY BOWDEN New York, N.Y.


Woman Holding Baby Is Killed While Fleeing Gunman in Bronx
A woman running frantically on a dark sidewalk in the Bronx as she clutched a baby girl to her chest was shot to death late Friday night by a man chasing her, the police said yesterday.
The shots also struck the baby in the abdomen and face, seriously injuring her.
The police said the woman was killed instantly by gunshots to her head and chest.
She was found dead on West 172d Street near Jesup Avenue in Morris Heights about 11:40 P.M.
She had been shot five times, including one point-blank shot to the head.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Ruth Pierson Churchill; Years of Elegance, a Life of Good Works
"I REMEMBER every detail," Ruth Pierson Churchill said.
She was recalling the time -- almost a century ago -- when the communities of Chatham, Madison and Florham Park were known for their manor houses, landed estates and world-famous rose nurseries.
And well she might, for Mrs.
Churchill is the granddaughter of Louis Mulford Noe, whose rose greenhouses and dairy farms once ranged over several hundred acres of this area.
Mrs.
Churchill will celebrate her 97th birthday on Aug. 22, but her age seems to have barely reduced her schedule.


The Long Goodbye
She is sitting in the clinic waiting room, bent over a magazine, half an hour early for her appointment and looking fine.
Year after year now, as the others sitting out there slowly fade into shadows, she alone has remained solid, substantial, voluptuous, the only image left on the screen.
She first came to our clinic four years ago for an H.I.V. test.
It was her fifth.
The other tests had all been positive, but refusing to believe the unbelievable, she still felt there was the possibility of a mistake and had no patience for anyone who suggested otherwise.


In the Dark, in the Park, Communing With the Stars
NEW YORKERS have some strange ideas about nature.
Who else would surround miniature gardens with barbed wire, roast pigs on the top of Sanitation Department parking depots or try to feed empty crack vials to hapless, innocent squirrels?


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on July 11 about the 1994 Wimbledon tennis championships misstated the telephone number for Sportsworld Travel in Atlanta.
It is (800) 278-6738.


U.S. IS CONSIDERING AID TO CAMBODIA
The Clinton Administration will consider trying to give foreign aid to a government of Cambodia that includes the Khmer Rouge if the guerrilla group disarms and agrees to adhere fully to a United Nations peace plan, a senior Administration official said today.
The remark was intended to encourage the Government and the Maoist-inspired guerrillas to join in peace talks.
But the official declined to say how the Administration would get around Congressional prohibitions on United States assistance that directly or indirectly benefit the Khmer Rouge.


The Dress As Film Star
THE central image of "Rising Sun," the film version of Michael Crichton's 1992 best seller, is a security system's video showing the murder victim, a high-priced party girl played by Tatjana Patitz, lying on her back on a boardroom table.
The sequence is played over and over (just as the photo of Vanessa Redgrave was repeatedly examined in "Blow-Up"), and it contains many clues to be unraveled.
For after seeing "Rising Sun," which opens on Friday, you may never think of the little black dress the same way again.
"The dress had to do so many things!" said Jacqueline West, the fashion designer who created the movie's costumes.
"It had to have star quality, it had to look expensive and elegant, it had to show off Tatjana's superb body yet not look tawdry and at the same time say what she does for a living. On top of that it had to open in the front as much as decency would allow during sex, murder and police examination."


An Auspicious Summertime Splash
NICOLE has taken Carol's place.
For about 15 years summer visitors trekking to the East End have been greeted by Carol's on Route 27 in Southampton.
The restaurant skipped from haute French to down-home chicken and ribs to Spanish tapas and grilled food.
But, Carol Rosenwald, the owner, was always center stage.
This year, with the switch from Carol's to Nicole's Cafe, Ms.
Rosenwald is just the landlord, not the main attraction.
The new enterprise is run by Peter Leslie and Rida Medina, who also operate Waiting on You Inc., a company that interviews and hires workers for restaurants in Manhattan.


Author Vs. Author
Michael Crichton, the master of intrigue and fantasy, and John Grisham, the king of the legal thriller, are the most envied authors of the summer.
"Jurassic Park," based on Mr.
Crichton's 1990 novel, and "The Firm," based on Mr.
Grisham's 1991 novel, are raking it in at the box office.
"Rising Sun," adapted from Mr.
Crichton's 1992 novel, is due out on Friday, while the screen adaptation of Mr.
Grisham's "Pelican Brief" is being filmed.
What's more, each man has four books on the best-seller lists of The New York Times.
Each has some 20 million paperbacks in print.
And both have signed deals for the movie rights to unpublished novels.


Demythologizing the Trade Pact
Debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement has been overheated.
Critics proclaim the pact -- which would eliminate most tariffs and trade barriers with Mexico and Canada over the next 15 years -- a national catastrophe, threatening jobs, wages and the environment.
Proponents claim Nafta will boost employment and that its environmental provisions are a lovely shade of green.
The truth is more mundane.
Nafta would have a modest economic impact in Mexico but a trivial impact on the U.S. economy.
Mexico is too small to threaten U.S. firms, and U.S. tariffs are already so low that elimination couldn't possibly lead to a flood of Mexican imports.
Nafta spells neither economic salvation nor ruin.


Painters Who Use Ceramics as a Canvas
IS it art?
Or is it craft?
"The Painterly Pot," an exhibition at the Newark Museum, proves that the answer to both questions can be an emphatic yes.
Painted on porcelain or earthenware vessels, not canvas, landscapes, Oriental-style flowers and a portrait of Napoleon's wife, Marie Louise, are displayed side by side with examples of Cubism and Expressionism.
The 60 pots and plates in the show date from the 1400's to the 1990's.
"The human impulse to decorate functional objects links them together," said Ulysses G. Dietz, curator of decorative arts, who chose them from the museum's collection.
In several instances, the elaborate ornamentation eliminates any practical use of the platter or vase.


Noreen O'Connor And Ted Abel
Noreen O'Connor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph C. O'Connor of Annandale, Va., was married yesterday to Ted Abel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin G. Abel Jr. of Wallingford, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter J. Gomes, the Plummer Professor of Christian Morals at Harvard University, performed the ceremony there at Memorial Church.
Ms.
O'Connor-Abel, a cum laude graduate of Bryn Mawr College who received a master's degree in French literature from New York University, is a manuscript editor at the Yale University Press in New Haven.
Her father retired as an administrative officer in the office of logistics at the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, Va.


At Caramoor, a Summer's Rest (Sort of)
SUMMER, declared Andre Previn, is not a time for working hard.
On a cool afternoon at Caramoor here before the recent heat wave, Mr.
Previn was eating a private lunch in a sheltered area of the Spanish Courtyard, which Walter and Lucie Rosen, the estate's former owners, used as an outdoor dining room.


From the East, Indian Summer, of Course
EVERY so often, a trend in fashion actually makes sense.
So it is this summer, as designers look to India for inspiration in hot-weather dressing.
With its dry linens and paper-thin sari silks, India is more than esthetically inspiring.
It is practical, too.


Gloria Ricks And Roy Taylor
Gloria Ricks, a vice president and the director of public relations at Hearst Magazines and the deputy director of corporate communications at the Hearst Corporation in New York, was married on Friday in Paget, Bermuda, to Roy Picton Taylor, an international business consultant.
The Rev.
Patrick Kerr, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Fourways Inn.


'Rebating' Travel Agencies: For Plan-It-Yourselfers
TRAVELERS who love to read brochures, compare prices in ads and study calendars and timetables can get an extra saving for doing this travel agent sort of work if they order their tickets and bookings through a "rebating" or "fee based" travel agency.
These agencies sell the tickets and reservations for an itinerary the client has designed, or, for complicated trips, find the right flights to do what you want and to fit the pieces together.
They are called rebating or fee-based agencies because they rebate to the customer part or all of the basic commissions they get from airlines, cruise lines, tour operators, hotels and car-rental companies, earning their money instead by charging a flat fee for their work.
After subtracting their fee, these rebates are not huge, usually 4 percent to 7 percent .
But these companies, like other big-volume agencies, get deeply discounted fares from cruise and tour operators and combined with the rebates, they can mean worthwhile savings.
That is, if you like research.


Helping Teachers Stay Up to Date
If Dr.
Ronald Butcher and others who are pushing for requirements for teachers' renewable certification ("Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," July 4) are truly interested in improving what happens between children and teachers in the classroom, they would do well to go out to schools and ask teachers if completing 60 hours of state-approved professional development activities every three years will make a difference.
The answer will be: "Sure it will. I'll have less time to prepare for classes, meet with parents, work with my students."


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Eastchester, N.Y  $325,000
39 Waterside Close  2-bedroom, 2 1/2 bath, 8-year-old condominium; entry hall, fireplace, loft, r pool; common charges $294; taxes $8,339.
Mount Vernon, N.Y.  $255,000
71 Sheridan Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old split level; tiled entry hall, bay window, office; taxes $5,066.
Yonkers, N.Y.  $215,000
13 Nevada Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; family room, fireplace, 2-car garage, basement; taxes $5,600.
Glastonbury, Conn.  $380,000
273 Grandview Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; breakfast counter, family room w/fireplace, 1 acre; taxes to be determined.
Rocky Hill, Conn.  $222,000
190 Countryside Drive  3- bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, on cul-de-sac, formal dining room, 0.50 acre; taxes $3,800.
Roxbury, Conn.  $248,000
93 Lower Country Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old Cape Cod; large dining room, 1-car attached garage, park-like setting, 3.1 acres; taxes $3,030.
OTHER AREAS Montvale, N.J.  $562,000
10 Candlelight Drive  4-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; c/a, pool, fireplace, 3-car garage; taxes $8,203.
Neptune, N.J.  $242,500
640 South Riverside Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, river view, basement; taxes $3,600 Bay Shore, L.I.  $131,500
24 Roland Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 29- year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,700.


An Open-Air Cornucopia Teases the Senses
EVEN as gritty air rises from city sidewalks, New York's movable feast doesn't stop or slow.
Shaved ice drizzled with sweet Caribbean fruit syrups displaces honey-roasted cashews on corner pushcarts when the air gets heavy.
Dining alfresco beckons, against the odds of bus exhaust and steam from subway grates.
No city soul is immune.
The senses may plead for air-conditioning and iced tea.
But the untamable summer child inside even the most urbane adult seeks a sliver of country-in-the-city, with its bucolic and folksy underpinnings, and its tacit promise of fresh air.


Rostenkowski Defiantly Denies Wrongdoning in Postal Scandal
Responding to accusations by a former House official that he embezzled $21,300 from the post office of the House of Representatives, a defiant Representative Dan Rostenkowski today categorically denied doing anything illegal or unethical.
"I want to make it absolutely clear that I have committed no crime and have engaged in no illegal or unethical conduct," the influential Illinois Democrat said in his first statement since the accusations by the former postmaster of the House were made public last Monday.


MOVIES
Don't Miss
"IN THE LINE OF FIRE." Clint Eastwood in the summer's best movie, an action-romance in which he plays an aging but still enticing Secret Service agent bound to save the President from a mad killer (John Malkovich).
With Rene Russo as the agent he loves.


No Headline


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:  THE SIGN PAINTER'S DREAM.
Written and illustrated by Roger Roth.
Crown. $14. (Ages 5 to 9) A dream about his hero, George Washington, helps Crabby Clarence, a constantly complaining sign painter, become a modest hero and a better artist.


Secrets Revealed
Deborah Laake is pretty darned flabbergasted by the way her book, "Secret Ceremonies," is being received.
After being turned down by 12 publishing houses, the memoir she wrote about her Mormon childhood and marriages and subsequent stay in a psychiatric hospital was released by William Morrow &amp; Company in April.
Within weeks, Ms.
Laake (pronounced LAKE) was playing the talk show circuit.
On "Tom Snyder," "Donahue," "Larry King Live" and "Sonya Live," staunch Mormon women like Beverly Campbell, the Washington-based director of international relations for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, kept accusing Ms.
Laake of blaming the church for her personal problems.


Conversations/Jair Bolsonaro; A Soldier Turned Politician Wants To Give Brazil Back to Army Rule
APPLYING to politics the boldness he once displayed as an army parachutist, Congressman Jair Bolsonaro plunged into uncharted territory a few weeks ago when he strode to the podium of Brazil's Chamber of Deputies and called for the closing of Congress.
"I am in favor of a dictatorship," he bellowed in a speech that rattled a country that only left military rule behind in 1985.
"We will never resolve serious national problems with this irresponsible democracy."


G. E. Matthews, Anne Elise Mumford
Anne Elise Mumford, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David M. Mumford of Houston, and Gregory Edward Matthews, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward E. Matthews of Princeton, N.J., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Tucker performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Houston.
The Rev.
Lee H. Bristol 3d, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Matthews, 31, was until recently the director of resident services at the Warwick Towers Condominiums in Houston.
She graduated from Trinity University in San Antonio.
Her father is the associate dean of continuing education at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Of Ferris Wheels And Racing Pigs
WHEN somebody says, "Let's go to the fair," a kind of mythic experience sweeps over me.
I smell hay.
I hear pigs grunting.
I think of the best french fries of my life tossed piping hot into a white paper cone by some guy from the Kiwanis Club.
I remember the skinny muscular arms of my brother as he fired his fake rifle at the fake ducks riding along on their conveyor belt, only he never won the big stuffed panda from the woman in the low-cut blouse and more makeup than Mom said was nice.
I remember the joyful feeling of having a red helium balloon follow me everywhere.
Dad always tied it to my finger, saying, "Don't let it go." But I usually did because I liked the slightly melancholy feeling of watching it float away, smaller and smaller, over the vast parking lot.
Sometimes I'd bring it home and tie it to my bedpost.
But it was much sadder watching it die a slow death -- you know how they get all wrinkled and limp after a day or two -- so I usually liberated it the night of the fair.


Croton Falls Revives 'Fourposter' Of 1951
"THE FOURPOSTER," which covers a 35-year marriage, barely works up the momentum for a two-hour play.
And it hasn't been known for staying power either.
Revivals of the 1951 two-character exercise in three acts by Jan de Hartog are rare, presumably because it has always depended on the luster of stars for validation.


DANCE
Tomorrow
"P.S. 122's BIG ROOM," Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan. .
Performance and partying in the vast old rock palace.
Reno in a performance art piece and Charles Dennis in "Maelstrom," a communal dance experience.
Performance is at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Reservations: (212) 477-5288.
Charge: (212) 307-7171.
July
"DANCES FOR WAVE HILL," 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Dance leaps, dashes and rolls out over this sprawling green environmental center.
Sara Pearson/Patrik Wedig and Company and Sham Mosher, with the children from Riverdale Neighborhood House, on Wednesday at 6:30 P.M. and Saturday at 3 P.M.
Admission free on Wednesday; admission Saturday: $4; $2 for the elderly and students; children free.
Information: (212) 989-6996.
ELIZABETH STREB, Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, at the foot of the bridge, Cadman Plaza West and Old Front Street, Brooklyn Heights.
Rehearsals of Ms.
Streb's "Lookup," a wall-climbing piece that opens Sept. 17, will be open to the public on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays through Sept. 4, from 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
DANCING IN THE STREETS.
Joanna Haigood performs in "Cho-Mu/Butterfly Dreams," Roosevelt Island Community Garden, next to the Roosevelt Island subway station.
Thursday and Friday.
A collaborative installation and performance piece created with Reiko Goto and the Zaccho Dance Theater, all of San Francisco, with the audience moving through seven sculptures. 6:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
NIKOLAIS: REMARKABLE RETROSPECTIVE.
The Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company perform pieces choreographed by Alwin Nikolais from the 1950's through the 1980's.
"Imago" today, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday; "Pond," "Mechanical Organ," and "Gallery" on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday matinee.
Performances are Mondays through Fridays, 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2 and 8 P.M.
Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
August
LINCOLN CENTER OUT OF DOORS, in Lincoln Center's parks, plazas and open spaces, Aug. 3 to 24.
New this year are two series: Playdays, on Aug. 14 and 15 beginning at 2 P.M., features performances and participatory events for families; the Great American Cities Program begins with a tribute to Philadelphia, Aug. 17 to 21, featuring performances by Philadanco and Steve Krieckhaus.
The festival opens on Aug. 3 at 8:15 P.M. with the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company (also on Aug. 4 at 8:15).
The festival continues with dance on social issues by Marlies Yearby and Amy Pivar; Montreal Danse performing Japanese Butoh, and dance from Taiwan, Brazil, Israel, Ukraine, India and Cambodia.
Performance times vary.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5400.
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER, at Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, midpark at 72d Street, Aug. 10.
A program of "Revelations," the Ailey signature piece, "Shelter," choreographed by Jawole Willa Jo Zollar of Urban Bush Women and "The Winter in Lisbon," choreographed by Billy Wilson, to the music of Dizzy Gillespie. 8:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 360-2756.
FELD BALLET, at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Aug. 9 through 21.
The Summer Preview Season includes revivals of "Charmed Lives," "Skara Brae," "Play Bach," "Contra Pose" and "Ion." There will be premieres of "Arcana," much of which is performed on a high bar suspended eight feet above the stage, and "Doo Dah Day/No Possum, No Sop, No Taters," which is set to songs of Stephen Foster.
Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays, at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


Manager's Profile; Wayne D. Lyski
Fund: Alliance Bond Corporate Bond A, top-performing corporate bond fund over five years; $250 million in assets; upfront sales charge, 3.0 percent.
Manager since 1986. (Sponsor: Alliance Capital Management, New York.)
Born: Sept. 24, 1941; Great Falls, Mont.
Education: B.A., economics and business, Seattle Pacific University; master's, Wharton, University of Pennsylvania.


Media Vision (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cray Electronics Holdings Plc reports earnings for Year to April 30


American Business Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Swift Transportation (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sundstrand Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anchor Bancorp (N.Y.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Census Report Found Murphy Brown Atypical
To the Editor:
A July 14 front-page article makes much of a reported increase by the Census Bureau in births outside of wedlock, yet this increase was not in absolute numbers but in percentages.
Only four paragraphs into the article do you mention that the increase was in percentages after you have implied something very different.


Oregon Metallurgical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Robert Toombs; Producer, 62
Robert Toombs, a longtime producer for NBC News, died on Friday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 62 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered a massive heart attack after finishing a day's work at United Nations headquarters, The Associated Press reported.


Flood Damage Spreads
As flooding continued in the Midwest, 76,000 residents of St.
Joseph, Mo., lost tap-water service when the engorged Missouri River overflowed into the city's water plant.
Page A10.


Where a Man G.M. Calls Turncoat Is Still a Hero
At the unspoken heart of the vicious corporate battle that pits the General Motors Corporation against Volkswagen of Germany, there stands a verdant expanse of farmland and pine-clad hills on the outskirts of this sleepy provincial town in the Spanish Basque country.
Cows graze, tractors trundle, the late-afternoon sun casts long shadows.
There is nothing to suggest anything but somnolent rural tradition.
Yet it is here that Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, late of General Motors, now of Volkswagen, has long wanted to build a revolutionary auto plant that would slash the production time for a car to 12 hours, or 30 percent below what even the Japanese can achieve today.


Review/Pop; Dancing Safely to the Bleeps
Ultramarine, a group from England that performed at Limelight on Wednesday night as part of the New Music Seminar, plays ambient house, one of the many splinter movements found in modern dance music.
Partly generated by machines, partly performed on instruments, the music has a dreamy sort of creep to it.
Bleeps and squeaks multiply over a beat, and a song's logic seems almost mathematical, as if it were crystallizing on the spot.
The band, which didn't use vocals, knows exactly how to make people feel good, finding in some mixture of tempo, harmony and melody -- if electronic noise can called melody -- a warm sense of security.
And the slow speed of permutation, along with the band's use of repetition, made the music comforting.


Review/Rock; Internationalist and Punk, With a Pure Mexican Flavor
If the steady stream of Mexican rock bands coming through New York is any indication, Mexican culture is still a work in progress.
Santa Sabina and La Lupita performed at S.O.B.'s on Wednesday as part of the New Music Nights, and they brought together all sorts of influences.
The bands, part of a new and rising Mexican bohemia, are internationalist and mostly reject the sorts of obvious sentimentalities of international pop or the roughness of the various Mexican national dance styles.
But as much as the groups use Jamaican ska rhythms and draw on punk and post-punk rock influences, they are also unquestionably Mexican, not only in the lyrics, but in something in a way more essential: there's a carnival flavor to them, in the costumes of the musicians and the presentation of the music, a glorification of kitsch that is purely Mexican.
And they draw from all over Mexican society, itself something unusual.
At S.O.B.'s, upper-middle-class Mexicans in Lacoste shirts didn't quite mingle with working-class Mexicans wearing T-shirts of the Virgin.


Federal Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alfa Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deli on 43d St. Refused Offers for Relocation
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to a July 14 letter regarding the 42d Street Development Project, in which the lawyer for an evicted business maintains that his client, Al's Deli, was removed without reason or without sensitivity to his position or that of his employees.


Mexico's Red, White and Green Leaves the U.S. Blue
The 120,000 soccer fans who crammed into Azteca Stadium today on this rare rainy-season afternoon without rain found out just how sweet revenge can be as the powerful Mexican national team trounced the defending champion United States team, 4-0, in the Gold Cup final.
Mexico dominated the tournament, scoring 28 goals and allowing only 2, and it was in full force in today's long- awaited game against a low-scoring United States team that managed only 5 goals in five games.


Ayer Looks Outside For New Executive
Ayer Inc. in New York said it was searching outside the agency to hire an executive to fill a newly created top-level position while it reorganizes management positions within.
Jerry Siano, the chairman and chief executive of Ayer, said in a statement that the agency was looking to fill the new position of president and chief operating officer.
The dual role was created to free other executives to concentrate on the agency's growth.
He said the person who would take on the position would focus on the day-to-day status and profitability of all the New York accounts.
Thomas F. Maxey, the vice chairman and chief operating officer, could then concentrate on strategic planning and international expansion.


Marsh Supermarkets (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


Lisa Arbaczawski and Michael C. Gray
Lisa Arbaczawski, the daughter of Catherine Arbaczawski of Marlboro, N.J., and the late Walter Arbaczawski, was married yesterday to Michael C. Gray, a son of Michael and Paula Gray of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Fox, an American Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Holmdel (N.J.) Park Arboretum.


Total Petroleum Co. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cavalier Homes reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Associated Banc-Corp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Republicanism Can Be Cured!
The startling discovery that affiliation with the Republican Party is genetically determined, announced by scientists in the current issue of the journal Nurture, threatens to overshadow the announcement by Government scientists that there might be a gene for homosexuality in men.
Reports of the gene that codes for political conservatism, discovered after a long study of quintuplets in Orange County, Calif., has sent shock waves through the medical, political and golfing communities.


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Siliconix reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


This Airport for Lease: An Idea Splits Officials
The new Mayor of Los Angeles wants to lease the city's international airport to a private company and use the income to pay for more police officers, firefighters and other municipal services.
But some Congressional leaders, fearing that other cities with budget problems might follow suit, strongly oppose the idea.
The Mayor, Richard J. Riordan, a Republican who took office July 1, considers Los Angeles International Airport an unused financial asset in a city that recently had to lay off workers to close a $190 million budget gap.


Reporting Bond Issuers' Political Contributors
The Public Securities Association, in a policy statement being released today endorses the disclosure of political contributions made to state and local officials who choose bond underwriters.
The association also backs the writing of regulations by the Securities and Exchange Commission that would require reporting of important financial data by issuers after the initial sale of tax-exempt bonds so that owners and buyers in the secondary market could make more informed judgments.


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Donnkenny Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 5


National Data (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tecumseh Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ADT Ltd., Boca Raton, Fla., 18 million common shares. First Boston.


Head of CUNY Challenged On Reorganization Plans
In an increasingly bitter battle over plans to reorganize the City University of New York, faculty leaders will hold an unusual summer meeting tomorrow to vent their anger at Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds.
Some faculty leaders said there had been discussion among Dr.
Reynolds's opponents of pressing a motion to censure her, though it was unclear whether such a motion would gain wide support.
The meeting comes after the recent disclosure that Dr.
Reynolds was seeking to withhold some financing from colleges that had not reacted favorably to her reorganization plans.


Administrations May Change, but Jokes Never Stop
For 12 years, stand-up comics made toothsome snacks of Republicans and their politics.
But when the Governor from Arkansas was elected President, comedians panicked: Was there a future for political comedy without Dan Quayle?
Could Bill Clinton and his Democratic colleagues -- those bustling earnest reformers, the natural straight men of politics -- be funny?


World Economies


Time's Readers to Talk Back, on Computers
Time will soon become the first general-interest magazine to provide an electronic forum in which readers can hold two-way discussions on their computer terminals with the magazine's reporters and editors.
The conferences will be one of several features of the magazine's on-line service, which is to begin in September.
Users will also be able to read entire issues of Time on their screens before the magazine is available on newsstands, and to voice opinions about specific articles on an electronic bulletin board.


Nicaraguans Say the Army Had a Hand in Attack
At first blush, the attack of former Sandinista soldiers against this provincial town last week appeared to be a simple affair, but almost as soon as the guns went quiet a darker picture of intrigue and betrayal began to emerge.
Diplomats say that a closer examination of the attack strongly suggests complicity at the highest levels of the country's army, which remain under Sandinista control although the Sandinistas lost the elections in 1990.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8 ISRAEL RETALIATES IN LEBANON Israeli aircraft fired a barrage of rockets at guerrilla sites in Lebanon, retaliating for recent attacks that have killed Israeli soldiers.
A1 CHINA DENIES TREATY VIOLATION China's Foreign Minister denied that Beijing had violated an agreement that bars it from exporting missile technology, but it was unclear whether the Chinese had denied selling missile parts to Pakistan.
A2


River Forest reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Capriati Uses Power Surge Plus a Dash of Finesse to Beat Fernandez
Power.
It seems to be the latest fad in women's tennis.
Hit the ball so hard that it zooms past your opponent before she even has a chance to think about hitting it back.
Moments before the start of the this year's Pathmark Women's Tennis Classic, Chris Evert stepped on center court and joked about why she stopped playing tennis.


The Talk of Provence; The Arts of Summer in the South of France
The modern summer festival, whereby every European village bigger than a barn tries to lure tourist cash through culture, dates from after World War II.
Provence was among the first to realize the cash-culture connection.
But by now its leading festivals have attained a longevity and an excellence that make it easy to overlook whatever crass commercial considerations figured in their origins.
This month, a traveler can sample Provencal festivals devoted not just to music, as here at Aix-en-Provence, but also to photography, at Arles, and theater, at Avignon, all within an hour's drive of each another.


With a Makeover, W Joins Ranks of Fashion Magazines
Flaunting as radical a new look as the lace-edged miniskirts now on Paris runways, W, the Fairchild Publications broadsheet, will arrive on newsstands later this week looking like a bona fide magazine for the first time in its 21-year history.
With its glossy cover and newly bound pages, it will be placed next to the other fashion magazines as it enters that fiercely competitive market.
Newsstand sales are down or, at best, even with last year's levels for its four main competitors -- Vogue, Elle, Harper's Bazaar and Mirabella.
Advertising is still uneven, though Harper's Bazaar registered a significant rise in pages during the first six months of the year.
But the magazines' overall circulation is strong, and this is where W hopes to make its gains.


Another U.S. Jet on Patrol Fires at Iraqi Antiaircraft Battery
In the second such incident in a month, a United States warplane fired a missile Saturday at an antiaircraft battery in southern Iraq that was preparing to shoot down the plane, the Pentagon said today.
An Air Force F-4G jet was patrolling the no-flight zone, declared by the United Nations after the Persian Gulf war, when radar at an Iraqi antiaircraft site began tracking it, the Pentagon said.


Textron Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


People's Bank (Conn.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Girilal Jain, 69, Editor; Backed Indira Gandhi
Girilal Jain, an influential Indian journalist and ardent supporter of Indira Gandhi, died on July 19 in New Delhi.
He was 69.
Mr.
Jain, who joined The Times of India in 1950, served as editor in chief from 1978 to 1988.
In columns and other writings, he often argued that a weak central government was a danger to India, and that Mrs.
Gandhi -- whose critics called her dictatorial -- was needed to provide authority, discipline and order.
She was Prime Minister from 1966 to 1977 and from 1980 until she was assassinated in 1984.


Beverly Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New York Vote Plan Seeks to Gain Voice In Puerto Rico Status
Rebuffed in their efforts to win permission to participate in a plebiscite on Puerto Rico's political future, a group of Hispanic elected officials in New York yesterday announced a plan to hold a separate vote to give people of Puerto Rican descent living outside the island a voice in the battle over statehood.
The vote in New York will in no way affect the outcome of the island's Nov. 14 plebiscite, in which voters will choose whether to endorse independence, continued commonwealth status or a petition to Congress for statehood.


Review/Dance; Jacob's Pillow Opens 'The Gates'
As in every summer, the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here in the Berkshires is offering its audiences and students more than a full plate.
Two theaters and an informal outdoor performing space are alive with the sound of dancing every weekend, and artifacts from a work in progress are even scattered in an exhibition gallery in a new Visitors Center.
The beautiful neo-rustic Studio/ Theater, a nonproscenium space opened in 1990 for experimental work, was the setting Friday night for the Margaret Jenkins Dance Company from San Francisco, which presented the East Coast premiere of "The Gates (Far Away Near)."


Cragin Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Multimedia Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Spain Captures Second Federation Cup  Spain crushed Australia's bid for an upset to capture its second Federation Cup title yesterday in Frankfurt.
In a lopsided final, the top-seeded Spanish team, led by Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Conchita Martinez, dominated the unseeded Australians, who were seeking their first title since 1974.
Martinez, ranked sixth in the world, beat Michelle Jaggard-Lai, 6-0, 6-2, to put Spain ahead.
Then Sanchez Vicario, No. 3 in the world, defeated Nicole Provis, 6-2, 6-3, to give Spain an unbeatable 2-0 lead in the best-of-three series.
Spain won the title for the first time in 1991, defeating the United States in the final. (AP) Mansdorf Wins Newsweek Classic: Amos Mansdorf of Israel used a strong baseline game to stymie seventh-seeded Todd Martin, 7-6 (7-4), 7-5, in the championship of the $625,000 Newsweek Classic in Washington.
Mansdorf, seeded eighth and ranked 29th in the world, won for the sixth time in his career and for the first time since 1990.
He earned $84,000 for the victory. (AP) Gustafsson Solves Stich: Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden overcame Michael Stich's remarkable run of success in his home country, outlasting the German, 6-3, 6-4, 3-6, 4-6, 6-4, to capture the Mercedes Cup in Stuttgart.
In the last eight months, Stich has reached the finals of five tournaments in Germany, winning three titles, including the Grand Slam Cup in Munich. (AP) SOCCER Bolivia Stuns Brazil in World Cup Qualifier Brazil, one of the giants of international soccer, was jolted by Bolivia, 2-0, yesterday in La Paz, Bolivia, in a South American World Cup qualifying match.
Bolivia, which has not made the World Cup since 1950, scored twice in the final three minutes in what is surely the country's biggest soccer victory.
Brazil, which won the World Cup in 1958, 1962 and 1970, had gone 22-0-6 since it beat Chile, 2-0, in 1954 in its first World Cup qualifying game.
The victory moved Bolivia to the top of the South American Group B standing with a 2-0-0 record.
Brazil is 0-1-1, having tied Ecuador in its previous game.
Also in Group B, Jose Herrera's goal early in the second half lifted Uruguay to a 1-0 victory over Venezuela in San Cristobal, Venezuela.
The winner of Group B advances to next year's World Cup finals in the United States.
The second-place finisher will play against either Canada or Australia for another spot in the finals. (AP) GOLF Azinger Triumphs in New England Classic  Paul Azinger, hitting his shots with exquisite precision, fired a three-under-par 68 yesterday to win the New England Classic in Sutton, Mass., by four strokes.
His total of 16-under 268 for the four rounds was one shot off the tournament record set in 1985 by George Burns.
Azinger won $180,000 to pass $1 million in winnings for the year, second over all on the PGA Tour to Nick Price. (AP) Archer Beats Colbert in Playoff: George Archer shot a record-tying eight-under-par 63 to force a playoff, then parred the third extra hole to beat Jim Colbert and win the Senior PGA Tour's First of America Classic in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Archer, 53, is the first back-to-back winner on the Senior Tour this year.
He also won last week's rain-shortened Ameritech Senior Open.
On the third extra hole, the 398-yard par-4 18th, Archer hit his tee shot under a tree on the left side of the fairway, but made a daring second shot and was able to scramble for a par. (AP) Thirty Years Later, Charles Returns to Scene of Victory: Thirty years after winning the British Open on the same course, Bob Charles of New Zealand claimed the seniors' version with a birdie at the final hole in Lytham St.
Annes, England.
Charles carded a 74, three-over par at the Lytham and St.
Annes course in rainy and windy conditions to finish four rounds seven-over at 291.
He won his first British Senior Open by stroke over Gary Player of South Africa and Tommy Horton of England. (AP) AUTO RACING  Teammate's Mishap Gives Prost Victory Alain Prost of France won the German Grand Prix in Hockenheim after trailing for most of the race until hard-luck teammate Damon Hill blew a tire on his Williams-Renault with two laps remaining.
It was Prost's seventh Formula One victory this season and 51st over all -- extending his career record on the circuit. (AP) HORSE RACING Liver Stand by a Nose in Evan Shipman Liver Stand prevailed by a nose over Excellent Tipper in the $60,000-added Evan Shipman for New York-breds at Belmont yesterday.
Bill Of Rights finished another four lengths back in third in the field of five.
Under Jorge Chavez and 117, Liver Stand held a narrow advantage throughout to cover the 11/16 miles in 1:423/5 over a fast track.
The Stanley Shapoff-trained colt earned his second victory of six starts this year and $39,720 for owner Mine Hill Stable.
The winner returned $22.80, $7 and $4 for $2 across the board.
Excellent Tipper paid $3 and $3, and Bill of Rights was $3.20 to show. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Might John Dillinger Crack the Lineup?
ALLEN IVERSON was convicted two weeks ago on three felony counts of malicious wounding by mob for his participation in a brawl last winter and faces up to 20 years in prison on each count.
Allen Iverson is expected to be a senior this fall in high school in Hampton, Va., unless the government has other plans.
This was reported in some sports pages.
Why sports?
Because Allen Iverson is widely considered the greatest schoolboy basketball player in the land.


Softech reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Andrew Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Walbro Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Music/Rock; Nirvana's New-Music Night, From Bruising to Beatlesque
Nirvana chose the perfect occasion for its first New York show since 1991: a sudden, last-minute date on Friday night at Roseland as part of the New Music Seminar's New Music Nights.
The seminar seeks to nurture and exploit rock from the fringes; Nirvana's second album, "Nevermind" (Geffen) came out of Seattle and the collegiate-rock netherworld in 1991 to sell four million copies, giving hope to scruffy growlers everywhere.
By performing for a club-sized audience at the seminar -- with Jesus Lizard, an anti-pop riff-and-rant band, as opening act -- Nirvana thanked its earliest supporters while stoking interest in its next album, "In Utero," (Geffen) due in September.
The band also reminded both old fans and skeptics why it blasted out of the club circuit in the first place: onstage, Nirvana is unstoppable.
The band has the brute force of an old-fashioned power trio, the tunefulness of a pop group and the flippant, sloppy edges of great punk rock.
It hasn't cleaned up its act; for the finale, Kurt Cobain, Nirvana's lyricist, ended up alone on stage for perhaps five minutes, kneeling over his guitar to hurl screeches and sustained wails of feedback into the room.


Plasti-Line (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about a Federal plan to create night courts to handle illegal immigration cases referred incorrectly in some editions to the site of the grounding of the Golden Venture, a freighter loaded with Chinese asylum seekers.
It was off Queens, not Brooklyn.


DEMOCRATS EXPECT TIGHT BUDGET VOTE
After weeks of labeling the Clinton Administration's $500 billion package of tax increases and spending cuts too miserly or too spendthrift, Democratic liberals and conservatives alike took to television today to concede the increasingly obvious: like it or not, they will probably pass a compromise version of the plan next month.
"I think the President will be able to get the votes when the time comes," said Senator Sam Nunn, a conservative Georgian who was one of six Democrats to vote against the Senate version of the package last month.
"He's very persuasive."


EXPANSION OF AID FOR WORKING POOR IS TIED TO BUDGET
Overshadowed by the fight over raising taxes and cutting the Federal deficit are plans by both houses of Congress to add billions of dollars to a Government antipoverty program, a move that the Clinton Administration casts as a "pay raise for the working poor."
The House has already passed Mr.
Clinton's proposal for an expansion of the program, known as the earned-income tax credit.
The House bill provides for a $28.3-billion rise over the next five years in what is now an $11 billion-a-year program.
That would represent the largest antipoverty measure taken by the Federal Govern ment since the mid-1970's.
It would both increase current benefits and expand the number of workers eligible, to 20 million from 14 million now.


Structural Dynamics Research Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Comsat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Croatian Fights to Stay As a Student In New York
Andrija Laslo, a 17-year-old exchange student from what used to be Yugoslavia, enjoys the quiet of this remote northern New York agricultural village, settled by a pacifist religious sect fleeing wars in Europe.
After spending a year here watching as fighting between Serbs and Croats destroyed his homeland, Andrija, a Croatian Catholic from Sarajevo, has neither the desire to return nor a home to go back to.


Rollins Environmental Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Power of Water
Relentless rainfall continues to soak America's Midwest.
Rivers are rising in some places, receding in others.
But throughout the vast central watershed, the problems have barely begun.
Homes and farms, city streets and country roads are coated with millions of tons of chocolate-colored muck, sewage and contaminating chemicals.
Thousands of people have no shelter of their own.
The unluckiest have been flooded out twice, even three times, in the weeks of rain.
This was, and still is, the Great Flood of 1993.


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; From Levi Strauss, insight into the MTV generation's view of life.
EVERYBODY needs a little wisdom now and then, some words to live by.
They are not the same for everyone, of course, but in a television campaign beginning today for Levi's 501 jeans -- the kind with the button fly -- Levi Strauss &amp; Company offers up eight stylized fortune cookies expressly for young men on the journey out of their teens.


Dime Savings Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


VF Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Showbiz Pizza Time Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


People
*
Mike Drake, the executive vice president and director of media services at BBDO New York, was named to the new position of United States media director at BBDO Worldwide.
John Belfiore, senior vice president and director of media planning services at BBDO New York, succeeds Mr.
Drake as director of media services. *
Roger Winter was named managing director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles Asia, Hong Kong, succeeding John Fenton, who was named senior vice president international at D.M.B.&amp; B in New York.
Mr.
Winter was previously a senior vice president and director of worldwide accounts at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York.


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Old National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deerbank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vulcan Materials Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Summit Bancorp (NJ) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Many Questions Linger After Crown Hts. Report
SIX words may cost Mayor David N. Dinkins re-election.
Six words he never said, not in this order, anyway:
"I'm sorry. I made a mistake."


Cleveland-Cliffs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Butte Journal; Faith's Anchor in a Western Diaspora
This brick and clapboard city in southwestern Montana dusty, stark and eroding now in its perch alongside the Continental Divide -- was built by a rough and bawdy sort, miners who carved out this state's once-largest city in a rush for copper, silver and gold.
A hard-living city with bars in almost every block, Butte was as close to urban as the Wild West got, luring fortune-seekers from every corner of Asia and Europe a century ago.
Among them came Montana's largest population of Jews.


Richard Tee, 49, Dies; Composer and Pianist
Richard Tee, a pianist, studio musician, singer and arranger, died on Wednesday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 49 and lived in Cold Spring, N.Y.
He had been suffering from prostate cancer, said his wife, Eleana Steinberg Tee.


Millipore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boy's Father Assails Study Of Slayings In Crown Hts.
The father of the black child whose death in 1991 set off four days of unrest in Crown Heights yesterday bitterly criticized the state's investigation of the disturbances and called for another investigation of the events, including the death of his son.
Carmel Cato, whose 7-year-old son, Gavin, died after being hit by a car being driven by a Hasidic man in August 1991, also criticized statements by state officials and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo suggesting that the Cato family had not made itself available to investigators.
He spoke to reporters and a crowd of about 100 supporters in front of the Federal Courthouse in Brooklyn.


Roosevelt Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to June 30


Health Care Property Investors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yankees' Stanley Uses His Perseverance to Get Full-Time Job
Destiny carved out a place for Mike Stanley, the catcher.
And that place was on the bench.
Or so it was for most of his major league career, four full years and parts of two others with the Texas Rangers and last season with the Yankees.
The only distinction for this well-built, even-tempered backstop seemed to be his uncanny ability to hang on.
He recalls that in every spring training he was in a struggle just to be the 24th or 25th man chosen to go North.


Wheeling Pittsburgh reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alco Standard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.N. Mission in Somalia Is Also Military
To the Editor:
"Course Correction Needed in Somalia" (editorial, July 14) states that the United Nations should "get back to basics" and perform its "humanitarian mission." The reality is that no state authority exists in Somalia.
The United Nations must not permit a situation to recur in which Somalis are again at the mercy of anarchy and chaos.
While the feeding of the population is a priority, it is only the beginning of a long process by which the international community must restore a stable national life.


Kelly's Hit a Shocker For Him and Angels
Pat Kelly came in the game for his baserunning skills, but it was his single to left field in the bottom of the ninth that capped the Yankees' comeback victory over the Angels yesterday one inning after he had been trapped off base to end a rally.
With two out, the score tied at 8-8 and men on first and third, Kelly came to bat with a chance to redeem himself.


Move to Withdraw Rubles Splits Russian Government
A serious split emerged in the Russian Government today over the sudden decision by the Russian Central Bank to declare all pre-1993 ruble bank notes invalid as of midnight tonight, with senior Finance Ministry officials making a personal protest to President Boris N. Yeltsin at a Kremlin meeting.
The decision, which has thrown Russians into panic as they scurry to unload old bank notes, was made on Saturday without consultation with the Finance Ministry, which was only notified at the last minute, a senior economic adviser to the Government said.


Review/Jazz; Another Jam for Jelly, but With 2 Pianists
Dick Hyman, the artistic director of the 92d Street Y's Jazz in July series, likes to give his concerts narratives.
On Tuesday the series opened with "The Other Jelly Roll Morton," which was intended to offer more of the composer's music than is in the Broadway show "Jelly's Last Jam." Like many of Mr.
Hyman's shows, this one took liberties.
Mr.
Hyman, a pianist who could easily perform the music alone, brought out John Sheridan to play duets on the material.
They did it well: Mr.
Hyman has a nice touch, and he can wrap notes up in a soft sound or make them clear and hard.
On "Jungle Blues," an early boogie piece by Morton, he let his right hand cut through Mr.
Sheridan's pumping bass figures.
At times he and Mr.
Sheridan worked with interplay, using contrasting ideas; on "Perfect Rag," they cruised through a fast, descending melody and intricate parts, ending the piece with distinct melodies traded from piano to piano.


Frisch's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Census Report Found Murphy Brown Atypical; Uncounted Population
To the Editor:
The juxtaposition of front-page articles July 14, on the decision to formalize the "don't ask, don't tell" policy for gay people in the military and on the Census Bureau's reported increase in the number of never-married mothers, is telling.


Questions Lining Up On Defense for Giants
Where are the Giants' defensive linemen of yesteryear?
Of the starters the past four years, one is gone, one is sidelined by a bad back and one is just returning after a bad back.
Leonard Marshall is now a Jet.
Eric Dorsey, who left the hospital Friday, will spend at least one more week nursing an inflamed back.
And Eric Howard, after missing the first few days of training camp, started contact work Friday.


Airplanes Bump While Taxiing at Kennedy International Airport


Countrywide Mortgage Investments reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First United Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


American Business Information (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Politician Angered Japan's Women Voters
To the Editor:
In "Ruling Party in Japan Turns to '3 Arrows,' " (news article, July 16), on three popular politicians within Japan's Liberal Democratic Party, you write that Ryutaro Hashimoto, called "the Prince," is thought to be "the party's biggest draw for women and young people."


Pioneer-Standard (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Celebration Marks Disabled Independence Day


Henry Scheel, 81; A Design Innovator In Boating Industry
Henry A. Scheel, a yacht designer who brought innovations to boating at a time when tradition prevailed, died on Friday at Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Rockport, Me.
He was 81.
The cause of death was heart failure, said Dr. Daniel Mattox, his physician.


A Budget Worthy of Mr. Bush
If the conferees who will meet this week to finish a budget stick to their present path, they'll likely hand President Clinton a package much like the one George Bush signed three years ago.
Is that what America voted for?
The conferees are about to recommend chopping deficits by about $500 billion over five years, primarily by cutting defense, trimming Medicare, raising income taxes and imposing a gasoline tax.
But that's exactly what Congress did under President Bush three years ago.


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Plexus Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Thursday about the farming of oats referred incorrectly to a Minnesota farmer, Harold Hoppe.
He is the last farmer in his part of western Minnesota to rely on oats for a living, but he is not the only farmer in the area growing them.


Panel to Study Quality of Air In Plane Cabins
Prompted by reports that airlines are trying to save money by using less fresh air in airplane cabins, a House panel this week will start an investigation of air quality on planes.
"We intend to make a full and complete inquiry," Representative Tim Valentine, the North Carolina Democrat who heads the Technology, Environment and Aviation subcommittee of the Science, Space and Technology Committee, said Friday in an interview.


STRONG COMPANIES ARE JOINING TREND TO ELIMINATE JOBS
It is no longer news that troubled companies are eliminating jobs by the tens of thousands.
But the recent announcement by Procter &amp; Gamble that it, too, will shrink its work force called attention to a surprising aspect of America's jobs crisis: profitable companies with booming sales are also shedding jobs, insisting that to survive the 1990's, they must prepare for the worst.
Successful companies once felt free to raise prices to fatten profits.
Now, unable to raise prices in a weak economy, the mind-set is to focus on cutting labor costs to maintain profit margins.


Worthless Bridge. Priceless View.
William Sepe stood on the charred beams of an abandoned railroad bridge across the Hudson River here and spoke of a dream: to convert the span into a pedestrian and bicycle pathway connecting green spaces on both sides of the river.
Since 1974, when a fire made it unusable, the 6,767-foot-long bridge between Highland and Poughkeepsie has stood idle, the center of a debate about whether it should be torn down or converted into a civic amenity.


Ampco-Pittsburgh reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Store Worker and Robber Killed During Robberies in the Bronx
A grocery employee was shot to death during an attempted robbery in the Bronx, and in a second weekend incident in another Bronx store, a robber was shot to death by the store's owner, the police said.
The police said Rafael Moises, 36 years old, was killed shortly after 4 P.M. yesterday at a bodega at 1725 Fulton Avenue where he worked as a store clerk.
He was hit by gunfire between a fellow store clerk and two men who had entered the bodega, brandished handguns and demanded cash.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wilmington Trust (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For Indurain, It's as Easy as Riding a Bike
In what is becoming a Parisian tradition on one of the last Sundays in July, Miguel Indurain accepted today the Tour de France's final yellow jersey, dozens of kisses and the victor's check for 2 million francs ($360,000).
That made it three in a row, and counting.
After the finish on the Champs-Elysees, as hundreds of thousands cheered him and dozens of people paraded about with the Spanish flag, Indurain summed up this Tour: "It was a little harder than the last one because there were more mountains."


At Home Abroad; Looking To the Pacific
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, interviewed while here for meetings with Asian foreign ministers, spoke of "the primacy of Asia" in American foreign policy: a primacy of opportunity.
Did that phrase, I asked, represent a change in America's view of the world?


Tecumseh Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Zulu Leader Enlists the King In Challenge to South Africa
In his campaign to keep the Zulu homeland from being digested into a new South African order, Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi has been losing ground.
The negotiators of the country's future are pressing on toward elections despite Mr.
Buthelezi's decision to boycott talks.
He is slipping in the opinion polls.
Factional war is eating away at his turf.
Many white dignitaries who once courted him as a black leader they could live with now speak of him as an obstructionist and puzzle publicly over his motives.


Behind the 8-Ball in 2d, Yanks Rally to Sink Angels in 9th
The unavoidable "8" was posted on the scoreboard in the top of the second inning.
Mike Gallego could not help but keep looking at it.
He had booted an easy two-out grounder and the floodgates had opened as the California Angels added six more runs to an already productive inning, and put the Yankees' bid to keep pace with the Boston Red Sox in jeopardy.
Gallego looked, and he felt, responsible. He felt guilty. But he also felt hope.


A Surge in Gay Book Publishing
A Different Light, which caters to gay and lesbian readers and is part full-service bookstore and part community center, opened quietly in Los Angeles 14 years ago, carrying fewer than 1,000 titles and finishing its first year with a modest $38,500 in gross sales.
Today, the store is a chain, with branches in San Francisco and Manhattan that carry 15,000 titles of almost every interest, from serious gay academic studies to classics with general appeal -- like Virginia Woolf's "Orlando" -- to gay and lesbian periodicals from all over the world.
And last year, not only did the chain have gross sales of $3.7 million, but Norman Laurila, its president and co-owner, also became the first owner of a gay and lesbian bookstore elected to the board of the American Booksellers Association, the booksellers' trade group.


Claudia Ferran, James Banko
Claudia Margarita Ferran, a third-year medical student at Temple University in Philadelphia, was married yesterday to James Richard Banko, an associate at the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle.
William E. Neis, the mayor of Doylestown, Pa., officiated at the Aldie Mansion there.
Ms.
Ferran, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which her husband received his law degree.
She is the daughter of Carmen Lizzarralde de Ferran of Caracas, Venezuela, and the late Victor Ferran.
Her father, a career diplomat, was Venezuela's Consul General in Philadelphia.


The Sounds of Summer


Bestop Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


BayBanks Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


With Radar and Cool, Merten Wins the Open
When all those about her seemed paralyzed with tension, Lauri Merten chipped in on the 70th hole and then holed a 4-foot birdie putt on the 72d to win the 48th United States Women's Open today.
The 33-year-old Merten, whose last victory came in 1984, fired a final- round four-under-par 68 over the Crooked Stick Golf Course for a total of eight-under-par 280, one stroke better than Helen Alfredsson of Sweden, who finished with a 74, and Donna Andrews, who had a 71.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Profitable companies are shedding jobs, insisting that to survive in the 1990's, they must prepare for the worst.
Procter &amp; Gamble's recent announcement that it, too, will shrink its work force called attention to this surprising aspect of America's jobs crisis.
Unable to raise prices in a weak economy, the mind-set is to focus on cutting labor costs to maintain profit margins.  [ Page A1. ]
How deep I.B.M. may cut this time can say a lot about how quickly and forcefully its new chief executive intends to leave his mark.
Analysts expect the board to take a big additional charge against earnings, perhaps more than $4 billion.  [ D1. ]


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Superior Industries International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Missouri Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Homeless Shelters Drain Money From Housing, Experts Say
Facing eviction from her Brooklyn apartment for not paying her rent, Joanna Morgan is trying to understand a strange governmental arithmetic.
She and her 2-year-old son, Charles, are entitled to a rental subsidy of $250 a month if they stay in their apartment in the Park Slope neighborhood.
But once they become homeless, the city will spend 13 times as much -- $3,200 a month -- to put them up in a shelter.
"Maybe I'm crazy," she said, "but I don't see the sense in that."


Town Fends Off the Flood, But Awakes Without Water
When Conrad Wilcoxson went into the bathroom to shave early this morning, the only thing he got from the tap was a hiss of air.
"I knew right then that we had big trouble in St. Joe," he recalled.
"Nothing came out. Nothing."


Israeli Jets, in Answer to Attacks, Bomb Guerrilla Bases in Lebanon
In Israel's heaviest air offensive since the mid-1980's, its warplanes and helicopters rained rocket fire on guerrilla targets across Lebanon on Sunday and into today in retaliation for recent rocket attacks that killed seven Israeli soldiers.
Late Sunday, rockets were fired from Lebanon, and the Israelis again retaliated early today as the battles intensified.


Moorco International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Keystone Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Washington at Work; After Fall, Stephanopoulos Remains At Center, but Out of the Public Eye
There comes a time when every young political hotshot, even one who has made his name in message and media, comes to the hard realization that you cannot spin your own life.
At least not always.
One day you are George Stephanopoulos, hip young icon of the new meritocracy, a yuppie prince with an Oxford degree, the ear of the President and, The Wall Street Journal solemnly attests, the ability to do 45 minutes on the Stairmaster at the hardest level. (O.K., it's not touch football, but close enough for the 90's.)


Railroads Threading Freight Around the Midwest's Floods
Widespread Midwestern flooding is costing the country's railroads tens of millions of dollars, punishing train crews and maintenance workers and taxing the ingenuity and patience of railroad operations employees and their customers.
But the freight is getting through.
The railroads account for more than a third of all freight moving through American commerce -- more than any other form of transport -- and their success in getting into and out of the heartland has prevented an economic headache from escalating into a stroke. 'War Rooms' and Bufferin
Total intercity rail freight traffic is down 1.5 percent nationwide from a year ago, according to the most recent weekly tabulations of the Association of American Railroads, which represents the country's 70 largest railroads.
But the strikes hobbling Eastern coal production appear to be a more important factor than the flooding, the group said.


Mosinee Paper Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed George Bell, designated hitter-outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Matt Merullo, catcher, from Nashville of the American Association.


Precision Castparts reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Public Assistance
Recession-related layoffs and homelessness in the region helped drive up the number of people receiving public assistance 22.5 percent since 1988, to more than 2 million last year.
Of the two principal aid programs, General Assistance and Aid to Families with Dependent Children, A.F.D.C. has remained the larger, accounting for 79 percent of all recipients and 70 percent of spending.
A family of three generally receives $577 a month in New York, $581 in Connecticut and $424 in New Jersey.
A.F.D.C. benefits have risen 6.6 percent in New York in the last five years, and less in New Jersey and Connecticut.
General Assistance, which normally goes to individuals, has expanded sharply - total recipients increased 66 percent and spending 96 percent.
New Jersey pays a montly average of $504 per person; New York pays $352; and Connecticut pays $306.


6 Children Left Home Alone Die In Fire


Michael Foods Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Exploring Wave Hill's Landscapes
Three choreographers skillfully juxtaposed nature and art on Wednesday evening in the second program of the Dances for Wave Hill series.
Each piece was staged in a different area of Wave Hill, a public garden in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Sham Mosher emphasized the wildness of nature in "Between the Crucible and the Source," an impressive solo to a Glen Velez score for voices and percussion, which was performed by Eva Atsalis, Randy Crafton and the composer.
Mr.
Mosher wore brief red shorts and his body was painted red from head to toe.
He looked like a goblin as he scampered toward an immense copper beech tree.


Consolidated Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Harris Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
For the luster of power, it would be hard to match the board put together for the newly organized Virginia Neurological Institute at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
The research institute will diagnose and treat diseases of the nervous system.
The board includes LAWRENCE S. EAGLEBURGER, a secretary of state in the Bush Administration, BRENT SCOWCROFT, national security adviser to President Bush, ROBERT M. GATES, former director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and TONY COELHO, former Democratic whip in the House of Representatives.


Books of The Times; Answering the Question: What Do Dogs Want?
The Hidden Life of Dogs  By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas Illustrated. 148 pages.
A Peter Davison Book.
Houghton Mifflin Company. $18.95.
It may be difficult to imagine that anything about dogs remains hidden after 20,000 years of sharing their lives with people.
But Elizabeth Marshall Thomas -- a novelist ("The Animal Wife" and "Reindeer Moon") and an anthropologist ("Warrior Herdsmen" and "The Harmless People") -- brings a fresh perspective to the subject in "The Hidden Life of Dogs," a brief but moving narrative based on 30 years of living with or observing dogs, wolves and dingoes.


Cooker Restaurant Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Deep Cuts Are Seen For I.B.M.
When the I.B.M. board meets on Tuesday, the key decision it will face is how deep to cut this time.
And the outcome should say a lot about how quickly and how forcefully the company's new chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., intends to place his mark on the troubled computer giant he joined in April.
Most Wall Street analysts and industry sources expect the board to take a big charge against second-quarter earnings for closing factories and selling off equipment, as the company streamlines its operations.
The charge for cutting back manufacturing capacity -- which could range from $1 billion to more than $4 billion, analysts said -- would be in addition to the $2 billion write-off announced early this month for larger-than-expected staff cuts.
Operating Loss Expected
The International Business Machines Corporation is also expected to announce its second-quarter results after the board meeting.
In addition to a special charge for cutbacks, analysts forecast that I.B.M. will report an operating loss in the range of $140 million to $180 million.


SynOptics Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Ukraine May Ask Special Status in Atom Pact
As sentiment in Ukraine strengthens for keeping nuclear weapons on its territory and delaying ratification of disarmament treaties, the Defense Minister has suggested that the country may try to join the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty with the special status of a "transition country" with nuclear weapons.
The Defense Minister, Col.
Gen.
Konstantin Morozov, spoke in an interview Friday on the eve of a five-day trip to Washington, where he is to meet with Defense Secretary Les Aspin.
General Morozov appeared to be searching for middle ground between the position of hard-liners in the Ukrainian Parliament, who have threatened to reject the 1970 nonproliferation treaty, and appeals from Washington that Ukraine keep its pledge to join the treaty as a country without nuclear arms.


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
This may not have been the best of years for MELVIN M. BELLI, the flamboyant trial lawyer long known as "the king of torts." He is embroiled in battle with his five former partners, from whom he has split, and with his fourth wife, who took him to court when he fell $200,000 in arrears in their divorce settlement.
However, the feisty Mr.
Belli sees no reason to be down or out and certainly, he said the other day, no reason not to celebrate his birthday in a big way.
He turns 86 on Thursday and will be at a party in Hollywood that night and at another in San Francisco on Saturday.


Scripps (E.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Biogen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Not Only Bochco's Uniforms Are Blue
Advertisers are staying away from it, ABC affiliates are complaining about it and conservative groups are threatening to boycott it.
Still, Steven Bochco said today that he wouldn't do it any other way.
Mr.
Bochco's new show, "N.Y.P.D. Blue," is, simply put, the raciest show ever to appear on the networks' prime-time schedule.
In the first episode, a male character grabs his crotch in an obscene gesture; a female character, filmed from behind, bares all, and several characters use unflattering -- and unprintable -- epithets to express their disgust.
The show's taboo-breaking material has already generated considerable controversy, in the process, of course, also generating considerable publicity. 'You're Competing With Cable'
In one of his first public appearances since the show was screened for affiliate members and for the press, Mr.
Bochco defended it today to reporters who are gathered here to preview the fall shows.
These days, he said, network dramas need more license to grab audiences that have become accustomed to more graphic fare on cable.


National Health Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Imaging Materials (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MOVE BY MOSCOW DEPLORED IN WEST
Western officials and economists today criticized the decision by Russia's Central Bank to withdraw old bank notes from circulation, saying it could unfairly confiscate currency from many Russians and severely hurt small businesses, a group that the West is eager to help.
The move to reduce the number of rubles in circulation is officially aimed at controlling the money supply and reducing inflation, but some officials and economists interviewed said the move might ultimately help drive up prices by undermining faith in Russia's currency and Central Bank.


CoreStates Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday Consumer Confidence . . .
July  Wednesday Durable Goods . . .
June  Thursday G.D.P. . . . 2d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday New-Home Prices . . .
June  New-Home Sales . . .
June  Personal Income . . .
June


Richard Quinn Jr. and Christina Frith
Christina Frith, a jazz singer and composer in New York, was married yesterday to Richard Quinn Jr., a painter and a jazz and rock musician in New York.
Viola Wood, a representative from the Bahai community of New York, officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
The bride is a daughter of Calley O. Frith of Brooklyn and Michael K. Frith of New York.
Her father is an executive vice president and the creative services director of Jim Henson Productions in New York.
He is also a principal in Trudy Trees Inc., an entertainment production company in New York.
The bride's mother is a graphics designer at Peterson &amp; Blyth &amp; Associates, a graphics design firm in New York.


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


IP Timberlands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Scholastic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Butler Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Treasury to Auction Only Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bill and note market, starting with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, there will be a two-year note auction, followed by a five-year note auction on Wednesday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.08 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.22 percent, traders said.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a rate to yield 4.23 percent, and the five-year note was at 5.26 percent.


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


INSIDE
Ruble Shift Creates a Split
Russia's Finance Ministry protested to President Yeltsin over the Central Bank's decision to invalidate pre-1993 ruble bank notes, a move that has thrown Russians into panic.
Page A8.
The High Cost of Shelters
Government policies cause New York City to spend far more on temporary than permanent shelter for the homeless, experts say.
Page B1.
Plan to Privatize Airport
The Mayor of Los Angeles wants to lease the city's main airport to pay for more city services.
But some Congressional leaders object.
Page A9.
An Aide Falls From View
George Stephanopoulos, no longer a symbol of a hip Presidency, has moved inside to what some say is an even more powerful job.
Page A13.
New Boss for M-G-M
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer dismissed its chairman and chief executive, Alan Ladd Jr., replacing him with the former head of Paramount.
Page D1.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Accounts
*
W.
F.
Young Inc., Springfield, Mass., to the Ardent Group Inc., Philadelphia, to handle advertising and promotion for the Absorbine brand line, previously handled by Van Winkle &amp; Associates, Atlanta.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Aveda Corp., Minneapolis, to Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., to handle the creative portion of the account of the manufacturer of cosmetics and environmental-care products.
The work was previously handled in-house.
Mullen was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $5 million, without a review.


Enact Seat-Belt Law For New York Taxis
To the Editor:
How many people have to be hurt before a law mandates seat belts in the back of all New York City taxis?
As passengers, we are rear-seat projectiles waiting to be launched.


Micro Warehouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coast Distribition System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Viacom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Abram L. Sachar, First President Of Brandeis University, Dies at 94
Dr.
Abram Leon Sachar, a historian who led the Hillel Foundation for 22 years and was the founding president of Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., died on Saturday at his home in Newton, Mass.
He was 94.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, said Dennis Nealon, a spokesman for the university.


One Valley Bancorp (W.V.) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dodgers Are Stymied By Mets and Hillman
The Mets went west with a reputation for falling all over themselves and left today bowing to Eric Hillman.
Give him an infield full of sure hands, and he is capable of replacing Frank Tanana in the starting rotation.
This afternoon, the 6-foot-10-inch Hillman induced 15 ground-ball outs, and won, 4-0, with a five-hit shutout.


Chief Dismissed in M-G-M Shake-up
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer dismissed Alan Ladd Jr. today as chairman and chief executive and turned to Frank G. Mancuso, the former chairman of Paramount Pictures, to rescue M-G-M, a once great but now crippled studio.
Credit Lyonnais, the giant French bank that owns M-G-M, also announced that it would revive M-G-M's companion studio, United Artists, which has been dormant for years; expand film and TV production, and take financial steps to keep M-G-M afloat.
The arrangement is intended to enable M-G-M in the next few years to climb out of the financial and creative troubles it has experienced.


Park Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dividend Meetings


Tagliabue Is for Free Agency
Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League commissioner, is more than just a fan.
But it was hard to tell that this morning as he watched on the sidelines as the Jets practiced.
Dressed in shorts and wearing a Jets cap, Tagliabue looked like just another spectator.
Actually, though, Tagliabue is busy getting a closer look at all of the teams in the wake of free agency.


Stampede Is On to Saratoga Springs Track
Moments after the final race at Belmont Park this afternoon, the great migration will head north: a caravan of half a dozen trucks, a dozen flatbeds and 15 tractor-trailers, carting everything from betting machines to horse ambulances for nearly 200 miles along the Hudson River to Saratoga Springs.
That is where race horses have been the summer stars since the Civil War.
And they will return as the stars on Wednesday, when the stately old Saratoga Race Course opens its 126th season.


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


MGIC Investment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Superfluous Subs
Sound the klaxon and prepare to dive.
The Navy is still on alert against a surprise Soviet nuclear attack, ready to retaliate at a moment's notice.
Which is to say: Today's Navy has yet to adjust to today's realities.
Its excessive fleet of missile-carrying submarines confronts a receding nuclear threat and Russia's rapidly rusting anti-submarine warfare effort.


Iowa National Bankshares Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ohio Edison Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


Adia Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
A group from Northern California captured the Grand National Team title here last night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer National Championships.
Chip Martel of Davis, Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Hugh Ross, Jeff Ferro, Brad Moss and Ravindra Murthy, all of Oakland, led by 16 imps going into the final quarter, and held on to win by 43.
The losers were Jay Apfelbaum, Richard Finberg, Florine Walters, all of Pittsburgh, Brian Ellis of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, Asim Ulke of Monroeville, Pa., and Piyush Vakil of Wooster, Ohio.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; By ordering fewer episodes of its new shows, CBS tries to change a system, and to save money.
THE television networks have always paid millions of dollars a year to subsidize failure.
Most new television series end up being canceled, and that usually happens before all the episodes a network has ordered are broadcast.
That forces the network to pay for production of episodes that never get on the air, something they have always willingly done.
With profits down, though, the networks are increasingly looking for ways to reduce those costs.
CBS thinks it has found a simple solution: order fewer episodes of new shows.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


CDW Computer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Matchmaking Game: The Profits in Dating
Sam Cohen, a 30-year-old computer consultant, experienced "a particularly dry spring, socially speaking." He swallowed hard, and went to a dating service.
First came Kathleen, "a great lunch." Then there was Susan, who "was just wonderfully evanescent, not to take anything away from Kathleen."


Jets Hoping Johnson Is a Big Back in Deed
Sometimes it's not the manner in which news is delivered.
Sometimes it's the message that counts most.
And so it was with running back Johnny Johnson last April when he heard of the draft-day trade between Phoenix and the Jets.
"I had been in San Jose with some friends," Johnson recalled, "and I was driving back to Santa Cruz on draft day when I found out from a friend of mine, who was also driving, and he pulled up alongside of me and said, 'How do you like being a Jet now?' That's how I found out."


Decora Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Seeing a Hidden Play in Macy Junk Bonds
Two big players in the busted bonds business appear to have outmaneuvered other, less nimble investors in half a dozen or more big bankruptcy cases, and some traders believe that R. H. Macy &amp; Company may be their next target.
Fidelity Investments' Capital and Income Fund and the Trust Company of the West's four Special Credits Funds have big stakes in Macy's bank debt and may have begun trolling for its junk bonds, the traders and some analysts say.


Q-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
An obituary headline on Thursday about Thomas Moody Campbell, a scholar and author on 20th-century American foreign policies and relations, misstated his age in some editions.
He was 57, not 51.


Trinova Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boston's Doing It, Milan and Moscow Too
To the Editor:
Mary Cantwell didn't have to go all the way to Sydney, Australia, to get "A Ticket to Ride" (Editorial Notebook, July 13).


Dallas Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Geon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sealright Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


China Denies Violating Pact By Selling Arms to Pakistan
At a meeting with United States officials, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China denied today that Beijing had violated an international arms control agreement that bars it from exporting missile technology, a senior Administration official said.
But it was unclear whether the Chinese had denied selling parts for M-11 missiles to Pakistan.
Mr.
Qian also said China was willing to discuss a proposal by President Clinton that all countries with nuclear arms suspend testing of the weapons, the official said.


Steel Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Amy H. Linsky and Roy B. Oser
Amy Hallen Linsky, a daughter of Bettie Hallen of Springfield, Mass., and Leo J. Linsky of East Longmeadow, Mass., was married yesterday to Roy Bennett Oser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan S. Oser of St.
George, S.I.
Judge Norma L. Shapiro, a cousin of the bridegroom and a United States District Court judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, officiated at the Lord Jeffery Inn in Amherst, Mass.
Mrs.
Oser graduated from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in secondary education from American International College.
Her father is a distributor in East Longmeadow for World's Finest Chocolates Inc., a candy producer in Chicago.
Her mother teaches English at Central High School in Springfield.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richard M. FitzSimmons, Corporate Lawyer, 69
Richard M. FitzSimmons, a former general counsel and senior vice president of the Allis-Chalmers Corporation, died Friday.
He was 69 and had homes in Milwaukee and in Hobe Sound, Fla.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his daughter Jamie Thorson of Mequon, Wis.


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patents
THE debate among new parents, environmentalists and diaper manufacturers never seems to end: Which is better -- cloth or disposable?
Dana L. Watson, of Wichita Falls, Tex., adds a new dimension to the diaper debate with a newly patented invention that he says will recycle disposable diapers at a profit to the recycler.


Whitney Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; Mostly Mozart, Partly the Audience
Friday night's Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra program at Avery Fisher Hall offered crowd-pleasing repertory of unassailable quality played to a large and somewhat fidgety audience.
Late Mozart was represented by the last piano concerto (the B flat) and the next-to-last symphony (the G minor).
Teen-age Mozart was represented by the D-major Violin Concerto.
The listenership was represented by the static of shuffling feet, rattling paper and respiratorial misadventure: the kind of dull background crackle that so succesfully impedes clear reception at these events.


More Possible Suspects May Be Arrested in Bombing Schemes
With the arrest on Friday of Matarawy Mohammad Said Saleh, Federal officials say they have now identified and arrested the core group of people involved in a foiled plot to bomb New York City targets.
Investigators said, however, that while they now believe the main players have been rounded up, there are other possible suspects at large who may have played some role in the unsuccessful plot, the bombing of the World Trade Center, or both.


Payco American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Illegal Angle: Inertia Mires New Schools
Of all the battles the founders of the Benjamin Banneker Academy have waged to open one of New York City's 32 small new public high schools on time in September, none has proven more intractable than the matter of the subversively angling wall.
Architects at Pratt Institute, the Brooklyn design school sponsoring the new school, penciled the angling wall into the academy's floor plans to widen a hallway at one end, creating a student gathering area easily monitored from staff offices.


METRO DIGEST
SEEKING A VOICE IN PUERTO RICO'S FUTURE
Rebuffed in their efforts to win permission for Puerto Ricans on the mainland to participate in a plebiscite on the island's political future, a group of Hispanic elected officials in New York announced plans to hold a separate vote to give those outside the island a voice in the battle over statehood.
Though the vote in New York will not affect the island's Nov. 14 plebiscite, organizers say it will significantly influence how Congress responds.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  BATTLE GROWS OVER CUNY CHANGES
In an increasingly bitter battle over plans to reorganize the City University of New York, faculty leaders will hold an unusual summer meeting tomorrow to vent their anger at Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds.
The meeting comes after the recent disclosure that Dr.
Reynolds was seeking to withhold some financing from colleges that had not reacted favorably to her reorganization plans.
B3.


Adamson Hoebel, 86; Studied Pre-Literate Groups
E.
Adamson Hoebel, an anthropologist who studied the legal systems of pre-literate societies, died Friday at his home in St.
Paul.
He was 86.
The immediate cause was not clear, but he had a history of heart problems, said Frank C. Miller, head of the anthropology department at the University of Minnesota, where Dr.
Hoebel had been a faculty member.


Berlin Journal; Rail Ramps Spared, to Tell Their Sickening Story
Bowing to protests from Jewish groups, German railroad planners have withdrawn plans to demolish part of a Berlin train station from which tens of thousands of Jews were deported to their deaths in the 1940's.
Instead, they will build a monument there to honor the victims.
Several long freight ramps at Grunewald station were to be torn down to make way for a modern complex serving passengers on newly improved routes between Berlin and cities in western Germany.
But at a meeting last week, planners agreed not to proceed with any demolition until the project is redesigned to meet the objections of Jewish groups.


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Simpson Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Spacelabs Medical Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Boston's Doing It, Milan and Moscow Too; Subway Blues
To the Editor:
I read with great amusement Mary Cantwell's "Ticket to Ride" (Editorial Notebook, July 13).


Santa Cruz Operation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Valmont Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Community Health Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Carolina Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dr. Pepper/Seven-Ups Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Total Petroleum Co. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richardson Electronics Ltd.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Politicians Find Jogging With Clinton Is No Stroll in the Park
Representative Bob Filner stopped jogging about four years ago because of a bad back.
But when word came that President Clinton planned to spend the night in San Diego, the freshman lawmaker didn't think twice about inviting himself along for an early morning jaunt on the Coronado beach.
Not timid about seizing a political opportunity, Mr.
Filner, who is 50, said: "It's a status thing. I thought there'd be some interesting pictures taken that I could use to talk about in a fun way with my constituents."


Orion Pictures Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Film Maker's Connections Between 2 Cultures
Landing an interview with Pham Van Dong is not easy.
When Tiana, an American actress and film maker born in Vietnam, announced to journalists in Ho Chi Minh City that she would be talking to the former premier, who retired in 1986, the reaction was skeptical.
No one could interview Mr.
Dong.
In fact, many journalists were convinced that he was dead.
Yet there he is in Tiana's autobiographical documentary, "From Hollywood to Hanoi," artfully evading awkward questions about Communist rule in Vietnam, pointedly shifting the discussion to the higher plane of Vietnamese poetry.


Norwood Promotional Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Caraustar Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cintas Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Larizza Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Commercial (Arkansas) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Census Report Found Murphy Brown Atypical; Volunteer for Children
To the Editor:
The rise in single-parent families (front page, July 14) is an international phenomenon.
It's not one that springs only from America's urban plight; therefore, it's not one that will simply go away.


Merrimac Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 19


No Headline
"I think the press enjoys a good fall, and particularly  a good fall by someone who's younger and more successful and better looking than they are. That really turns 'em on." -- JAMES CARVILLE, political adviser to President Clinton, about George Stephanopoulos.  [ A13:6. ]


Microchip Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


VWR Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


United Television reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Freda Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Nashua Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


A Team of Individuals; Almost 10, New Jersey Quintuplets Vie to Stand on Own
Christopher is the oldest.
Lauren is the tallest.
Megan is the youngest.
Ryan is the most energetic.
Kevin is the best all-around in sports.
The superlatives translate into ammunition when the siblings compete with one another to be first, last, best -- anything to make them stand out as individuals.
It's part of a campaign that has been going on for almost 10 years since Jenifer and Jerry Joyce became parents for the first time on Aug. 18, 1983.
They emerged from the hospital into a flurry of publicity about the armsful of babies they would be raising.


Sonat Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Worthen Banking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Anthony Working for a Future
As the Doral Arrowwood New York Summer League concluded today, Knicks Coach Pat Riley said he was pleased with his embattled young point guard, Greg Anthony, and the three other Knicks under contract who participated in the 10-day tournament.
"Greg has shown great leadership," said Riley, who watched most of the Knicks' seven games.
"He's shown he is not affected by what happened at the end of the season."


O'Sullivan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


New Magazine From Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch's News America Publishing Inc., which recently took over management of The New York Post, is planning to start its first magazine in more than three years.
The publication, Married Woman magazine, will begin in January and will be aimed at young married women in their mid-20's through late 30's.
The company projects initial nationwide sales of 350,000 for the magazine, which will be published every two months.


Besicorp Group reports earnings for Year to March 31


Textron Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Student Loan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Tossed Firecracker, A Cloud on Coleman
Vince Coleman, the Mets' left fielder, threw a firecracker from a parked car at Dodger Stadium late Saturday afternoon, and the Los Angeles Fire Department is investigating whether the incident was connected to injuries reported by three fans who had attended the game.
Eric Davis, the Dodgers' left fielder, said Coleman was sitting in Davis's blue Cherokee Jeep after the Dodgers' 5-4 victory Saturday when he threw the firecracker.


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acme-Cleveland reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the debate over the Black Sea Fleet and the port of Sevastopol misstated Crimea's position in the 1991 vote on independence from Russia.
Crimea voted 54 percent in favor of independence, not against.


Lisa Borg and Dan Broe
Drs.
Lisa Borg and Dan Broe were married yesterday at the Rockefeller University Faculty Club in New York.
Rabbi Harold Swiss and the Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Robert F. Borg and E. Winifred Borg, both of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Daniel and Nora Broe of Tannersville, N.Y.


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Houghton Mifflin reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


China Denies Violating Pact By Selling Arms to Pakistan; Pakistani Denies A-Test
A retired Pakistani general denied yesterday that he had said Pakistan had tested a nuclear weapon.
Gen.
Mirza Aslam Beg, who was Chief of Staff of the Pakistani Army from 1988 to 1991, was quoted in a report on Friday as saying Pakistan had built a nuclear bomb and carried out a successful laboratory test of it in 1987.
"Pakistan crossed the line in 1987," he was quoted as saying by the Urdu-language newspaper Awaz International, published in London.
"Pakistan carried out the test in cold laboratory conditions, and it was very successful."


American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Serbs Pound a U.N. Position in Sarajevo
Serbian nationalist troops besieging Sarajevo broke a cease-fire soon after it took effect today with heavy artillery barrages, including a bombardment of French troops quartered in a derelict sports stadium from the 1984 Olympic Games.
The 45-minute attack on the stadium, involving 68 tank and mortar shells, caused only slight injuries among the 100 French troops, who took shelter inside a barracks after the assault opened with machine-gun fire.
But 10 French military vehicles valued at millions of dollars, including three armored troop carriers and three trucks, were set ablaze and destroyed.


Cooper Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Commonwealth Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Software Developer's Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Morris T. Weeks Jr., Writer, 80
Morris T. Weeks Jr., a magazine editor who became an author and freelance writer, died on Thursday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 80 and lived in Sea Cliff.
The cause was complications after heart surgery, said Stret Whitting of the Whitting Funeral Home in Glen Head.


Fulton Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trinova Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tool Orders Dropped 2.3% Last Month
In a sign that plant managers are more wary about the future than they were just a few months ago, machine-tool orders dipped 2.3 percent in June, after a 9.4 percent decline the previous month, the Association for Manufacturing Technology reported yesterday.
New orders fell to $308.65 million in June from $315.75 million in May and $348.30 million in April.
The association, based in Washington, represents 340 makers of machine tools.


Carpenter Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


GALILEE UNDER FIRE
Israeli forces continued bombing strikes and artillery barrages early this morning on targets in southern Lebanon for a third straight day of attacks on pro-Iranian militiamen.
The renewed assault, in accounts from Israeli and Lebanese officials, followed an intensified drive by Israeli forces on Monday to stop rocket attacks on Israeli settlements near the Lebanon border.
But it failed to stop the militiamen from unleashing more rocket attacks on Israeli settlements, and the fighting forced civilians on both sides of the border region to flee or seek safety in bunkers on Monday.


James Henderson, 72, Executive In Top Posts at American Express
James Alexander Henderson, whose 36-year-career at American Express took him to the company's top echelon, died on Sunday at his home in St.
James, L.I.
He was 72.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Donald McAllister, Top Executive, 91, In Publishing House
Donald McAllister, a business-publications executive active in his family's concern for more than seven decades, died on Thursday at New York Hospital.
He was 91 and had homes in Manhattan and Centre Island, L.I.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


San Marcos Journal; In Nicaragua, No Peace, and Nostalgia for Somoza
On the musty walls of her somber dry goods shop just off this small town's central square, Maria-Elsa Palacio pointed to a faded portrait of the longtime dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle and issued a startling judgment.
"He was the last good President we had," Mrs.
Palacio said, passing over mention of the late general's record of massacres and land-grabbing.
"Say what you will about him, but in his time there was work. To us, he was a real winner."


IEC Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Brazil Arrests Military Policemen In the Killing of 7 Homeless Boys
Three military policemen were arrested and questioned today about the killings on Friday of seven homeless boys who slept on sidewalks of downtown Rio.
The arrests, ordered by a judge today, came after a weekend of protests in the city center and tumultuous funerals in the city's bleak northern suburbs.


E&amp;B Marine reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


Summer's Call: Practice, Practice, Practice


This Jet Secondary Seems 2d To None
Cornerback Eric Thomas looks at the Jets' secondary and sees a group that, he says, is better than the one he played with in Cincinnati in 1989.
That Bengals team reached the Super Bowl and included a couple of Pro Bowl players, Thomas and strong safety David Fulcher.


Dinosaur Institute Keeps Digging
UNDAUNTED by a year of F.B.I. raids, subpoenas, the prospect of Federal indictments, pressure from half a dozen Government agencies and uneven support from academic paleontologists, a South Dakota fossil dealer is still digging for dinosaurs and has just bagged a new Tyrannosaurus rex, its third in two years.
Robert Farrar, an officer of the beleaguered Black Hills Institute of Geological Research of Hill City, S. D., a commercial dealer in fossils, declined to disclose the site in northwest South Dakota where the new tyrannosaur had been found, but he said the skeleton appeared to be fairly complete.
Peter L. Larson, the company's president, said that only 15 "significant" tyrannosaur skeletons had been unearthed throughout the world and that 3 of them had been excavated by his company.


Bridge
One of the country's most experienced partnerships won the Life Master Pair Championship here Sunday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Dan Morse of Houston and John Sutherlin of Dallas, who have previously won several major team titles but none in pairs, came from behind with a 59 percent final session to win by almost a full board.
The standings were: in first, Morse and Sutherlin with 1213.678 match points; in second, Tom Clarke of Lake Charles, La., and Alan Le Bendig of Los Angeles with 1178.05; in third, William Root of Manhattan and Richard Pavlicek Sr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., with 1154; in fourth, Robert Levin of Orlando, Fla., and Gaylor Kasle of Palm Springs, Calif., with 1153.23; in fifth, Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan and Mats Nilsland of Malmo, Sweden, with 1152.08.


Quarter? Quarter? Dollar? Sidewalk Charity Lives
As she moves each day through the outstretched hands and jingling coffee cups on the sidewalks and subways of New York, Grace Desnoes has to make choices.
She saves her money to give to two homeless men she has come to know.
Others, like Bernice Anderson, give only food to those who ask for help.
Angelo Cinti sets aside $5 a week, which he gives to anyone who asks.


Health-Mor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Perez Hoping That He's Not Penciled Into the Pen
There is a huge pitching calendar hanging in Manager Buck Showalter's office at Yankee Stadium that lists his daily starters.
For Sunday's game, Showalter had Melido Perez written in, but he also had Domingo Jean printed beside Perez.
Jean, who pitched for Class AAA Columbus Sunday, is hovering around Perez on and off the calendar.
After Perez was shelled for six runs and six hits in only one and two-thirds innings in New York's improbable 9-8 comeback victory over the Angels Sunday, Showalter met with his struggling starter for 20 minutes later that night to discuss his "situation." Although Showalter claimed today that Perez will not be demoted to the bullpen, the prospect still seems likely.


Accounts
*
Potter Hazlehurst Inc., East Greenwich, R.I., was awarded three accounts: Mattress Discounters, Upper Marlboro, Md., to handle its account, previously handled in-house; Home Theater Concepts Ltd., Norwood, Mass., as the first agency to handle the maker of home entertainment systems' account, and Marval Marketing Group, Rockland, Me., as the first agency to handle advertising for the marine retailer.
Billings were not disclosed.


ARCO reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Air France, Continental Linkup Seen
Continental Airlines and Air France are expected to announce today an arrangement to coordinate flights, allowing passengers easier travel between the United States and Europe.
Industry executives said yesterday that the agreement would allow the airlines to sell seats on each other's flights so that passengers traveling to Europe could, for example, begin on Continental's domestic system and continue overseas on Air France on a single ticket.
The airlines would coordinate their schedules to make connecting flights more convenient.


Equifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Critic's Notebook; Is It Fiction? Is It Nonfiction? And Why Doesn't Anyone Care?
What's upsetting about "The Last Brother," by Joe McGinniss, isn't just that the author invented thoughts Senator Edward M. Kennedy might have had, or that in the opening section of the book Mr.
McGinniss seems to have appropriated significant portions of his narrative from William Manchester's 1967 book, "The Death of a President." What's even more alarming is that "The Last Brother" represents the logical culmination of several disturbing trends in publishing, literary theory and American culture at large that have accelerated precipitately in recent years.
The lines between fact and fiction have become so blurred nowadays that many readers are likely to shrug off Mr.
McGinniss's startling acknowledgment that in creating his portrait of the Massachusetts Democrat, he has "written certain scenes and described certain events from what I have inferred to be his point of view," despite the fact that he did not even interview the Senator for the book.
Indeed, we are daily assaulted by books, movies and television docudramas that hopscotch back and forth between the realms of history and fiction, reality and virtual reality, with impunity.


Secondhand Smoking
Secondhand smoke is at the very least a nuisance, and at the very worst a health hazard.
So Americans can be grateful that the Environmental Protection Agency announced guidelines last week on smoking in public buildings.
The guidelines, however, are voluntary -- which means that it's up to states and localities to make them stick.
Some states -- among them California, Hawaii, Vermont, North Dakota and Utah -- already have regulations on environmental tobacco smoke.
New York might have been on its way to having intelligent restrictions, too, had the State Legislature passed the "Prokids" bill this month.
But the Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino, seems to have thought the tobacco industry, just handed a 17-cent-per-pack tax hike, had taken enough of a hit.
The bill, agreed upon by Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the Senate Health Committee, and passed overwhelmingly by the Assembly, never got to the Senate floor.


A Witness and a Victim Tell of an 'Explosion'
The firecracker apparently tossed by Mets outfielder Vince Coleman on Saturday was described today by witnesses as an explosion that sent debris flying into a crowd of fans and cut the face of a 1-year-old girl.
Floyd Brown of Elysian Heights, Calif., said today that he and about 100 other people were behind a chain-link fence adjacent to the player parking lot at Dodger Stadium when the firecracker went off.
"I heard the explosion and saw a cloud of smoke," he said.
"And then I saw a woman holding a baby running into the security office. The lady was freaking out. She was saying, "My baby, my baby.' " A Boom, Not a Pop
The arson unit of the Los Angeles City Fire Department has not disclosed the type of firecracker used.
But Brown said: "When I was a kid, firecrackers went 'pop, pop, pop,' but this was a boom, loud. People were hit by the rebound or the ricochet."


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Blow to Russian Reforms
The Russian central bank's decision to withdraw older ruble banknotes from circulation is either inept, malicious or corrupt.
But whatever lies behind it, the policy announced Saturday is sure to undermine badly needed economic reform in the former Soviet Union.
Under the plan, the bank would let Russians swap small amounts of pre-1993 rubles for new rubles, but would confiscate large ruble holdings.
The policy was presented as a way to clamp down on inflation by cutting down excess ruble holdings in Russia and stemming the flow of rubles from neighboring republics.
But this rationale is transparently lame.


INSIDE
Yeltsin Relaxes Money Plan
Russia's President softened a drastic currency revision the Central Bank announced on Saturday.
Page A3.
Rebuilding in Afghanistan
In Herat, on the western edge of Afghanistan's border with Iran, rebuilding has begun.
Page A6.
Fiction or Nonfiction?
Disturbing trends in literary theory and American culture meet in Joe McGinniss's book about Edward Kennedy.
Critic's Notebook, page C13. 'Plymouth Rock' of Florida
Archeologists have found what they believe is the site of the first permanent European settlement in the United States.
Science Times, page C1.


METRO DIGEST
FOR NEW YORK INMATES, CLEMENCY IS RARE Last December, after almost 11 years in prison on drug charges, Lawrence Snider was one of only two New York State inmates to receive clemency from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The other was Jean Harris, whose conviction for killing her former lover became a cause celebre.
Inmate advocates say that while cases like Mrs.
Harris's attract attention, prisoners like Mr.
Snider -- who developed drug and AIDS awareness programs and organized charity drives in prison -- are more representative of those who deserve to be considered for clemency.
But in 11 years, Mr.
Cuomo has granted the extraordinary relief only 31 times.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY HIGHWAY ROBBERY IN THE BRONX Fourteen people on a shuttle bus bound from Washington Heights to Providence, R.I., are robbed on the Major Deegan Expressway by three fellow passengers who produced pistols and forced the driver to pull over at the Van Cortlandt Park exit.
The highway bandits took cash and jewelry, then made their escape in a waiting car.
B2.


Schering-Plough Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Airborne Freight Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is offering $100 million of notes due in 1996 at 100 to yield 4.65 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The issue is noncallable for one year. *
Medic Inc., Pennsauken, N.J., is offering $30 million of exchangeable subordinated debentures due in 2003 at 100 to yield 7.5 percent through Dillon, Read.
Noncallable for three years, the debentures are rated B-3 by Moody's Investors Service and B- by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.99
3.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.08
3.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.22
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.56
5.59
6.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.70
7.51
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.43
8.54
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.81
5.81
6.09
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
The "On Sunday" column in the Metro Report on Sunday referred incorrectly to a cemetery in Queens that prompted a new state law banning burials amid landfill debris.
It is the Cypress Hills Cemetery.


Spain Launches Invasion Of Latin America, to Push For Cultural Preservation
Against a landscape of rolling fields and grazing cows, church columns of pink stone rise unfinished.
Work stopped in 1768 when a decree arrived here from King Carlos III of Spain, ordering the expulsion of all Jesuit missionaries from this distant corner of empire.
Now, a new fence protects the ruins from art thieves.
Sturdy beams shore up sagging walls.
Near a new guard cottage, a billboard heralds the mission's new benefactor: Spain.


Giant Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
ARGOSY GAMING CO., Alton, Ill., acquired a lease giving it mooring privileges to riverfront areas on the Mississippi River in St.
Louis from St.
Louis Concessions Inc. for $33.5 million in stock and $8.3 million in cash.


Review/Television; Child's Right to Parents She Knows
Barbara Walters leaves no doubt about whose side she is on in the dispute over Kimberly Mays's efforts to "divorce" her biological parents.
Ms.
Walters comes down undisguisedly in favor of 14-year-old Kimberly, where most viewers of tonight's preview of "Turning Point," the new ABC news-magazine program, are likely to join her.
The case, which is to go before a Florida judge next week, resembles that of Gregory K., the first minor to be permitted to sue to terminate the rights of his biological parents.
The main difference is that no one says that Kimberly was ill-treated by Ernest or Regina Twigg; indeed, she never heard of them until she was 9 years old.


No Headline
"Once again, we are making fools of ourselves in the eyes of the world. We are using Bolshevik methods of a Stalinist nature to try to resolve economic problems in the context of a market economy." -- BORIS G. FYODOROV, the Russian Finance Minister.  [ A3:3 ]


Sports of The Times; Light a Fuse On Coleman's Departure
VINCE COLEMAN was hired to be the Mets' firecracker, a leadoff batter with explosive speed who could steal bases and score runs.
But he has been mostly a dud.
And a detriment.
Just when the 31-year-old left fielder with hamstrings as fragile as violin strings has remained healthy enough to generate possible interest in a trade that would liberate the Mets from his sneering, surly attitude as well as the remainder of his four-year, $11.95 million contract, he has done something stupid.
Again.


Candidly Broadway
There's Richard Rodgers, briefing the cast of "Carousel." And Leonard Bernstein, coaching the dancers in "West Side Story." Carol Channing holds forth in her dressing room during the run of "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes," and the young Jerome Robbins looks ready to leap into a dance routine in "The Straw Hat Revue of 1939."
Yesterday's theater comes vibrantly alive again in "100 Years of Broadway: A Photographic View," an exhibition that runs through Oct. 3 at the International Center of Photography Midtown, 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street.


Senate Confirms Former Amex Head as S.E.C. Chairman
The Senate today confirmed the nomination of Arthur Levitt Jr., President Clinton's selection as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr.
Levitt, the former chairman of the American Stock Exchange, will succeed Richard C. Breeden, who said in February that he would step down as chairman.


Rise in C02 May Shift Key Biochemical Cycles
IN a study with wide-ranging ecological implications, researchers at the University of Michigan say that regardless of whether rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide contribute to global warming, the gas itself may produce fundamental changes in the Earth's carbon and nitrogen cycles.
The researchers found that photosynthesis, root development and plant growth increased significantly in bigtooth aspen seedlings grown in chambers with carbon levels twice as high as the level of 350 parts per million currently in the atmosphere.
The summer-long study was conducted in 1991 at the university's biological station near Pellston, Mich.


Internatioanl Recovery reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A War No One Wants
On the face of it, the fiercest fighting in Lebanon in more than a decade may seem destined to sabotage the latest chapter in the Middle East peace talks and perhaps even to draw Israel and Syria into an all-out war.
Certainly, the violence of the last few days has a familar feeling: guerrilla fighters in southern Lebanon using long-range artillery and Katyusha rockets against Israel positions; Israeli forces responding with such ferocity that the only prospect seems to be ever-worsening fighting.


Japan Wins U.S. Embassy Work
The State Department has selected a Japanese construction company to renovate the residence of the United States Ambassador in Tokyo, even though the American trade representative has found that Japan discriminated against American companies in awarding Government construction contracts.
An American company that wanted the job, Fischbach &amp; Moore International, filed a formal protest Friday contending that the State Department award violated Federal law.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ABC Head Rises at Cap Cities
With his retirement nearing, Daniel B. Burke, the chief executive of Capital Cities/ ABC, announced a set of promotions today that established Robert A. Iger, president of the ABC Television Network Group, as his heir apparent.
Mr.
Iger, 42, has spent his entire career at ABC and has enjoyed a remarkably rapid rise through its ranks.
He will continue to head the network while also assuming the title of executive vice president of Capital Cities/ABC.


Too Often, New York's Mentally Ill Get Swept Under a Bridge; Republican Support
To the Editor:
State Senate Republicans are portrayed as not "pure of heart" in passing the community mental health resources bill (Michael Winerip column, July 11).
Our purpose, it is claimed, is mainly to embarrass the Governor, who opposed the bill.
The Senate Republicans have a long record of standing up for New Yorkers with mental illness.
When the state's budget crunch hit in 1989, the Senate Republican majority led the fight against the Governor's budget, which excessively singled out the Office of Mental Health for cuts.


Review/Dance; World and City Premieres In a Starry Prospect Park
When summer comes, dancers often leave theaters behind to perform in parks and city streets.
Although dancing under the stars can be pleasant, not all dance groups and public spaces are made for each other.
That became clear on Saturday night when Matthew Nash Music and Dance appeared in Brooklyn at the band shell in Prospect Park.
A large audience enthusiastically welcomed the well-disciplined and technically agile company.
Yet, as the evening progressed, many emotional nuances in Mr.
Nash's choreography failed to register.


Dow Climbs by 20.96, to a Record 3,567.70
The Dow Jones industrial average surged to another closing record yesterday, as all leading stock market indicators climbed.
The Dow gained 20.96 points, ending the day at 3,567.70, surpassing its previous closing high of 3,555.40 set last Wednesday.


Sihanouk, After U.S. Shift, Lets Government Talk to Khmer Rouge
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, having apparently won concessions he wanted from the Clinton Administration, agreed today to allow Cambodia's newly formed coalition Government to resume negotiations with the Khmer Rouge to end their civil war.
Prince Sihanouk, the head of state and former monarch, said in a statement that he would allow the talks to resume if they were "likely to bring peace and resolve the problem of the partitioning of Cambodia." U.S.
Signals Policy Shift
Last week, the Prince called off peace talks set for September with Khieu Samphan, the titular leader of the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired rebels responsible for the deaths of at least several hundred thousand and possibly more than one million Cambodians under their rule in the 1970's.


Lubrizol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


It's Our Own Genes We Should Worry About; Parade of 'Causes'
To the Editor:
Oh no, not another earnest-faced scientist trying to explain to us what "causes" homosexuality.
This time it's the genes (front page, July 16).
As a card-carrying homosexual who has witnessed an endless array of such "causes" paraded before the public over the years, I am always left with the same question: Why don't these scientists show the same eagerness in researching the causes of homophobia? (Is it genetic, as in testosterone poisoning, or cultural, as in religious indoctrination?) In other words, don't they see that their whole manner of framing and pursuing the question is saturated with the dominant social biases of their time?


Strategic No More, Mohair Loses Its Status in Senate
With no debate or recorded vote, the Senate voted today to kill a subsidy dating from an era when wool and mohair were considered strategic materials essential for military uniforms.
But the sheep and goat farmers may prevail after all.
The word on Capitol Hill is that the subsidy program will probably be preserved, though trimmed somewhat, when the agriculture appropriations bill goes to a House-Senate conference.


Top G.O.P. Couple Splits on a National Service Bill
Bob Dole's latest filibuster has its supporters in the Senate, but it has a major opponent at home: his wife.
Backers of the national service bill revealed today that Elizabeth Dole, the president of the American Red Cross, favors the measure that her husband, the Senate Republican leader, portrays as a threat to the American taxpayer.


Nasdaq Uncovered Short Sales at Record High
The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose to another record high this month, signifying a rising amount of bearishness.
But a large number of short-sellers appeared to give up hope that Snapple Beverage would ever tumble.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported that the short interest in Nasdaq stocks climbed 4 percent, to 558.4 million shares, from 537.1 million shares a month earlier.
The figure includes trades through July 8.
The figure has risen 34 percent over the last year.


German Company Got Crematorium Patent
To the Editor:
Prof.
Gerald Fleming's recent discovery in Russian archives of the records of the 1946 Red Army interrogations of the employees of the German firm J. A. Topf und Sohne who designed and built the crematoriums at Auschwitz and other Nazi camps ("Engineers of Death," Op-Ed, July 18) is an important contribution to the historiography of the Holocaust.
I was particularly struck by the quoted statement of the senior engineer Fritz Sander that the company's diabolical design innovation -- a crematorium that used the fat of the burning corpses as fuel to operate the furnaces -- "could not yet be approved" for a patent because it was classified by the Third Reich as a state secret.


Arkansas Best (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Continues His Untimely Fall Back to Earth
The sight is strange to the Yankees.
It was enough of a surprise when Jimmy Key allowed runs earlier this season, but now he has actually lost some games, too.
Their most reliable pitcher has been tough on the eyes lately.
The decline of Key continued tonight when the Tigers nicked him for eight hits, including Cecil Fielder's crushing opposite-field home run, and eased to a 5-2 victory at Tiger Stadium.
Key has lost two straight games after only losing twice in his first 20 starts with the Yankees.
The lefty who rarely made a mistake has been human for the last week.


MacDonald Harris Is Dead at 71; Novelist and Literature Professor
MacDonald Harris, a novelist and a teacher of comparative literature, died on Saturday at his home in Newport Beach, Calif.
He was 71.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son Paul Heiney.


United Dominion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fix, but Don't Kill, the N.E.D.
In a surprising turnabout in June, the House of Representatives voted to kill funding for the National Endowment for Democracy.
By Washington standards, the money is trivial -- $48 million -- but the principle is scarcely petty.
Unless the Senate decides otherwise this week, it will mark the end of the N.E.D., which was established during the Reagan years to promote democracy abroad and is now supported by President Clinton.
Opponents charge that the endowment is a cold-war fossil whose mission has been compromised by its peculiar status as a private foundation using public funds.
They point with alarm to dubious grants to right-wing trade unions or exile groups favored by one or another of four "core" intermediaries who make the grants -- the Republican and Democratic parties, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce.
But one can acknowledge the point and still wonder if the right remedy is to scuttle the program rather than repair it.


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Is Told to Review Lumber Tariff
A panel of Canadian and American trade experts sided with Canada today in a longstanding dispute over softwood lumber exports to the United States.
The panel, created under a trade agreement in 1988 by Washington and Ottawa, ruled that the International Trade Commission, a United States agency, must reconsider its decision to allow tariffs on the lumber imports as a way of combating subsidies.


Tecumseh Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Calendar Crazy
Insurance and plumbing supply companies hand them out to customers.
So do banks.
But it's never been clear why members of Congress need specially imprinted calendars to distribute to constituents.
It's harder to fathom why, when Congress ought to be trying to trim spending, taxpayers should continue to pay for this self-promotion.
Representative Martin Hoke, a freshman Republican from Ohio, wants to end the Congressional calendar craze.
He got nowhere last month when he tried to get the House Rules Committee to accept an amendment striking the $740,000 allotted for next year's Congressional calendars from the 1994 legislative appropriations bill.
Had he succeeded, the actual savings would have been much more.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Walton Gets a Coaching Job
Maybe it is because he will not feel any pressure to win immediately.
Perhaps the chants of "Joe Must Go" no longer ring in his ears.
It could even be that he missed being a head coach.
Whatever the reason, JOE WALTON is making a comeback of sorts.
Walton, the former Jets head coach who was one of the most unpopular in team history, will be named today as the first head football coach at Robert Morris.
The Pittsburgh-area school recently decided to field a team for the first time, and it will begin play at the Division I-AA level in the Eastern College Athletic Conference in 1994.


Gunmen Rob 14 on a Bus In the Bronx
Fourteen people on a shuttle bus bound from Washington Heights to Providence, R.I., were robbed yesterday on the Major Deegan Expressway by three fellow passengers who produced pistols and forced the driver to pull over at the Van Cortlandt Park exit in the Bronx.
The police said the highway bandits took cash and jewelry from the passengers and driver, then escaped in what the passengers described as an "old black Buick" that had been traveling directly in front of the shuttle bus.
No arrests had been made last night, the police said.


Keeping It to a Low Roar; New York City Tries Electronic Muzzles to Zap Bus Noise
Watch out, Klingons, a new cloaking technology is in the field.
It helps hide a city bus.
The technology is an "anti-noise generator," a computer-driven, 220-watt speaker in the tailpipe of a bus that emits sound waves to partially cancel exhaust noise.
The New York City Transit Authority is testing the device, also called an electronic muffler, in four buses.


When It's Time to Pay the Piper Electronically
THE scientific theory of chaos holds that if a butterfly flaps its wings in China, your household finances will be a mess.
That pesky butterfly is particularly busy near the end of the month, leaving the checkbook chaotic and the bills piling up.
Fortunately, the financial butterflies can be counteracted by two impressive new household finance programs, one for Windows computers and one for Macintoshes.
The newest program is Quicken 4.0 for Macintosh, a major upgrade of the Apple version of the most popular computer program for handling personal finances.
In some ways the new Mac version is just catching up to its Quicken 7.0 for DOS counterpart, but in others it moves ahead.


As America grows older and grayer, are companies becoming any wiser about their marketing?
IF recent advances in medicine and health care are not evidence enough that the passage from middle age to maturity has moved farther along the lifeline, please consider this: Mick Jagger turned 50 yesterday.
That is just one fact that Ken Dychtwald -- gerontologist, psychologist, author and marketing consultant -- uses to demonstrate how corporate America may be misreading the demographics of the country for their advertising and marketing strategies.


Justice Refuses to Block Return Of Girl, 2, to Biological Parents
A Michigan couple fighting to keep a 2-year-old they have raised since birth were turned down today by a Supreme Court Justice whom they had asked to block an order that they give the girl to her biological parents.
The rejection, by Justice John Paul Stevens, came on an emergency request by the couple, Jan and Roberta DeBoer.
The order requires them to give the girl they call Jessica to her biological parents in Iowa by next Monday.


Guest Supply reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Yeltsin Softens a Plan to Withdraw Old Ruble Notes
In the face of growing popular dissatisfaction and loud criticism from the Westernized market-oriented wing of his Government, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree today sharply watering down a drastic currency revision that the Central Bank announced on Saturday.
As Russians stood complaining in long lines from St.
Petersburg to Khabarovsk to exchange their suddenly invalid pre-1993 ruble banknotes at state savings banks that had inadequate supplies of new notes, even Mr.
Yeltsin's political rival, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker, usually an ally of the bank, opposed the change, calling it confiscatory and threatening to reconvene Parliament to overturn it.


Hudson Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


First Olympic Event: Going for the Green
Olympic and TV executives will square off today over the sale of network rights to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
The networks will try to show how cost-conscious they can be.
The International Olympic Committee will push the value of the centennial Olympiad happening live on the East Coast.
The Atlanta organizing committee will simply scream for the most money it can get.
The closed-door meetings scheduled for today and tomorrow will need plenty of intrigue to match past Olympic TV negotiations, which have comprised a rather enthralling Olympic event on their own.
Most of the fascination grew out of the great competitiveness among the three networks and ABC's position through 1988 as the pre-eminent network of Olympic television.
Roone Arledge, the former president of ABC Sports, once said: "Olympic negotiation with the networks is a case of putting scorpions in a bottle."


Kerr-McGee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


EAST ASIAN PACT IS BACKED BY U.S.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher affirmed United States support today for a new security pact that would allow the countries of East Asia to head off conflicts as the region becomes increasingly important in the world economy.
Mr.
Christopher and United States officials traveling with him say they envision an Asian equivalent of the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which was established to provide a forum for European countries to work out disputes peacefully.


After Sex Attacks, Fear Spreads in Starrett City
Laurie Ramos was simply startled by her 7-year-old son's question two nights ago.
"Mommy, what is rape?" the boy asked innocently, she recalled, after he glimpsed a television news report of what had happened to other children in their Brooklyn community.
"It's terrible that at his age he has to deal with these horror stories," Mrs.
Ramos, 32, lamented as she walked, hand and hand, yesterday afternoon with the boy, Peter, to the local grocery store.
"I wasn't ready for him to have to become a grown-up so fast."


How to Make Donations To Help Flood Victims
Several American charities have established special funds and sent disaster teams to the Midwest.
Here is a list of organizations seeking donations:
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256. (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


South Korean Plane Crashes in a Storm; 66 Reported Killed
A South Korean airliner crashed on Monday in the southwestern coast of the Korean peninsula, killing 66 of the 110 people aboard, airline officials and news reports said this morning.
The plane, an Asiana Airlines Boeing 737-500 from Seoul, crashed into a mountain after heavy winds and rain prevented it from landing at the port city of Mokpo, officials said.
Three foreigners, Japanese, were among the passengers, many of whom were vacationers heading for the popular summer resort there off the Yellow Sea, the airline said.


Attack on Cape Town Church Keeps a Rattled Nation Edgy
Absurdly, the first notion that came to Kara-Anne Harris on Sunday night as the killers kicked in the door of St.
James Church and blasted worshipers with automatic-rifle fire and grenades was that they were after the Russians.
If St.
James is a symbol of anything, it may be a kind of openhearted evangelical hospitality, extended to squalid black shacktowns of nearby Khayelitsha township and to homesick fishermen from visiting Russian trawlers.


Lawter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Congress Is Feeling Pressure To Preserve Meal Deduction
In the last days of politically agonizing negotiations over $500 billion in tax increases and cuts in programs like Medicare, Congress is suddenly having second thoughts this week about a long-settled decision to reduce the huge tax break businesses get for meals and entertainment expenses.
Both the House and Senate voted months ago to reduce the deduction for meals and entertainment from 80 percent of expenses to 50 percent, a move that would raise $15 billion in new tax revenues during the next five years.
That roughly equals the amount that would be raised by a proposed increase, to 35 percent from 34 percent, in the corporate income tax.


Nasdaq Uncovered Short Sales at Record High
The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose to another record high this month, signifying a rising amount of bearishness.
But a large number of short-sellers appeared to give up hope that Snapple Beverage would ever tumble.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported that the short interest in Nasdaq stocks climbed 4 percent, to 558.4 million shares, from 537.1 million shares a month earlier.
The figure includes trades through July 8.
The figure has risen 34 percent over the last year.


Observer; Failure in Chic
I learn from Styles of The Times, my favorite guide to up-to-date dressing, that it is no longer de rigueur to have your jacket sleeve sewn to your jacket.
To do so may even be gauche, revealing you are out of touch with the deconstructionist movement in men's wear.
The chic male, I gather, can now rip the sleeve off his best hound's-tooth check and tie it to the jacket shoulder with a ribbon.
It's not clear whether you put your arm in the amputated sleeve or just leave the thing -- the sleeve, not the arm -- dangling empty in the breeze.


Science Park Plan Offers Vision of Newark's Center
An elaborate vision of high-tech offices, homes, parks and shops was put forth today for a desolate 50-acre tract in this city's Central Ward, with Federal, state and community leaders praising the plans as a formula for hope and economic growth during the next 20 years.
Although the proposal, called University Heights Science Park, is little more than a concept at this point, officials at the announcement ceremony in City Hall spoke encouragingly of the collaboration of educational institutions and civic leaders that would lead, they said, to 3,000 permanent jobs and $4 million in property-tax revenue on land that now generates next to nothing.
Educated Guesses
They also acknowledged that the detailed architectural renderings arrayed behind Gov.
Jim Florio, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg and Representative Donald M. Payne were merely educated guesses as to what might eventually be built.
They insisted, however, that their goal of a $250 million development amid the scars left by the 1967 riots was realistic.


Protest in Texas Over Lack of Access for the Disabled


Chess
There is almost nothing you can absolutely count on in chess; there is almost nothing to which there is no exception.
Take the endgame: It is the phase of a game where, in general, quite a lot of material has come off the board and there are no mating attacks.
Yet often a situation has to be treated as an endgame even though just a few pawns and the queens have been exchanged.
Moreover, in a position that has been dominated for more than 20 moves by slow maneuvering, the chance for a mating attack can dramatically arise, even when there are only a few pieces left on the board.
So you must be alive to whatever fluctuating concrete opportunities come up, no matter what the general situation may be.
The game between the Manhattan grandmaster Joel Benjamin and Aviv Friedman of Israel in the International Open Tournament in Marigot on the Caribbean island of St.
Martin, from May 1 to May 8, shows how a mating attack can stunningly intrude into a quiet endgame.


It's Our Own Genes We Should Worry About; Predisposed to Be Gay
To the Editor:
Please note the difference between "Report Suggests Homosexuality Is Linked to Genes" (front page, July 16) and "scientists said the work suggests that one or several genes located on the bottom half of the sausage-shaped X chromosome may play a role in predisposing some men toward homosexuality." A world of difference exists between "is linked" and "may play a role" as between "homosexuality" as such and "predisposing some men toward homosexuality."  KEN WHELAN  San Francisco, July 16, 1993


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jurisdiction Being Sorted Out in Serial Killings
Prosecutors from nine New York counties met here today to discuss jurisdiction in the case of Joel Rifkin, the unemployed landscaper who has admitted to killing 17 women.
The Nassau County District Attorney, Denis E. Dillon, said the closed-door talks were about "the problems that arise when various jurisdictions are involved" in a complex murder case like that of Mr.
Rifkin's.


Cummins Engine Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


The Chances Are Good You're Random
To the Editor:
Eric J. Lerner misquotes my paper in the May issue of Nature in "Horoscopes for Humanity?" (Op-Ed, July 14).
He claims I had said there was a 95 percent chance that humans will become extinct within several thousand years (the actual upper limit I gave was 7.8 million years!).
Our total predicted longevity is thus quite consistent with other mammals and hominids.
I never said the Earth wasn't a special place; I noted that you can be in a special (that is, habitable) location because you are an intelligent observer.
My hypothesis is that among intelligent observers we do not expect you to occupy a special place.
One expects that there is a 95 percent chance that you are not among either the first 2.5 percent of all humans who will ever live or among the last 2.5 percent.


Review/Performance Art; Gentle Souls of Gay, Black Defiance
For a group that straddles the cutting edges of racial and sexual politics, Pomo Afro Homos, a trio of black gay male performance artists from San Francisco, is a remarkably low-key ensemble.
Even when mouthing the rhetoric of defiance and challenging black institutions to face up to the reality of the AIDS epidemic, the attitude of Brian Freeman, Djola B. Branner and Marvin K. White remains more friendly than threatening.
"Dark Fruit," the show they brought to Alice Tully Hall on Friday evening as part of Serious Fun is a collection of six satirically edged sketches and monologues about black gay life and the myths and attitudes around it.
The most touching section, "Sweet Sadie," is an autobiographical monologue by Mr.
Branner about growing up with a mother who many years later developed Alzheimer's disease.
Playing both himself and his mother, Mr.
Branner evokes a complicated mixture of devotion and resentment for the woman whose ruby red lipstick he used to put on for Halloween parties.
Mr.
Branner is not a charismatic actor, but his gentle, heartfelt memoir conveyed a stinging poignancy.


Zenith Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Jacob Wittner Is Dead; Equal-Rights Aide, 85
Jacob Wittner, who spent nearly three decades enforcing equal-opportunity legislation at various levels of government, died on Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 85 and had homes in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Deerfield Beach, Fla.
The cause was respiratory failure, his family said.


4 Hurt in Sheepshead Bay Shotgun Attack
In a brazen midafternoon shooting, four people were injured by shotgun fire yesterday on a residential street in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
The police said that three of the victims, all immigrants from Russia, were shot when they emerged from a Lexus automobile and were walking toward a residence at 2553 East 16th Street.
The fourth victim, not a member of their group, was hit four times in the stomach, the police said.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to June 30


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Q&amp;A
Avoiding Ozone
Q.
I know ozone is formed because of chemical pollution, but do natural sources of ozone also lead to dangerous air?
Where should I live to avoid ozone pollution?
A.
Ozone is constantly being formed and lost at both high and low regions of the atmosphere.
Ozone at high regions is protective against dangerous ultraviolet radiation.
At low elevations, ozone or 03 , a highly reactive chemical, is dangerous to delicate lung tissue, although it is only one component of air pollution.


Review/Rock; The Noisyland Tour: Sounds of New Zealand
New Zealand is the realm of four-man, two-guitar rock bands that swerve between punk and pop.
Or so it seems from the Noisyland Tour, a package of three New Zealand bands that arrived on July 24 at Irving Plaza as part of the New Music Seminar.
Straitjacket Fits, the Bats and the Jean-Paul Sartre Experience share a lineup and a New Zealand record label, Flying Nun; together, they filled Irving Plaza with earnest pop sentiments and bristling, enveloping guitar noise.
Straitjacket Fits, the headliner, was the most abrasive band on the bill, rawer onstage than on its albums.
As Shayne Carter sang in a wounded Elvis Costello baritone, the band surrounded him in turbulence.
Choppy, sometimes dissonant riffs from bass and drums carried surges of distorted guitar: scrabbling tremolos, sustained fuzztone notes, billowing reverberation.


Goulds Pumps (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pittston Move Separates Businesses
The Pittston Company yesterday became the latest corporation to employ a financial technique intended to lift stock prices by separating out the most attractive parts of a business from those that have problems.
And in so doing, it has accomplished something that companies like RJR Nabisco have had trouble doing.
The company, whose identity has been as inseparable from the coal industry as that of the United Mine Workers, won permission at its annual shareholder meeting to create a new stock and alter the nature of the existing Pittston stock.
A shareholder with a share of Pittston stock will now own a share of Pittston Services Group and one-fifth of a share in Pittston Minerals Group.
The Pittston Company stock will cease to trade.
Stock of each group will pay dividends based on their respective earnings.


Corrections
A list of outdoor concerts in the special SummerTimes section distributed with some copies on Sunday misstated the date of a Central Park performance of Verdi's "Aroldo" by the New York Grand Opera.
It is tonight at 8 at the Rumsey Playfield (mid-park at 72d Street); it was not last night.


Criminal Charge Likely in Firecracker Case
The Los Angeles District Attorney's office said late yesterday that a formal criminal charge was expected to be filed as a result of last Saturday's firecracker incident outside Dodger Stadium.
Vince Coleman, the left fielder for the Mets, has been identified as the person who threw a lighted firecracker from a vehicle, an action that apparently resulted in injuries to at least three persons.
Officials from the District Attorney's office met with officials of the Los Angeles Fire Department's arson unit yesterday.
A spokeswoman for the District Attorney's office said a decision had not yet been made on whether to press a misdemeanor or felony charge.
It is also possible, but unlikely, that no charge will be brought.


Gold Still Gleams
When inflation fears were high at the beginning of the month, speculators bid up the stocks of companies that mine gold, like Newmont Mining, on the theory that the price of gold would rise.
When gold stalled at midmonth, investors began dumping their mining stocks.
But gold rose more than $3 an ounce yesterday, and Newmont gained, too.


Comedy Network Narrows Choice to 3
The Comedy Central cable television network in New York said yesterday that it had narrowed the review of its $3 million account to three agencies from 11.
The account has been handled by Schnurr &amp; Jackson of Troy, N.Y., for a year and a half.
Tony Fox, a Comedy Central spokesman, confirmed a report of the review that appeared in Adweek this week.
He identified the finalists as: Grey Entertainment and Media; Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, and Lowe &amp; Partners, all of New York.


Varian Associates Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Allegheny Ludlum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; National Medical, recently battered, faces more therapy.
ONE of the nation's largest hospital operators, National Medical Enterprises, appears to be heeding the biblical dictum "Physician, heal thyself." But the recovery is likely to be slow.
Analysts were reassured by an array of management changes begun in April, in the aftermath of a scandal that began with lawsuits by several insurers charging fraudulent billings by the company's psychiatric hospitals.


It's Our Own Genes We Should Worry About; Military's Closet
To the Editor:
When my brother's 3-year-old daughter won't go to sleep because of monsters under the bed, or, even scarier, in the closet, he picks her up, and together they open the doors and look.
She doesn't like this, and squirms with resistance.
But it works out.
See?
Nothing to be afraid of.
Too bad she's not 20 years older, homophobic and a member of the military.
Because then, if she had an irrational fear of what might be in the closet, the military, with a blind eye from Congress and the courts, would nail the door shut for her.


No Cars Needed at This Drive-In


Chambers Development reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Johnson Is Working Out Only His Body, Not His Problems
There was a Pepper Johnson sighting today.
Yes, that's right, Pepper was here.
He practiced hard and in the process slightly pulled his groin.
The injury isn't serious at all, but his attitude is, and some of the things he said today must scare the Giants more than any groin pull.
His arrival left several questions unanswered: Is Johnson still unhappy and how long will he remain in camp?
Despite Coach Dan Reeves's saying he felt the dispute between Johnson and the team was behind them all, Johnson gave the definite impression that this was not indeed over and that he could pull a disappearing act any time now.


Saks Moves To Shed Last Of Old Debt
Saks Fifth Avenue said yesterday that it had prepaid the last $150 million of $325 million in long-term debt used to finance the buyout that took the company private in 1990.
Brian Kendrick, Saks's chief financial officer, said the company had decided to take advantage of lower interest rates and borrow $150 million in bank debt to rid itself of the subordinated debt, which carried 13 percent interest and was originally scheduled to mature in 2000.
Mr.
Kendrick said that the new debt would have an interest rate that floats 250 to 300 basis points over the London interbank offered rate and that the maturities ranged from five to seven years.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


On My Mind; The Torture Continues
In their living room in Atlanta, Hassan and Yasmin Ibrahim are having one of their nightly worried talks about their three little girls.
Both want what is best for the children.
But they cannot agree on a decision that will affect the girls every day of the rest of their young lives.
Mrs.
Ibrahim seems a gentle woman.
But she insists that each girl must in childhood have her clitoris removed.


America's Best, but He's Off to Budapest
Darrick Heath settled down under a tree outside of his dormitory room and contemplated his final 48 hours before leaving the United States.
First there is Tuesday night's game for the East, when Heath and his teammates will face the South in a gold-medal game of the United States Olympic Festival's team handball competition.


COMPANY NEWS: Small Agencies Protest; American Express Skids In Shift on Car Insurance
The American Express Company has made a screeching U-turn about restrictions on car rental insurance it extends to its card users.
The company provides insurance against damage to cars rented on its cards, but next week had planned to restrict that coverage to cars rented from the 15 largest agencies.
Yesterday, after an outpouring of protest from smaller independent car-rental companies, American Express said it would drop the plan and instead force any rental agencies with above-average losses to cover some costs.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Seeks to Ease Friction in Companies
With corporate executives and labor leaders gathered here today to give supporting testimony, the Clinton Administration insisted that more jobs would exist in the United States if only management and workers ran their companies together.
The daylong conference, sponsored jointly by the Labor and Commerce Departments, served as a billboard to advertise a keystone of President Clinton's jobs program -- that the friction inherent in traditional labor-management relations undermines efficiency and the competitiveness of American companies in a world market.


Police Arrest Man In Subway Shooting
It was a New York nightmare come to life.
A gang of robbers preying on people aboard the subway picks as its target a man who refuses to be victimized, and instead the man is shot.
Yesterday, with Corey Townsend of the Bronx staging an impressive recovery from the damage from four .45-caliber slugs, Steven Lopez, 18, was arrested in the July 19 shooting.


New Orleans Journal; From Gator Fodder to Haute Cuisine
Louisianians have tried everything to get rid of nutrias, the big brown rodents that are eating up the marshes.
They have shot them.
They have trapped them.
They have turned them into fur coats.
They have even fed them to the alligators.
Now they're going to try eating them.
Paul Prudhomme, the Cajun chef, busied himself today in the kitchen of his restaurant here inventing nutria etouffee, nutria sausage, nutria gumbo and other dishes.
He plans to prepare them next weekend at a Nutriafest, and state officials hope they prove so popular that hunters, who rarely bother with nutrias anymore, will take to the swamps again to provide them for the nation's markets.


Books of The Times; Two English Languages, A Vast and Fertile Field
A Mouthful of Air  Language, Languages . . .
Especially English  By Anthony Burgess 416 pages.
William Morrow. $25.


General Binding Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


RPM Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to May 31


Beating Indurain Is Problem For Rivals
The Motorola team went to a Tex-Mex restaurant in Paris.
The Banesto team went to a night club.
Most everybody who finished the Tour de France went somewhere afterward to celebrate.
It is certain that a little time was spent during the festivities in discussing the 80th Tour and how it will be ranked.
A difficult one, certainly.
A fast one, surely -- the fifth fastest.
A great one, not really.


Review/Jazz; Saxophonists Facing a New Direction
A few years ago, the World Saxophone Quartet lost one of its founders, Julius Hemphill, and it hasn't been the same since.
Mr.
Hemphill was the group's master harmonist, and its master formalist as well, and when he left, the group's music turned into a shambles.
In its second set last Tuesday at Sweet Basil (88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village), the band didn't present even a shadow of its former self.
The group now features the saxophonist James Spaulding on various instruments, often flutes, and three African-style drummers, and it opened its set with 30 minutes of Mr.
Spaulding fooling around on flute over the percussion.
Occasionally another saxophonist soloed a bit.
One of the drummers sang "This Generation Is Too Busy Thinking About Themselves."


Belmont Gate Drop Becomes A Concern
Belmont Park rang down the curtain yesterday on its 72-day meeting with a 5.4 percent drop in attendance but with a 3 percent rise in the betting handle, chiefly from simulcast betting from other states.
And the president of the New York Racing Association promptly declared that simulcast betting was "not only the future of racing, but the present as well."
The trend is expected to continue when the racing season is resumed tomorrow at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., the upstate track in the Adirondacks where New York racing has pitched its tent in summertime for 126 years.
During the next five weeks, Saratoga will stage 29 stakes races in 30 racing days with purses of more than $4.4 million.
Then the caravan will roll downstate again to open Belmont's fall meeting on Sept. 1.


U.S. Healthcare (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


H. D. Eberhart, 86; Transformed Design Of Artificial Limbs
Prof.
Howard Davis Eberhart, who designed artificial limbs and other prosthetic devices, died of a heart attack on July 18.
He was 86.
He died while riding in a car being driven from Arizona to his home in Santa Barbara, Calif., said an official at the University of California at Berkeley, where he was professor emeritus of civil engineering.


Clinton Assails G.O.P. Delays In Bitter Tones
President Clinton accused Congress today of returning to old habits of gridlock and said obstructionism by Republicans there was hurting ordinary Americans, including victims of the Midwestern floods.
The sharp criticism was an unexpected turn to confrontation by a President who has maintained a largely cordial relationship with Capitol Hill.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN SHIP BUILDING CO., Tampa, Fla., named Allen Zang president and chief executive.
CRYOLIFE INC., Atlanta, a developer of human organ transplant technology, named Donald J. Blankers vice president and chief financial officer.


People
*
Jeffrey Negrin was named to the new position of senior vice president and account supervisor at Sudler &amp; Hennessey, New York.
He was previously a vice president and account group supervisor at Lavey/Wolff/ Swift Inc., New York. *
Andrew R. Amill was named advertising director at Redbook magazine, New York, succeeding Jeff Hamill, who left to join Cosmopolitan magazine, New York, in the same capacity.
Mr.
Amill previously held the same position at American Health magazine, New York. *
Karen Rose Werner was named to the new position of fashion advertising manager at Los Angeles magazine, Los Angeles.
She was previously associate publisher at Sportswear International and In Fashion magazines, Los Angeles.


CHRONICLE
It was one of the more glittering evenings of the midsummer social season in Washington on Saturday, when Sir ROBIN RENWICK, the British Ambassador to the United States, and his wife, ANNIE, gave a party in honor of Gen.
COLIN L. POWELL, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and his wife, ALMA, and Sir CHARLES POWELL and his wife, CARLA.
Sir Charles was private secretary and adviser on foreign affairs and defense to Prime Ministers Margaret Thatcher and John Major, and is now a director of Jardine Matheson Holdings and Associated Companies, an international banking organization in Hong Kong.
The two Powells are longtime friends, hence the dual tribute at the ambasssador's residence.


Matthew B. Ridgway Dies at 98; Leader of U.S. Troops in 2 Wars
Gen.
Matthew B. Ridgway, who became Army Chief of Staff after leading American forces in Normandy and United Nations troops in Korea, died yesterday at his home in Fox Chapel, Pa., a suburb of Pittsburgh.
He was 98.
He died of cardiac arrest, said his lawyer, G. Donald Gerlach.


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Business Tax Break Put Back on Table
After months of negotiating over $500 billion in tax increases and spending cuts, Congress is suddenly having second thoughts about its long-settled decision to reduce the tax break that businesses get for meals and entertainment expenses.
Although both the House and Senate voted to reduce the deduction for meals and entertainment, lobbyists and Congressional aides now say that lawmakers are seriously considering restoring a chunk of the deduction, at a cost of perhaps $7 billion in lost tax revenues.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday with the Market Place column, about the financial contracts known as derivatives, mislabeled some dollar amounts.
In the part of the chart showing a breakdown of the types of investors involved in interest-rate and currency swaps in 1991, the figures should have been labeled in billions, not millions.
Transactions between dealers totaled $865 billion in 1991, financial institutions $591 billion, corporations $362 billion, governments $111 billion and others $21 billion.


St. Paul Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First American Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design; Accessory Slowdown
At last week's couture shows in Paris, accessories were treated like extra poundage -- trimmed down or eliminated altogether.
At Chanel, there was not a strand of pearls, never mind the usual ropes of them, decorating a single model.
The night before the show, the designer, Karl Lagerfeld, was supervising the last-minute looks.
Trays brimming with bracelets, earclips, brooches, lariats of pearls and loops of gaudy belts were spread out before him.
But instead of adding, he was subtracting.
"So modern," he kept murmuring as the models were shorn of everything except their costumes, opaque tights and velvet hiking boots.


1Big Ten Takes a Penalty
The Big Ten Conference will lose $75,000 in grant money because a flawed policy allowed seven member schools to award more scholarships than permitted under National Collegiate Athletic Association rules.
The penalty imposed yesterday marked the first time in N.C.A.A. history that a national conference was fined, said DAVID SWANK, chairman of the N.C.A.A.'s Committee on Infractions.


Man Injured Cushioning Four-Story Leap
If Marshall Mazeroski had not been there, Letitia Cox might have died.
But when a fire sent her leaping from a fourth-floor window yesterday, he cushioned her fall, saving her life, but severely injuring his head and neck.
"The only reason she's alive is because he caught her," said Francis J. McCabe, a Fire Department spokesman.
"If she had hit the concrete or any of the fencing around there, she would have either been impaled or killed by the impact."


What's a Woman to Wear?
Just when you thought it was safe to send your miniskirts to the thrift shop, they made a comeback on Paris runways.
An informal survey of women turned up reactions ranging from the amused to the outraged.


Norwalk Police Find Focus Turns to Them After a Death
A few blocks from brick sidewalks lined with antiques stores and bistros and an extensive array of "shoppes," a dozen of Keith Sumpter's friends were lingering on the chipped pavement near the Carlton Court housing project.
It was another restless summer day.
Like many young black men in small cities across the New York region, they said they could not find jobs.
So they stood bare-chested in the sun, raging against the local police, who, they insisted, had killed Mr.
Sumpter earlier this month for no apparent reason and who routinely harass them.


Cancel That Summer Vacation for the Phillies
The general manager of the Philadelphia Phillies was discussing the difficulty the St.
Louis Cardinals encountered during a long weekend in Colorado.
The Rockies won two of four games, giving them four victories in seven recent contests with the Cardinals.
"The Cardinals by no means are a juggernaut," Lee Thomas said.
"There are a lot of clubs out there that can beat the Cardinals. We just have trouble beating them ourselves."


Feeney Suffers Mild Stroke
CHARLES (CHUB) FEENEY, a former National League president, apparently suffered a mild stroke at yesterday's Giants-Dodgers game in San Francisco and was hospitalized.


Detroit Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Harvest Is Knowledge


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Stoltenberg Defeats Gilbert Jason Stoltenberg, a qualifier from Australia ranked 58th in the world, upset 16th-seeded Brad Gilbert, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4), yesterday in the opening round of the Player's Ltd.
International tournament in Montreal.
Stoltenberg had to qualify because of the hard-court tournament's strong field, which is headed by No. 1 Pete Sampras and No. 2 Jim Courier. (AP)


Rail Tank Leak in California Spews Sulfuric Cloud


Long-Lost Spanish Fort Found in St. Augustine
ARCHEOLOGISTS have found buried traces of a 16th-century fort in St.
Augustine, Fla., and are confident that this establishes for the first time the exact site where the Spanish planted the earliest permanent European settlement in what is now the United States.
Excavations this summer have exposed part of the moat and other artifacts of a structure that archeologists say was almost certainly the first fort built by Pedro Menendez de Aviles in 1565.
He arrived that year with 1,500 soldiers and settlers to found the Spanish colony he called St.
Augustine, decades before the English established the Virginia Colony at Jamestown in 1607 and the Pilgrims on the Mayflower landed at Plymouth Rock in 1620.


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In West, Dinkins Promotes Candidacy and Filming
Battered last week by criticism of his handling of the Crown Heights violence, Mayor David N. Dinkins managed to create some positive moments here, spending the last three days raising money for his re-election campaign and drumming up support for filming in New York City.
Mr.
Dinkins met with movie studio executives today, brandishing statistics that he said showed that filming had become less costly and hectic in New York, before he boarded a plane to return home.
During the weekend, Mr.
Dinkins held a fund-raiser, played tennis and met Barbra Streisand and friends for dinner and movies.
They watched "Poetic Justice" and "Cliffhanger." The Political Wars
But New York's political wars did intrude a bit.
Responding to criticism by Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, that Mr.
Dinkins was masking fund-raising in Los Angeles as an official trip, the Mayor said: "Put this with a long list of things he doesn't understand. Instead of just raising funds I'm spending time doing good government, which is useful to the city."


Lost in a Complex Maze
LAST week's column described how a 386 system crashed after installing QEMM 7.01, the Quarterdeck Expanded Memory Manager, although the program absolved itself of any responsibility: "Without QEMM, your system would have crashed without warning or explanation." Without QEMM, the system had not crashed at all.
The only thing to do was to turn the machine off and on again.
This time, the original error message, Exception 13, did not recur.
Nevertheless, as two sections of the manual suggested, I ran the Manifest program.
First, you must find Manifest.
It is not mentioned in the manual's table of contents and, although there are 15 references to it in the index, none of them, as far as I could determine, told how to invoke it.
Getting a listing of the QEMM subdirectory through DOS showed there was a program called MFT.EXE and, sure enough, that was it.


Political Memo; Health Plan Sits in the Waiting Room
Remember health care reform?
The Clinton Administration's self-imposed 100-day deadline for producing a plan has long since passed, and some experts in the field worry that a rare moment of political opportunity has been lost.
But officials in the White House and the Democratic leadership on Capitol Hill say they hope to return quickly to health care once the President's economic plan is passed.
They plan to send members of Congress home on their August recess with briefing books on the issue, and the President himself will begin to campaign on health care in mid-August, probably at the National Governors Association meeting, aides say.


Detroit Pushes Leasing but May Pay Later
Over the last century Detroit has pushed durability, tailfins and apple pie to persuade Americans to buy new cars.
But now the nation's auto makers are enjoying their first surge in sales after three bleak years thanks in part to a fresh approach: persuading Americans not to buy at all.
Instead of buying, the companies argue, their customers should lease -- paying for the value of the car they use up over two to three years, then returning it to lease a new one.
For the consumer, they say, leasing means no fat cash payments in lean times and no aging hulks depreciating -- without warranty -- in the driveway.
Leases Get Popular
For the manufacturers and dealers, it means brisk business at last, as Americans in growing numbers seize the offer.


William Furst, 81, a Psychiatrist
Dr.
William Furst, psychiatrist and founder of the Community Psychiatric Institute in East Orange, N.J., died on Sunday in the St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 81 and lived in West Orange, N.J.
His wife, the former Barbara Horowitz, said the cause was brain cancer.


From Cairo Up to St. Louis, The River Spreads Its Wrath
At Cairo, Ill., where the Mississippi meets the Ohio, the mighty river becomes more than a mile wide and 100 feet deep in spots, its sheer size swallowing up the violence of the widespread flooding up river.
It is an effect that Army Corps of Engineer officials like to compare to a two lane country road suddenly becoming a six-lane highway.


Phillips Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FLOOD AREA AWAITS A FATEFUL MEETING OF RECORD CRESTS
Like some great watery pincer, the rampaging Missouri and Kansas Rivers are closing in on Kansas City.
Sometime Tuesday, a record flood crest coming down the Kansas and another record crest coming down the Missouri will collide here where the two rivers join.


Making the Most of a Rare Clemency in New York
Last January, Lawrence Snider found himself in the middle of a trendy Long Island clothing store, clutching a pocketful of money and watching his sister Lori pull jeans off the racks for him.
After spending almost 11 years in prison on drug charges, he felt strangely displaced, like a tourist who could only barely make out the signs in a foreign language.
"The manager of the store walked up to me and asked, 'Is someone helping you?' " he said.
"I turned to my sister and said, 'What do I say?' "


American Express Shows Broad Improvement in Profit
The American Express Company's earnings continued to rebound in the second quarter, largely because of lower costs.
The company's revenues remained essentially flat.
The financial services giant said yesterday that it had earned $416 million for the second quarter, up 34 percent from $310 million for the comparable period a year earlier and up 71 percent from $243 million for the first quarter of this year.
Operating income increased even more sharply from last year because net income for the second quarter of 1992 included $41 million in net gains from special items.


Matthew B. Ridgway Dies at 98; Leader of U.S. Troops in 2 Wars
Gen.
Matthew B. Ridgway, who became Army Chief of Staff after leading American forces in Normandy and United Nations troops in Korea, died yesterday at his home in Fox Chapel, Pa., a suburb of Pittsburgh.
He was 98.
He died of cardiac arrest, said his lawyer, G. Donald Gerlach.


What Rivalry? Banks and Redskins Hit It Off
Once the Giants signed Carlton Bailey and then Michael Brooks as unrestricted free agents, Carl Banks became almost a financial luxury.
The Giants already had four linebackers (Lawrence Taylor, Bailey, Brooks and Pepper Johnson) earning at least $1.2 million a year, and Banks, a premier strongside outside linebacker who is almost 31, was ripe to be replaced.


Reporter's Notebook; Unraveling the Seminar: Call It Culture Thrash
It was all about culture of various kinds; yours, mine and ours.
The many constituents of the New Music Seminar -- insurgents and members of the business establishment, hip-hoppers, metal heads, rockers who are collegiate, Irish, Japanese or Turkish, as well as those who shun definition -- came together on Saturday to thrash out the wide-ranging topic at the music-business convention's "Culture Summit."
The daylong program at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers included several panels, like "Wake Up! Fighting Issues Through Unity," which discussed homophobia, racism and sexism in music; "World Music: Whose World, Whose Music"; "International Video: The Americanization of World Culture," and "Nightclubbing Fab Forum," which offered a glance at the club life.


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rise Granted On Insurance For Doctors
With efforts to tame the rapid rise in health-care costs delayed in both Washington and Albany, the State Insurance Superintendent today approved an average 14 percent rise in medical malpractice insurance rates paid by doctors.
The increase, which takes effect on July 30, will be the first rise in malpractice premiums after four years of stable or declining rates.
The Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, said in a statement that the change was justified because of an increase in the number of malpractice lawsuits being filed, a rise in the dollar amount of malpractice awards and a decline in interest rates, which has limited insurers' investment income.


His Honor Himself Is Counselor To Pacino
Justice Edwin Torres is standing in a familiar place, in a little alcove off a fourth-floor courtroom in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, but he is seeing something highly unusual, and irksome in the extreme.
In the courtroom itself, and visible to various technicians and Justice Torres on a camera monitor in the alcove, Al Pacino is mouthing off to a judge, played by Paul Mazursky.
The mouthing-off part isn't the problem.
It's what's in the mouth.
A Baby Ruth.
As Mr.
Pacino rips through the opening scene in "Carlito's Way," directed by Brian De Palma and shooting on location in New York, he is chewing furiously.


CHRONICLE
Another marker of the passage of time: MICK JAGGER turned 50 yesterday and kept right on rocking as he recorded a new album with the Rolling Stones, The Associated Press reported.
No, he wasn't deprived of a party on his half-century milestone.
His wife, JERRY HALL, the American model, gave him a party with a French Revolution theme on July 16 in West London, where the guests included the actor Eric Idle, of Monty Python fame, and a former British cabinet minister, Paul Channon.
The Rolling Stones recorded their first hit record, "Come On" 30 years ago.
On Mr.
Jagger's birthday the band members were in Dublin, working on their latest album, due for release next year.


Unocal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Interpublic Group of Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Coroner Assailed in Detroit Beating Trial
Prosecutors in the trial of three former police officers accused in the fatal beating of a man asserted today that a pathologist who had undermined the state's case was bitter toward his former boss and therefore unreliable as a witness.
The pathologist, Ljubisa Dragovic, who is the Oakland County Medical Examiner, testified last week that cocaine played a much larger role in the Nov. 5 death of the victim, Malice Green, than the initial autopsy indicated.
He called that first autopsy sloppy.
It was done in Wayne County and found that Mr.
Green had died of more than a dozen blows to the head.


Aid to Minority Bidders Complicates Bailout Bill
Deep inside a $34 billion bill to complete the cleanup of the savings and loan industry, a few clauses that would give preference to minority investors stand like so many political pawns in a stalemated game of chess.
There are many other issues, some involving high finance and others involving partisan politics, that have complicated the prospects of this bill, a perennial legislative pariah.


Webb (Del) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Faith in Multiple-Drug AIDS Trial Shaken by Report of Error in Lab
MISTAKES in laboratory research are embarrassing and more common than generally recognized.
Only a few make headlines, such as the serious error acknowledged last week by scientists at the Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School.
The error, in a theory justifying a novel drug therapy for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, illustrates the enormous pressures on AIDS scientists to publish quickly while maintaining traditional scientific standards.
And it points up the risks run by scientists and Federal health officials when they rush into clinical trials on the ground that a lethal disease justifies greater speed.
In the Harvard case, a national trial began without independent confirmation of preliminary research findings, illustrating the risks in taking such short cuts.


On Horizon, the Specter of a Casino
FOR 14 years, the Ramapough community that lives on Stag Hill has been tugging at Washington's sleeve, trying to become certified as a duly recognized American Indian tribe.
Being members of an official tribe in the midst of suburbia would mean housing and health-care benefits and scholarship aid for the young, said Ronald Van Dunk, the elected chief of the Ramapoughs.
Maybe some of the young people would be able to get help with down payments for homes or get some training, he said.


Senate Democrats See Re-election Perils in '94
When Senators Charles S. Robb of Virginia and Donald W. Riegle Jr. of Michigan appeared on the Senate floor recently to deliver enthusiastic pitches for President Clinton's economic program, they were thinking not just of the President's political fortunes but also of their own.
Both men are atop the list of the most vulnerable Democratic incumbents facing re-election next year.
And both, following deliberate strategies, have decided to stick by their President when they comfortably can, but not to hesitate to offer sometime biting public criticism.


Bosnian Leader Goes to Geneva for Start of Talks
The President of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government arrived here today to discuss his Serbian and Croatian rivals' proposal to partition the country into three ethnic enclaves, and international mediators planned to press the Serbs and Croats to be more generous to the Muslims in the division.
The attendance of the President, Alija Izetbegovic, had been in doubt until the last minute because of a Serbian offensive against Sarajevo and the Serbs' violation of a cease-fire that was to have started on Sunday.


Gallagher Is Inside Looking Out
Danielle Gallagher's lacrosse career started at the age of 10, when she joined a boys' youth league at Manhasset (L.I.) High School.
It was a determined beginning for a young athlete who, 16 years later, is a member of the United States team in the Women's Lacrosse World Cup.
The cup is the ultimate in women's lacrosse, and the United States is the defending champion.
Gallagher is one of 16 players who will try to defend the title when cup play gets under way in Edinburgh, Scotland, on Aug. 7.
In the final of the last World Cup championship, in Perth, Australia, in 1989, the United States seized the trophy from the England with a 6-5 victory in sudden-death overtime.


Minerals Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Too Often, New York's Mentally Ill Get Swept Under a Bridge
To the Editor:
Re "Mental Health Politics" (editorial, July 15): Although I do not agree with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's determination, if such is the case, to return most of the money that has accrued from closing several New York hospitals for people with mental illness to the general fund, I agree that funds should not be allocated to community programs without first developing specific policy to insure that the neediest of the mentally ill receive the benefit of these funds.
Too often vendors or those with mental illness who are not necessarily the neediest benefit from financing that is allocated without proper consideration.
Most programs for the seriously mentally ill who do not fall into standard categories are neither well conceived nor relevant to "difficult-to-manage populations."


Boeing Net Lower, but Stock Rises
The Boeing Company posted lower second-quarter earnings yesterday, but the results exceeded analysts' expectations and buoyed the company's stock.
Still, the company warned that sales would soften and that results would be weaker in the third and fourth quarters than analysts expected.


It's Our Own Genes We Should Worry About
To the Editor:
It seems (despite your own caution against it) you fell for the hype of "Jurassic Park," dwelling on the silliest issues in two editorials.
There is no danger that dinosaurs will be brought back, now or ever.
It can't be done for the very reasons your first piece carefully spelled out ("Should We Revive the Dinosaurs?," editorial, June 13).
But then you turned against your own argument, entertaining the fantasy long enough to conclude that scientists should leave well enough alone.
Worse, when Karl E. Meyer revisited scientific issues in the movie ("The Instant T. Rex," Editorial Notebook, July 18), he examined a "plot hole," whether these creatures could have grown so fast.
This is equivalent to publishing a discussion about a cartoon, "The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show," explaining that flying squirrels merely glide, but then quibbling that Rocky actually seems to fly.
Remember, this is Steven Spielberg, this is science fiction.


Clark Equipment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LaFarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Death in Italy: A Trail of Corruption
They died in different circumstances, but when two of Italy's best-known businessmen were found dead last week, apparently after each committed suicide, the trail that joined them led to an unusual joint venture called Enimont that may well have been the greatest of scams, a tale of fraud that could make Italy's vast and still unraveling political corruption scandal seem modest by comparison.
"Whoever touches Enimont dies," remarked Emilio Molinari, a legislator from the Green Party.


Horses of Coast Islands, A Regional Symbol, Harm the Environment
MORE than any other creatures, wild island ponies personify the rugged beauty of the sandy barrier beaches that line much of the East Coast.
Motels are named for them.
They are a recurring decorative motif in restaurants.
And tourists by the boatload venture out to watch as mares and foals walk along the water's edge and bend gracefully to crop the marsh grass, while stallions watch alertly from nearby dunes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American auto makers are enjoying a sales surge after three bleak years, due in part to leasing.
Analysts say the trend could cut into future profit, but if the gamble pays off, car companies would have a leasing market without boom and bust cycles.  [ Page A1. ]
The president of the ABC Television Network, Robert A. Iger, became executive vice president of Capital Cities/ABC, making him the heir apparent to the chief executive.  [ D1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  ISRAELI BARRAGE INTENSIFIES Israeli strikes battered Lebanon on Monday and again today, sending 150,000 people fleeing, and pro-Iranian militiamen fought back, with neither side backing down.
A1  Despite the bloodshed, the Mideast's leaders don't want a fight.
A2


Rita Ford, 92, Dies; Owned Shop Serving Fans of Music Boxes
Rita Ford, a dealer in antique and current music boxes with a wide array of musical sounds that enchanted visitors to her Manhattan shop for more than four decades, died on Thursday at New York Hospital.
She was 92 and lived in Manhattan.
Her physician, Dr.
Thomas Fabry, said the cause was complications of fluid in the lungs.


Rain Forests Seen as Shaped by Human Hand
FOR decades, La Selva, a lush, dripping jungle filled with towering trees and swinging vines, has served as the quintessential example of the pristine rain forest, untouched and unchanged for millenniums.
But scientists who have begun to look more closely into the history of the world's rain forests say they are finding clues that this one and others like it are not the stable museums of biodiversity they were thought to be.
In the very forests biologists have long prized as pristine, pot shards and the remnants of ancient crop fields are now turning up.
And ecologists say they are being forced to reformulate their ideas about how the world's rain forests came to be and how best to manage them.


Dentsply International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Accused Sheik Last Year Of Inciting Violence in Egypt
A State Department report on Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman issued last year found that while the Islamic cleric had never been placed at the scene of violence committed by his supporters, "the evidence shows a clear pattern of encouraging others to commit violent acts against Christians in Egypt and against others."
The report by the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs was submitted to a Federal immigration judge in October 1992 -- four months before the bombing of the World Trade Center -- in response to Mr.
Abdel Rahman's request for political asylum in the United States.
The asylum request was considered and rejected in closed proceedings.


In a Corner of Afghanistan, Mines Are Cleared and a Bold Emir Emerges
Ahmed Shah is 18, but he looks older in his green jungle fatigues.
His job is to lie on his stomach and use his bayonet to clear dirt from the top of mines left over after the war in Afghanistan -- while somehow managing to avoid blowing himself up.
"In the last year three of us have died, but that decision is made by someone else," Mr.
Shah said, a tinge of fatalism creeping into his voice.
"We faced a lot worse in the war."


Howell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed David Lamb, infielder.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Jeff Granger, pitcher, and assigned him to Eugene of the Northwest League.


CDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ekco Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Another Round in Fix Scandal
Reopening the second front in the Olympique Marseilles match-fixing scandal, investigators yesterday inquired deeper into allegations that the club owner, BERNARD TAPIE, tried persuading a rival coach to take the fall.
The investigating judge, BERNARD BEFFY, questioned BORO PRIMORAC, former coach for Valenciennes, on Primorac's charge that Tapie offered him money and career opportunities to become a scapegoat.
The encounter was expected to last several hours.
The Primorac affair is the only part of the bribery scandal directly implicating Tapie, who called the coach a liar and accused prosecutors of taking a new tack in trying to destroy him.


Study Sees Pain Ahead in States' Budgets
After three years of painful and protracted budget battles, most states approved spending plans this spring and summer with relative ease, if not resignation.
But the pain has just begun for many states, according to a study made public yesterday by the National Conference of State Legislatures at its annual meeting in San Diego.


In Couturiers' Hands, the Mini Is Renewed
Heads up!
Here come the miniskirts!
Not since their birth in London in the 1960's have short skirts caused such a stir.
That's because this time, they turned up in the haute couture collections, traditionally the source of clothes that are luxurious, elegant and exorbitantly expensive.
Known as the queen dowager of fashion, the couture has putatively ceded its position as pace setter of style changes to the world in favor of opulence and conservatism.
The clothes have been widely criticized as inappropriate to a world in recession.
Its clientele is shrinking, along with the number of houses staging shows.


Smith Still in Critical Condition
The stock-car driver STANLEY SMITH showed signs of ending his paralysis yesterday but he remained in critical condition in Birmingham, Ala., with a skull fracture sustained during the DieHard 500 Sunday in Talladega, Ala.


Superior Industries International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fieldcrest Cannon reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Apache Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Stone Container reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Patterns
Micro-Minis Make It Big
The clothes were barely off the haute-couture runways when Barbara Moss, the sales and public relations director for A. B. S. Clothing Collection Inc. of New York, was on the phone touting the news that the company's micro-mini was already heading for Bloomingdale's windows.


Spacelabs Medical Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


Service Bill Hits Home
While Bob Dole is urging senators to defeat the President's national service plan, his wife, Elizabeth, is asking them to support it.
Page D22.


No Headline
"There are a lot fewer 'no' votes that are leaning to 'yes' than there are 'yes' votes that are leaning to 'no."' -- SENATOR JOHN B. BREAUX on the budget negotations.  [ A1:2. ]


Bombing Suspect Tied to Drugs
For more than three years, the latest suspect in the foiled plot to blow up New York City targets regularly supplied heroin to two Detroit drug dealers, Federal drug agents said yesterday.
The man, Matarawy Mohammad Said Saleh, 37, moved back and forth between in New York City, where he bought the drugs, and Detroit before being arrested in 1988 as he collected money from one of the dealers, the agents said.
The dealers were identified as Albanians who had a network of six drug sellers in Detroit.


NORTHWEST UNION EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE AGREEMENT
Leaders of Northwest Airlines' largest union, the International Association of Machinists, is expected to announce today that the union's members have approved a deal to help Northwest restructure its finances and avoid filing for bankruptcy protection.
People familiar with the results of Monday's vote said that turnout was high and that a clear majority was voting to accept the pact.


Personal Health
Cathy M. was in her ninth month of pregnancy when she awakened with a toothache-like pain in her jaw that within hours spread to her ear.
Thinking she had an abscessed tooth, she saw her dentist, who immediately referred her to an oral surgeon.
But the surgeon's tests showed that it was not a tooth but more likely a facial nerve that was causing Cathy's pain.
By the next day, when she saw a neurologist, her eye was tearing uncontrollably and one side of her face had begun to feel numb and to droop.
When she tried to smile, she looked like a split-faced clown: happy on one side, sad on the other.


Campus Journal; An Exchange Program To Escape the Shelling
Out past the cornfields and not too far from the grain depot in the center of town here, Alan Walczak, the one-man international studies department at Grand Valley State University, is dialing Sarajevo again.
"Busy," he said on Monday, then tried once more.
"Busy . . . busy." Rescue officials in Sarajevo have explained to him that when the shelling begins, the electricity to their antenna is cut off and the telephones go out.
"Busy," he said.
"That's all I get since the heavy shelling started last week. I'll try again in a half hour."


How Do We Stop Mania To Build on West Side?
To the Editor:
I recently attended a community board meeting dealing with real estate development in the Special Lincoln Square Historical District.
Attending were representatives of the community board, the Municipal Art Society, lawyers and architects from Landmark West, the City Planning Commission, local block associations and residents of the area.


Valenzuel Stirs Memories
Fernandomania is only a memory in Los Angeles, but the Mexican Mesmerizer has resurfaced in Baltimore.
Fernando Valenzuela does not wear a cape and he does not carve his mark on the walls of opposing dugouts.
But he does leave his mark on opposing batters.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ISRAEL CONTINUES TO BLAST VILLAGES IN SOUTH LEBANON
Israeli warplanes and artillery pounded villages in southern Lebanon for the third straight day today in attacks intended to drive residents out of the southern part of the country until assaults on Israel by pro-Iranian guerrillas are halted.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who said on Monday that he would make southern Lebanon uninhabitable unless the guerrilla attacks stopped, told a parliamentary committee today that he planned to flood Beirut with refugees to press the Lebanese Government to end the attacks.
He said Israel would continue to blast villages as long as Katyusha rockets slammed into Israeli settlement towns in Galilee.


Saberhagen Admits to 'Joke'
Bret Saberhagen yesterday identified himself as the player who lit a firecracker and threw it under a table near reporters in the Shea Stadium clubhouse on July 7.
"I have nothing to hide," said Saberhagen, the right-hander for the Mets.


Amoskeag Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vincent J. Schaefer, 87, Is Dead; Chemist Who First Seeded Clouds
Vincent J. Schaefer, a self-taught chemist who invented cloud "seeding" and created the first artificially induced snow and rainfall, died on Sunday at a hospital in Schenectady, N.Y.
He was 87 and lived in Rotterdam, N.Y.
Mr.
Schaefer drew worldwide attention with his 1946 experiments for General Electric making the first snowstorm in a laboratory and inducing precipitation outdoors, solving many of the mysteries of rain and snow that had baffled scientists.


Beijing Journal; Whither That Torch? China's Burning to Have It
A few years ago, China seemed to have about as much chance of becoming host to the Summer Olympic Games in 2000 as Deng Xiaoping had of winning a gold medal in the pole vault.
But the Chinese leadership, with Mr.
Deng at its core, has been remarkably successful in promoting Beijing's bid for the Olympics.
With the International Olympic Committee set to choose a host city in less than two months, Beijing has become a front-runner.


Coastal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
CAPITAL GAMING INTERNATIONAL INC., Atlantic City, named Henry Hornbostel chief financial officer.
NIELSEN MEDIA RESEARCH, New York, a unit of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., named John A. Dimling president and chief operating officer.


Accounts
*
Jockey International Inc., Kenosha, Wis., to Fairman Schmidt &amp; Cappelli Inc., Chicago, to handle advertising for its retail outlet stores and special projects, previously handled in-house.
Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Portland, Ore., continues to handle the underwear maker's brand business.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Fountainhead Water Co., Atlanta, to West Advertising and Marketing, Atlanta, to handle its Fountainhead Pure Blue Ridge Mountain Water account, previously handled on a project basis by various agencies.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


3 Appointed at American Express
The American Express Company yesterday named Kenneth I. Chenault to the new position of president of its Travel Related Services United States division, expanding his role in the company's important charge-card business.
Mr.
Chenault, 42, who is president of the United States Consumer Card Group, the charge card unit, will keep that post and add responsibilities for the Travel Services Group, the Optima card business and consumer lending activities.
Other Appointments Announced
The company also appointed Jonathan S. Linen vice chairman of the American Express Company, also a new position, and R. Craig Hoenshell president of TRS International, the overseas operation of Travel Related Services.


U.S. Says Ukraine Has Begun Dismantling Nuclear Missiles
Ukraine has begun dismantling some of its SS-19 long-range nuclear missiles in an effort to address American concerns that it is determined to preserve its nuclear arsenal, Pentagon officials said today.
But while American officials described the move as an important first step, Ukraine has declined to discuss a schedule for dismantling its more modern SS-24 missiles.
Nor has Ukraine promised to put the warheads from the SS-19 missiles immediately under international control or ship them back to Russia for dismantling.


Via Sicily, a Low-Fat Meal of Salmon and Peppers
MIMMETTA, a new restaurant in Washington, specializes in Sicilian food.
There is a lot that is very low in fat, and delicious.
One of its most unusual recipes isn't traditional Sicilian.
Sauteed peppers are combined with fennel seeds, and smoked salmon is added for a delicious sauce to put over fresh pasta.
A salad of orange and fennel is also from Mimmetta.
Mimmetta's Peppers, Smoked Salmon and Pasta
36 ounces of red, yellow or orange peppers  1 tablespoon olive oil  1 teaspoon fennel seeds  4 ounces smoked salmon  8 ounces fresh, yolkless linguine  1/8 teaspoon salt, optional  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Bring water to boil in covered pot for linguine.
2. Wash, trim, seed and cut peppers into julienne strips 1/4-inch wide.
3.
Heat oil in nonstick skillet and saute peppers until they are soft, about 15 minutes.
After about 5 minutes, add fennel seeds.
4. Cut smoked salmon into tiny pieces; set aside.
5. Cook pasta according to package directions.
6.
When pasta is cooked, drain, reserving 1/4 cup of the cooking water.
Stir pasta into skillet with peppers.
7.
Season pasta and peppers with salt and pepper.
Add reserved water one tablespoon at a time until mixture is moist.
Just before serving, stir in salmon.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 672 calories, 14 grams fat, 13 milligrams cholesterol, 706 milligrams sodium, 29 grams protein, 115 grams carbohydrate.
Orange and Fennel Salad
2 eating oranges  1 small fennel bulb  4 tablespoons chopped onion  2 tablespoons fresh orange juice  1 tablespoon olive oil  2 teaspoons capers.
1. Peel oranges, then cut into small dices, reserving the juice.
2.
Trim tops and bottom off fennel bulb and remove outer part if it is tough or bruised.
Slice bulb thinly, then dice.
Finely chop onion.
3.
Mix reserved juice with 2 tablespoons of additional juice and the olive oil.
Then mix oranges, fennel and onion into dressing.
Spoon onto salad plates.
4. Rinse and dry capers and sprinkle over salads.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 154 calories, 7 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 170 milligrams sodium, 2 grams protein, 23 grams carbohydrate.


Fernandez Is Out With Shoulder Injury
MARY JOE FERNANDEZ seeded second, withdrew from the Acura United States Women's Hard Court Championships in Stratton Mountain, Vt., yesterday because of a right-shoulder injury.
Fernandez, ranked seventh in the world, hurt the shoulder in a three-hour match last Saturday with MARY PIERCE in Mahwah, N.J.
She said she aggravated it playing JENNIFER CAPRIATI, who beat her in the final the next day.


Komag Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Share Prices Fall at Novell
Shares of Novell Inc., whose software is the spine of many computer networks, fell $2.875, to $18.375, yesterday in anticipation of lower third-quarter earnings.
After over-the-counter trading closed, Novell said that because of slower sales in Europe, it would report sharply lower earnings, possibly even a net loss.
Novell, which will report its results on Aug. 23, said yesterday that it would write off $300 million to reflect the cost of acquisitions, including $270 million related to the purchase of Unix System Laboratories, which it acquired last month.


Altman Trial Nears Its End
The judge in the New York fraud and bribery trial of Robert A. Altman said yesterday that he expected to present the case to the jury on Aug. 9.
The judge, John A.K.
Bradley, of New York State Superior Court, made his announcement after a conference with lawyers for the prosecution and the defense, and after hearing a defense motion to dismiss the case because of insufficient evidence.


CHRONICLE
Tamper with the image of Miss America? Let down her teased and sprayed helmet of hair?
Proving that there is nothing that cannot be changed, LEONARD HORN, the president and chief executive of the Miss America Organization, and JEFF MARGOLIS, who will produce and direct the broadcast of the pageant in September, plan to give her, whoever she may be, and her 49 competitors a new look.


Browns' Hassan Jones Retires
HASSAN JONES, a wide receiver who signed with the Cleveland Browns as a free agent on June 28 after seven years with Minnesota, retired yesterday.
"I no longer feel capable of handling the day-to-day rigors of the game, both physically and mentally," the 29-year-old Jones said in a statement released by the Browns at their training camp in Berea, Ohio. (AP)


Mideast and Bosnia Call Christopher Back to U.S.
As the situation in Bosnia continues to deteriorate, the Clinton Administration is considering an urgent French request to use air power to punish Serbian attacks against French peacekeeping troops, a senior Administration official said today.
President Clinton summoned Secretary of State Warren Christopher home from a trip to Asia for wide-ranging discussions with other officials at the White House Wednesday on what to do next in Bosnia, including the possible use of American warplanes to enforce United Nations resolutions providing humanitarian measures to ease the suffering in Sarajevo, the official said.


A Raleigh, N.C., Agency Wins A Second Chance At Audi's Account And Takes Home The Prize.
AS Audi of America Inc. moved closer to changing advertising agencies for the first time in 24 years, a list of seven contenders to replace DDB Needham Worldwide was reduced to three finalists in May, and McKinney &amp; Silver was not among them.
A midsized agency in Raleigh, N.C., with 100 employees and 1992 billings of $102 million, McKinney &amp; Silver was the last to be eliminated, sending Robert C. Doherty, president of the 24-year-old shop, away "licking wounds and feeling despondent only in the sense that we absolutely knew we belonged in the finals."


One Vote for College
Ryan Sittler raised his eyebrows when he heard how much money Alex Rodriguez was demanding from the Seattle Mariners, but he understood the stress in making the decision.
Sittler is a forward for the West team in the Olympic Festival's hockey competition.
He was 18 years old last year when the Philadelphia Flyers drafted him in the first round, seventh over all in the 1992 National Hockey League entry draft.


AT LUNCH WITH: Sir Terence Conran; The Titled Champion of Democracy
WHEN people talk about Quaglino's, the restaurant of the moment here, they talk about the spectacular design, the immense skylight, the Crustacea Altar -- if you please -- where a dizzying array of raw shellfish is indeed to be worshiped before eaten, the cigarette girls, the 65 chefs serving 400 customers per meal, the dance floor in the upstairs bar with a view of the main dining room and most of all, the sweeping staircase down to it.
This is an entrance with a vengeance.
It teaches sympathy for Oscar presenters.
No one talks about the chairs.
Except, of course, Sir Terence Conran.
The former furniture designer who founded Conran's, the chain of stores that revolutionized home furnishings for an international mass market in the 1960's and 70's, has now become London's leading restaurateur.
Since he opened Quaglino's, his fifth restaurant, in February, reservations have been taken three to six weeks in advance.
Among the diners have been the Duchess of York, Princess Margaret and Naomi Campbell, the model.
When Gianni Versace showed up without a reservation, he was turned away.


Rodriguez a Shortstop With a Long Reach
Alex Rodriguez celebrated his 18th birthday today, and while the smooth, Miami-born shortstop has the world by a string, he also is feeling the tug of reality.
Rodriguez, who is playing for the South team here in the Olympic Festival, is regarded by most baseball experts as the top amateur player in the nation.
He was the first player chosen in last month's draft and with his arm, speed and range, most scouts project him as a great infielder.


Power Display by Kent Does It All for Mets
Dialed in.
It's Jeff Kent's turn of phrase for when he is turning hard on everything at the plate.
It means to be focused, to swing with intent and execute menace with ease.
Last night, Kent was dialed in. The connections went long distance.
Kent, the second baseman who has fought for confidence at the plate and a regular place to play in the field for the future, last night slugged one baseball 406 feet.
He crunched another 417.
He accounted for four runs, and thus the 4-3 triumph the Mets earned over the Marlins, their improbable superiors in the National League East.


London Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Iran's Isolation: Few Arab Friends Left
The Israeli military raids on the Iranian-sponsored Party of God in southern Lebanon bring a long-simmering confrontation between Israel and Iran to a new threshold.
But Iran and its allies in the region may find little sympathy even within the ruling circles of Syria, Teheran's longtime strategic partner and only Arab friend.
Despite widespread condemnation of the raids in Arab capitals today, it was difficult to escape the impression that many decision makers in this region welcome any blows dealt to the radicals in their midst, most particularly Islamic fundamentalist allies of Iran and the most radical fringes of the Palestinian movement.


The Road to Recovery: From Drugs to Drama
HE remembers it like yesterday.
He had gone to visit his 3-year-old son Danny in the projects, and his ex-wife would not allow him in the house.
He was at the lowest point of his heroin addiction.
He was homeless and he no longer believed in anything.
Danny pressed 50 cents and a little knife into his hands.
"Here, Daddy," he said.
"This is so you can get something to eat." The knife, Danny explained, was for protection.


Richard Assatly, 49, A Fashion Designer Of Ready-to-Wear
Richard Assatly, a skilled designer who worked in all facets of ready-to-wear, died on Sunday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 49.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, said Gregory Habeeb, a nephew.


Report on Trade Treaty Is Critical of Companies
A report scheduled to be released in Washington on Wednesday accuses several major American companies that are staunch supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement of having shifted thousands of jobs to Mexico, consistently violated workers' rights here and used Mexican plants to make products that have been banned in the United States.
The corporations named in the report by the Institute for Policy Studies are part of a pro-treaty lobbying group called USA*NAFTA.
Officials at the organization's headquarters in Washington had not seen the report and declined to comment.
Corporations Deny Accusations
But some of the corporations named in the study denied the accusations or accused the authors of repeating old claims that had been refuted.
They include a charge that the General Motors Corporation plant in Matamoros, Mexico, is dumping into an open canal a toxic chemical called methylene chloride at more than 216,000 times the allowed American standard, and another chemical called xylene at 6,400 times the rate allowed in the United States.


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to June 12


A New 'Tristan' Gives 'Ring'-Less Bayreuth Plenty to Talk About
The opening of the Bayreuth Wagner Festival is a great annual German occasion, equivalent to sports events elsewhere like the Super Bowl, the Henley Regatta in England and the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe horse race in France.
It is an opportunity for national pride and corporate display, with the richest Germans flaunting their status through the number of guests for whom they can provide Bayreuth tickets.
Since there are seven times more requests than tickets, a fistful represents considerable status.
As always, there were guests of honor at this year's opening, on Sunday, 270 of them.
Aside from the usual Bavarian and other German political potentates, Mikhail S. and Raisa Gorbachev were on hand.
Mr.
Gorbachev used the occasion to appeal for Western help, to be funneled through his foundation, in supporting Russian culture, imperiled by the current political and economic crisis.
He also managed to get his dark suit splattered with eggs, but the hurler of the eggs said later that he was aiming at Edmund Stoiber, the President of Bavaria.


Reviews/Television; Young and Uncertain, But Ready for a Risk
The New York youth scene gets the once-over twice on television tonight and, for a change, ends up looking just fine.
On the new ABC series "Street Match," at 8:30, singles on the streets of Manhattan are paired off, warily, for impromptu dates.
And on MTV's "Unplugged: Spoken Word," at 10, young poets demonstrate forcefully that there is more to the age of short attention spans than hypnotic rhythms.
"Street Match," whose host is Ricky Paull Goldin of the daytime soap opera "Another World," proceeds on what is probably the year's most unpromising premise: Just stop single people on the street and fix them up with strangers they find attractive, then pick up the tab for dinner, at a nice restaurant with a table that is wired for sound, and see what happens.
It's "The Dating Game" spiked with MTV's "Real World." Spare me, you well might cry.


An Exhibit That Causes Heads to Turn


Another Generation Lost
"The Lost Generation," the title of tonight's NBC News special, refers to the many young people who, as Tom Brokaw puts it, have "walked out of high school into a recession." It is no revelation that good jobs are hard to find these days, and this hourlong report tends toward the familiar and repetitious.
But the subject is important enough to bear some repeating.
By way of example, Mr.
Brokaw visits an Ohio town whose General Motors plant, once its major employer, shut down in 1987.
Since then, youngsters who would ordinarily have followed their parents onto the assembly line at union wages have had to settle for minimum-wage jobs in fast-food chains.
Instead of rearing families and putting money in the bank, they are scrambling to get by, and prospects are bleak.
Interviews bring out their feelings that they have somehow been betrayed, that they will never attain the simple but solid comforts their parents took for granted and they expected.


War and Peace in the Middle East
With luck, the deadly exchanges of bombs and rockets now raining down on civilian populations on both sides of the Israeli-Lebanese border won't blow up the Middle East peace talks.
Stopping the negotiations would perversely reward the very group that triggered the latest cycle of violence -- the radical Lebanese Party of God, whose guerrillas killed seven Israeli soldiers stationed on Lebanese soil earlier this month in a calculated effort to undermine the talks.
With that danger in mind, Damascus has prudently restrained its own forces in Lebanon even though Syrian soldiers have been killed in the fighting.
Showing less restraint, Israel is deliberately trying to force tens of thousands of Lebanese civilians to flee northward, in the hope this will somehow pressure Beirut and Damascus to crack down on the Party of God.


Son to Shelter Troubled Man Residents Fear On West Side
A mentally ill man who in the past has frightened residents of the Upper West Side and was once convicted of pushing a girl into traffic will be released tomorrow from a state mental hospital in Queens.
The man, Larry Hogue, has agreed to live with his grown son in Bridgeport, Conn., but some residents of West 96th Street said they feared he would soon be harassing them again.


Financial Benefit Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Clinton Seeks More Powers To Stem Illegal Immigration
President Clinton asked Congress today for more money and new laws to tighten the borders against illegal immigrants, speed interviews of people seeking political asylum and let the Government have the same tools it uses against organized crime to fight foreign gangs promoting illegal immigration.
The President said his decision to push for this legislation was prompted in part by the World Trade Center bombing, which showed how porous the American immigration system is.
But he said it was also an attempt to meet what is likely to be one of the biggest domestic challenges the country will face in the 1990's: how to stem the increasing flow of illegal immigrants while maintaining the fundamental American commitment to legal immigration and legitimate political refugees.


INSIDE
Tariffs Cut on Steel Imports
A Federal agency eliminated dozens of tariffs on imported steel, in a move that may ultimately lead to lower steel prices for consumers.
Page D1.
Celtics' Star Dies at 27
Reggie Lewis, the Boston Celtic star, collapsed for the second time in three months and died at age 27.
Page B7.
NBC Gets Atlanta Olympics
NBC's record bid of $456 million won the TV rights to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
Page B7.
U.S.
Readies New Arms Plan
The Clinton Administration is preparing an arms control plan calling for a global ban on the production of materials for nuclear weapons.
Page A2.
Condom Plan in New Haven
New Haven has approved a plan to provide condoms to students in middle school and high school.
Page B1.


DuPont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metropolitan Diary
SCENE: Appetizing counter at Zabar's on the Upper West Side.
Dramatis personae: Clerk, customer and Ina Chapler, who overhears the following:
Customer: One pound of Nova scraps, please.
Clerk (with disdain): We don't sell scraps. (Then, with triumphant smile) We do, however, have Nova Scotia trimmings!"
. . .
Scene: In line to see the film "The Firm." William K. Kopp is among those who hear the following:
Guy No. 1: So why do you think "The Firm" has replaced "Jurassic Park" as the No. 1 picture of the week?
Guy No. 2, thoughtfully: Because lawyers are scarier than dinosaurs?
. . .
RADIO SOUNDS As students of "Information, Please" we guessed at piano tunes; while anticipations of "Allen's Alley" made shorter long Sunday afternoons.
Lowell Thomas, Gabriel Heater: each voice suggested a face; and Fibber McGee's closet imaged us an avalanching place.
We were verbal, but visual too; and to my radio go my thanks for making me fill in so many blanks. -- ED ROSSMANN
. . .
Dear Diary:
With the arrival of each summer, I find myself completely at odds over how to spend my weekends.
I've never fancied the weekend commute to the country, and it's always been a bit out of my financial reach.
But I always make a terrific guest.
I bring great gifts, clean up after myself and always am filled with sparkling conversation.
So how is it possible that my dog, Maggie, has received more invitations to the country than I have?
It began in May, when I was taking a vacation in the Caribbean.
My friend Barbara had offered to take care of Maggie while I was away.
One weekend, Barbara took Maggie to her friend's country house in Bucks County, Pa.
Maggie was so popular during her visit that she was recently invited back.
There I was on Friday afternoon, packing her weekend doggy bag and waiting on the sidewalk for Barbara to pull up in her newly rented car.
Maggie was so excited to see her, as soon as the rear car door was opened, she jumped in and never looked back.
I couldn't shake the image of Maggie lounging across a manicured lawn, sipping Bellinis.
On Sunday night, when I went to pick up Maggie, there she was, wagging that tail, but only mildly happy to see me.
Barbara told me all about what fun they had, how well-behaved she was and that she was certainly invited to come back whenever she wanted.
Barbara also added with a crooked smile, "You just have to realize that your dog has her own set of friends." -- SETH ADLEMAN
. . .
Letter from a philosophically inclined friend:
Curious how in this cynical city, we are surrounded by strangers with no connections and manage to avoid exchanging conversations with them until one day . . .
On a beautiful morning, I was heading downtown on a Lexington Avenue bus.
I stood in the rear daydreaming, grasping a pole with one hand and twirling my hair around the forefinger of my other hand, a habit I've had as far back as I can remember.
Suddenly, a voice from out of the blue -- or rather, from out of the man seated in front of me: "My daughter used to do that -- twirling her hair."
Startled out of my daydreams, I dropped my hand and ceased what I had been doing.
"It's a bad habit of mine," I said with some embarrassment, "but it seems I've been doing it forever." My mother used to tell me I'd wind up with a big bald spot if I didn't stop.
My father claimed his sister had the same habit and that hunks of her hair did indeed disappear forever.
I asked my new traveling acquaintance what happened to his daughter.
"She died at a young age during childbirth," he said.
"I'm so sorry," I offered.
During the rest of the trip, neither of us spoke.
At the next stop, we both coincidentally got off.
We waved goodbye and headed in opposite directions.
I'll probably never see him again.
But I do think of him and his daughter whenever I catch myself twirling my hair.
. . .
Standing on the corner of Avenue of the Americas and Minetta Lane after a theater performance recently, Jimmy Nicholas, a New York printing executive, flagged a taxi to take his wife and a friend to dinner.
As the taxi approached, so did a giant waterbug, that scourge of New York summers.
As the women watched in horror, the bug veered from a puddle and scurried toward the door of the taxi.
Mr. Nicholas squashed it.
"I had to," he told the crowd at the corner, which burst into applause.
"It was trying to steal our cab."


If the Hudson Imitated the Mississippi
To the Editor:
"The extra water pouring into the Mississippi from the Missouri swelled the nation's greatest river toward a record crest, or maximum depth, of 47 feet as it rolled southward past the soaring Gateway Arch" you report in "St. Louis Wins the Early Rounds as the Mississippi Does Its Worst" (front page, July 19).


A Shape From Nature Helps Curb Noise
To replace conventional mufflers on trucks and other noisy machines, a Canadian company has developed a "silencer" whose inner workings are shaped like a conch shell.
The developer, Temro of Winnipeg, Manitoba, a subsidiary of the Budd Company of Troy, Mich., contends that the device for diesel engines is up to three times as effective a sound deadener as a conventional muffler and can eliminate 75 percent of the noise from a truck's exhaust pipe.


K.C. Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


60-Minute Gourmet
THE tradition of cooking with spirits goes back centuries.
In the Gascony region of France, for example, Armagnac, the distinctive brandy, is used in all sorts of sauces for game.
Similarly, chefs in the Champagne region incorporate their famous sparkling wine into all varieties of dishes.
About five years ago, I noticed that some Italian chefs were making pasta sauce with vodka.
This seemed odd, for I thought vodka had little flavor.
The chefs told me that alcohol had a binding effect on sauces and indeed added a touch of flavor, which my own experiments confirmed.


Bills Sign Smith to Four-Year Deal
RALPH C. WILSON Jr., the Bills' owner, wrote another healthy check yesterday, signing defensive end BRUCE SMITH to a four-year, $13.5 million contract that is almost identical to the deal that running back THURMAN THOMAS got last week.
Although details of Smith's deal were not released, sources said that like Thomas, the All-Pro defensive end, will receive about $4 million this year, roughly $2.7 million in each of the next two years, then another $4 million in the fourth and final year.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.11
3.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.10
3.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
3.24
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.55
5.56
6.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.67
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.39
7.40
8.43
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.82
5.81
6.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


All the Leading Men Set for U.S. Open
The United States Tennis Association says that all of the top 40 players on the men's tour have entered the United States Open, which will run from Aug. 30-Sept. 12 at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens.


D'Amato Panel Plans for '94
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato announced today that he has formed a fund-raising committee to help him decide whether to run for governor in 1994.
By forming a state committee, Mr.
D'Amato said he was trying to demonstrate that he was serious about the gubernatorial race and not simply trying to retire the $183,000 debt left from his 1992 re-election campaign.


People
*
Jerry Stahl was named executive vice president and general manager at Bozell Minneapolis, succeeding Ron Benza, who left to join McCann-Erickson San Francisco in the same capacity.
Mr.
Stahl was previously a consultant in Minneapolis for two years.
Before that, he was an executive vice president at Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis.


Tenneco Operating Net Up but Stock Falls
Tenneco Inc. reported yesterday that second-quarter operating earnings more than doubled over the corresponding period last year.
But the company's stock fell $2.50, to $48, on the New York Stock Exchange after it announced serious losses in its packaging concern with no sign of relief in the near future.
Attributing the gain to aggressive cost-cutting, Tenneco posted operating earnings of $111 million, up from $50 million in the second quarter of 1992.


U.S. Overturns Tariffs on Many Steel Imports
Opening huge holes in the protectionist wall that has surrounded the American steel industry for most of three decades, a Federal agency eliminated dozens of steel-import tariffs today, ruling that they were unnecessary.
The six-member International Trade Commission, a bureaucratic oddity that is independent of both the Administration and Congress, wiped out most tariffs on steel used in construction and machinery.
But it also made permanent some stiff temporary tariffs on corrosion-resistant steel used for household appliances and for car and truck body panels.


GOODYEAR TIRE &amp; RUBBER CO. (N)
The 29 percent jump in second-quarter earnings at the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company reported yesterday came despite a drop in overall revenues.
Goodyear attributed much of its gain to a strong performance in Brazil, where local markets and exports to other Latin American countries maintained high prices, and production increased about 20 percent over the similar period in 1992.
The tire maker, based in Akron, Ohio, said while overall sales dropped to $3 billion from $3.1 billion in the corresponding period a year earlier, sales in tire and related interests increased slightly, to $2.6 billion from $2.5 billion.


Miscellany
*
Charles T. Coyle, former advertising director at The New York Times Magazine, opened a marketing, publishing and sales development consulting group, the Charles Coyle Consulting Co., Greenwich, Conn.


Judge's Optimistic Signature On a Grim-Faced Death Row
Charles J. Hearn, a Texas state judge, has been putting a happy face on his signature for years.
The happy face is on his driver's license, on all the checks he signs, on thousands of court documents.
Now it is on an execution order he sent to a state prisoner here, informing him of the date he is to be put to death, and therein may lie a legal issue.


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Linebacker Surplus A Strength For Giants
Lawrence Taylor stood before reporters and proclaimed that he was actually thrilled about going to practice and attending meetings.
He was just tickled to death.
The Giants' linebacker spoke as if he had just sunk a 19-foot birdie putt on the 18th hole to win the Masters.
Oh, those happy-go-lucky linebackers.
And who said they were big, bruising monsters?
Whatever, it seems the Giants' linebackers are the deepest and most formidable part of the team, the lifeblood of the defense at the very least and maybe even the anchor of the whole squad.
With questions surrounding the defensive line and the secondary, it has become apparent in such a short period of time that the linebacking corps will be relied upon heavily to fortify the defense.


Amphenol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Drastic Start From Scratch On Financing for Schools
Frustrated by its inability to provide residents with property-tax relief, the Michigan Legislature took the ultimate political gamble last week.
It repealed all property taxes that support public schools, betting that the pressure to quickly find $6 billion a year for public education would force the lawmakers to make difficult decisions.
Gov.
John Engler, a Republican, said he would sign the measure into law next month, making Michigan the first state to repeal property taxes for schools.
While the bill had bipartisan support, many experts in education and government consider the measure foolhardy because it scraps the existing system without a substitute in place.


Consider This a Complaint About a Big Pothole
To the Editor:
My attempt to file a complaint about a pothole that recently destroyed a fine Michelin tire might interest other New Yorkers.


A Civil Suit Expected in Mets' Incident
The lawyer representing the 2-year-old girl apparently injured in last Saturday's firecracker incident at Dodger Stadium said yesterday that the girl's family would announce today in Los Angeles plans to file a civil suit naming Vince Coleman, Bobby Bonilla, Eric Davis, the Mets and the Dodgers.
Darrell York, the lawyer for the child, Amanda Santos, said that under California law a plaintiff seeking punitive damages was prohibited from specifying the dollar amount of the suit.


Goody Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


National Guard Joins Puerto Rico Police on Beat as Crime Rises
Every weekend now, troops in camouflage uniforms patrol the beaches here, M-16's in hand as they weave through crowds of children playing in the sand and bathers lying on towels.
Outside Plaza Las Americas, the biggest shopping center in the commonwealth, and in the theater and restaurant districts, soldiers in military vehicles rove the parking lots and streets.
In its long history, the National Guard has played many roles, including quelling riots in Los Angeles, aiding victims of natural disasters in Florida and the Midwest and fighting in the Persian Gulf, just to cite some recent examples.
But for the first time, the authorities here and in Washington said, American military reserve units have been routinely deployed to assist local police in fighting crime.


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
KIMBERLY-CLARK CO., Dallas, signed a joint-venture agreement to build a $33 million tissue mill in Bahrain.
ELI LILLY &amp; CO., Indianapolis, said its Cardiac Pacemakers Inc. unit had received an approval letter from the Food and Drug Administration for Endotak, a lead that connects a person's heart to a device designed to stop irregular heart beats.


Review/Music; Pianist Honors John Cage With Playful Devotion
During the intermission of Monday night's Serious Fun concert at the Walter Reade Theater, the pianist Margaret Leng Tan invited the audience on stage to watch her transform a prepared piano into a "string piano." Rubber, screws and nuts came out of the instrument, then other bolts were inserted at precise intervals, giving the strings the resonance of bells.
Ms.
Tan went about her task with the same playful devotion that she brought to this entire program dedicated to John Cage's memory.
Much of that devotion was contagious.
Ms.
Tan is the sort of musician who can hear the tensions between random notes.
So it is no surprise that she is probably the most convincing interpreter of Cage's keyboard music.
Cage was often determined that there be no relation between notes; Ms.
Tan is so talented that she cannot help but provide one.


Campus Journal; An Exchange Program To Escape the Shelling
Out past the cornfields and not too far from the grain depot in the center of town here, Alan Walczak, the one-man international studies department at Grand Valley State University, is dialing Sarajevo again.
"Busy," he said on Monday, then tried once more.
"Busy . . . busy." Rescue officials in Sarajevo have explained to him that when the shelling begins, the electricity to their antenna is cut off and the telephones go out.
"Busy," he said.
"That's all I get since the heavy shelling started last week. I'll try again in a half hour."


Memorial for Korean Veterans Is Dedicated in Boston


Fiserv Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dynatech Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Dance; Nikolais's 'Imago,' Forever Young
No choreographer was as adept at turning a prop into a philosophy as Alwin Nikolais; the quintessential Nikolais was on view Monday night with the revival of his 1963 "Imago" at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
This third program by Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance (Mr. Louis has directed the troupe since Nikolais's death in May) is not a mixed bill like the the others in the current Nikolais Retrospective but an evening-long suite.
Over the decades, the public has been treated to the more ingenious excerpts from "Imago," which is subtitled "The City Curious." This three-act reconstruction provides a rare opportunity to see a full version.


In America; Thuggery, Not Sports
Vince Coleman is an ill-tempered, base-stealing, 31-year-old left fielder for the worst team in baseball, the New York Mets.
This team is not to be confused with the lovably inept bunch that won over a city while kicking the ball around the field in the early 1960's.


Unusual Heart Therapy Wins Coverage From Large Insurer
In a move that could be a boon to alternative medicine, the nation's largest provider of health insurance for individuals announced yesterday that it would reimburse patients participating in a program that combines diet, meditation, exercise and support groups to reverse heart disease.
The "reversal program," which was developed by Dr.
Dean Ornish, director of the Preventive Medicine Research Institute in Sausalito, Calif., is the first non-surgical, non-pharmaceutical therapy for heart disease to qualify for insurance reimbursement, which it was granted yesterday by the Mutual of Omaha Insurance Company.


Western Aid Is No Help
It has become clear that new Western credits are no longer a remedy for Russia, but a drug helping maintain an unfit system, one accustomed to continual budget overruns and fiscal irresponsibility.
In 1992, Western countries rescheduled more than $7 billion of Russia's debt and granted it $13.3 billion in new credits, which financed more than half of Russia's hard-currency imports.


Market Place; When Free Marketers Turn Their Faith Over To Central Planners.
FEW would ever argue that Wall Street makes a lot of sense.
At a time when some strategists grumble that new taxes and regulations from Washington pose greater risk for American companies' share value, their investment banking colleagues think they have found a place where corporate prospects are just dandy: China.
That excitement for Chinese companies was evident earlier this month, when shares of China Tire Holdings began trading for the first time on the New York Stock Exchange.
Demand for the enterprise, a Bermuda holding company that controls two tire manufacturing subsidiaries in China, was intense: The 6.1 million shares in the initial public offering July 15 were priced at $17 each, above the expected range of $13 to $15.


Bomb Attacks Kill 5 In Milan and Strike 2 Churches in Rome
Car bombs rocked historic sites in Milan and Rome late last night and early today, killing at least five people and raising official concerns that Italy's political turmoil has unleashed a new wave of terrorism intended to destabilize the country.
"At the very moment we are speaking of elections, at the moment at which anti-corruption investigations have reached a crucial point, I do not think that these attacks are a coincidence," said Francesco Saverio Borrelli, head of the magistrates investigating Italy's vast and still unfolding political corruption.
At Basilica and Forum
Witnesses and officials said three car bombs -- one in Milan and two in Rome -- went off just before and shortly after midnight, killing 5 people in Milan and injuring 13 in Rome.


A New 'Tristan' Gives 'Ring'-Less Bayreuth Plenty to Talk About
The opening of the Bayreuth Wagner Festival is a great annual German occasion, equivalent to sports events elsewhere like the Super Bowl, the Henley Regatta in England and the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe horse race in France.
It is an opportunity for national pride and corporate display, with the richest Germans flaunting their status through the number of guests for whom they can provide Bayreuth tickets.
Since there are seven times more requests than tickets, a fistful represents considerable status.
As always, there were guests of honor at this year's opening, on Sunday, 270 of them.
Aside from the usual Bavarian and other German political potentates, Mikhail S. and Raisa Gorbachev were on hand.
Mr.
Gorbachev used the occasion to appeal for Western help, to be funneled through his foundation, in supporting Russian culture, imperiled by the current political and economic crisis.
He also managed to get his dark suit splattered with eggs, but the hurler of the eggs said later that he was aiming at Edmund Stoiber, the President of Bavaria.


Food Notes
Barbecue Grates
Williams-Sonoma has introduced a cast-iron grate that fits on standard kettle-style barbecue grills, which normally come equipped with chrome grates.
The grate retains heat better and sears food more effectively than a chrome grate.
It is designed to fit a barbecue 22 1/2 inches in diameter and is made in two sections, which permits part of it to be lifted up so the coals below can be adjusted.


Poll Finds Edge Still for Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins appears to have suffered virtually no erosion of his political support in the aftermath of a state report last week that criticized his handling of the racial violence in Crown Heights two years ago, according to a new poll.
The poll released yesterday by New York 1 News, the all-news cable television station, indicated that most New Yorkers have accepted the Mayor's admission that he made mistakes during the four days of unrest, and that they would like the issue to be put to rest.


Uniting in Fight Against Crime in 47th Precinct; Bronx Neighborhood Welcomes Community Policing Despite Frustration With Plan
On White Plains Road in the north Bronx, they all know their beat officer, John Crowley.
Elvira Wyart, a neighborhood civic leader, has the highest praise for him.
Kevin Eybergen, owner of the Deli, can't see enough of him.
Residents at St.
Luke's housing for the elderly gave him a rousing ovation one recent night.
Children at Public School 21 wave when the 6-foot-4-inch 220-pound officer passes, and neighborhood drug dealers seek his support when in a bind.
Officer Crowley was walking the beat some months back, when Mark DaCosta, an oft-convicted marijuana dealer, came running his way.
Crack dealers on 223d Street, marijuana dealers on 228th -- they know the name Crowley.
He's arrested most of them, including Mr.
DaCosta, some several times.
Cop of the Month
"Mr. Crowley, Mr. Crowley!" yelled the dealer.
"Mr. Crowley, it's me, it's me, I'm shot in the leg."


Cray Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
Almost all the top-ranked teams survived the first day of play in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here Monday at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
The lone exception was a team seeded 15th in the field of 148.
Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., Jaggy Shivdasani of India, Fred Stewart of Andes, N.Y., Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., all of whom have won numerous national titles, were teamed with Ethan Stein of Irvington, N.Y., and Luella Slaner of Scarsdale, N.Y.
They lost by 16 imps to the 114th-seeded squad: Nancy Pickering of Penllyn, Pa., Roberto Scaramuzzi of Baton Rouge, La., and Jeff Goldsmith and Walter Hamilton, both of Pasadena, Calif.


Clinton Sought To Cheer Aide, Official Reports
President Clinton telephoned Vincent W. Foster Jr. the night before he committed suicide in part because he knew that the deputy White House counsel was "having a rough time" at work, the White House said today.
The statement, confirming a report in Newsweek magazine, appeared somewhat at variance with a previous White House assertion that no one had known Mr.
Foster was feeling troubled.
But Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary, said the President had been aware only that it had been a difficult week for the office of the White House counsel, where Mr.
Foster was the second-ranking official.


Dinkins Tries to Reassure Starrett City After Attacks
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to Starrett City yesterday to try to reassure residents unnerved by three sexual assaults on young girls in the sprawling housing complex over the last six weeks, most recently on Friday.
The Mayor, like his predecessors, routinely goes to the scene of major crimes and accidents.
But with Mr.
Dinkins politically vulnerable -- the subject for the last week of harsh criticism for his management of the Crown Heights disturbances two years ago -- his helicopter journey to the housing development in southeast Brooklyn was clearly also intended to reassure voters citywide by demonstrating that he was engaged in his job and cared about the concerns of ordinary New Yorkers.


China Needs Time To Deserve the Games
IF we all can curb our suicidal instincts for war and pollution, China must surely be an Olympic host for the first time, very early in the next century.
But not in the year 2000.
At the point when the decision must be made, in Monaco on Sept. 23, the International Olympic Committee should use the yardstick of preparedness for not choosing Beijing.
Then while China is improving its stadiums and hotels, it can work on its observation of human rights, without having been seen as openly criticized.


Wine Talk
IT was just after 5 A.M. when Simon Judd sped along a darkened road in England, hurrying to Dover, where he planned to catch the 6 A.M. cross-channel ferry that would bring him to this French port.
Mr.
Judd was not alone; not in his car, and not on the roads of southern England leading toward the channel ports and the breaking dawn.
He and his family, along with hundreds of other Britons, had forsaken their beds that morning and were heading for France.
And bargains.


Commission Is Seen as Skeptical of Internal Police Monitoring
The mayoral commission examining police corruption in New York City is skeptical of efforts by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly to overhaul the Police Department's internal monitoring system, according to advisers to the commission and law-enforcement officials familiar with its work.
The officials said the commission, appointed more than a year ago and headed by Milton Mollen, a former deputy mayor and ex-judge, is moving toward a consensus that many of Mr.
Kelly's changes -- including reorganizing the internal-affairs operation -- are superficial.
At this time, they said, the majority of the commission tends to believe in the necessity of a move that Mr.
Kelly strongly opposes -- establishment of a permanent monitor of corruption from outside the department.


Kansas City Holds the Line As a Double Crest Surges By
The Missouri and Kansas Rivers, rising in muddy concert to record crests, worked their watery worst today on the levees and flood walls of this city and neighboring Kansas City, Kan.
But except for a few minor leaks, the protective berms and barriers held off the double-barreled onslaught.
At least for the moment.


A Partner Leaves Follis DeVito Verdi
Follis DeVito Verdi of New York and John Follis, a partner and creative director at the agency, announced yesterday that Mr.
Follis had left because of "philosophical differences" and had opened his own shop, Follis Inc.
"There were a lot of things I didn't agree with and I was tired of compromising," said Mr.
Follis, 39.
"Stuff like this happens all the time."


Schuylerville Stakes to Kick Off the Saratoga Scene
Saratoga, the home of racing tradition and racing upsets, will open its 126th season today with the 75th running of the Schuylerville Stakes for 2-year-old fillies trying to pass the first milestone on the road to success.
But waiting in the barns, filled with 1,800 horses who shipped into Saratoga for the five-week season, some of the stars of the Triple Crown campaign will be waiting for the first marquee race of the meeting, the Jim Dandy Stakes on Sunday.


John Brooks, Writer, Dies at 72; Specialized in Stories of Business
John Brooks, a longtime staff writer for The New Yorker whose best-selling books exposed the excesses of the business world, died yesterday at the Southampton Nursing Home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 72 and lived in East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was complications of a stroke, said his wife, Barbara Mahoney Brooks.


Abbott Finds His Best Form For 2d Half
The Yankees rang up four runs in the second inning tonight, then realized they were playing in Tiger Stadium, that Jim Abbott has had difficulty protecting leads and that it might be shrewd to keep their fingers crossed.
The night was still young.
But this time Abbott kept stressful situations to a minimum and looked to be the pitcher the Yankees have been waiting for.
Cancel the search party and trash the missing pitcher's report; the Abbott of previous seasons emerged at an opportune time in this Yankee pursuit of a division title.
The Yankees desperately need tonight's Abbott to hang around.


From Whom the Cuban Bell Tolls
The Clinton Administration has wisely relaxed the economic embargo of Cuba to allow U.S. telephone companies to share toll revenues with the Castro regime.
This could end a cruel and senseless game that has compelled Cuban-Americans in Miami to speak to relatives 90 miles away by routing calls through Canada, which shares tolls with Havana.
Yet there is another hurdle before the lines open: Fidel Castro has to agree.
In complying with the embargo, American telephone companies have placed in escrow $80 million owed to Cuba.
Havana insists this money has to be handed over before direct calls from Florida are permitted.
But one good turn deserves another.
Cuba can reciprocate Washington's gesture by putting the escrow issue on hold.
It could earn as much as $15 million in the first year of the new telephone operation and gain good will among exiles who are eager to speak with cooped-up kinfolk.


G.O.P. Continues to Block Youth Service Bill as Democrats Falter
Republicans continued to block action on President Clinton's national service legislation today, demanding that the Administration shorten the program's duration to just two years as the price of ending their filibuster.
Democrats, lacking the 60 votes needed to end debate, postponed until Thursday any open test of strength on the legislation, which as it stands would authorize educational grants of up to $5,000 a year to as many as 150,000 Americans in exchange for their agreement to tutor grade school students, help the elderly or perform other public services.


Engelhard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Grants $4.5 Million to Help Military Contractors Shift Focus
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo came here today to announce that the Federal Government has awarded the state a $4.5 million grant to help Long Island's sagging military industries convert to peacetime pursuits.
"This grant will enable us to do a lot of things, like expanding the state's industrial effectiveness program," Mr.
Cuomo said to an audience of about 500 business owners at the Crest Hollow Country Club.
"It will fund new training programs for defense workers, expand new market development for defense firms and set aside $2 million as a working capital revolving loan fund to help finance individual diversification programs."


U.S. IS SAID TO LAG IN SPACE RESEARCH
A Federal study said yesterday that the United States is in danger of losing its lead to foreign rivals in the $15-billion-a-year business of building communication satellites and related systems.
"The United States has lost its leading position in many critical satellite communications technologies," and this erosion has put America's market lead "at risk," said the report's executive summary, which was made public yesterday.


Lebanese Flee Northward
United Nations observers estimate that 120,000 Lebanese have fled north from their villages in southern Lebanon in the last two weeks.
Page A6.


Looking For Flavor? Say 'Cheese'
With all the talk of cutting back on fat, it might seem that cheeses -- rich, creamy and oozing -- had fallen from favor.
But Americans are eating more cheese than ever.
Although much of it is the mozzarella that goes on a pizza, the interest in cheese continues to grow, especially in the cheeses with complex flavor.
Blandness is no longer the norm.


Catholic Church Can't Follow Fashion in Morals
To the Editor:
I reply as an organizer of the 20th anniversary celebration of the papal encyclical "Humanae Vitae," held at Princeton University in 1988, to "Wrong About Sex, Absolutely" by Thomas C. Fox (Op-Ed, July 16).


Survivors of Fatal Hike Fault Lack of a Warning
A spokesman for the survivors of a deadly hike in a canyon in Utah said today that the party had not been warned that floodgates were open at the head of the canyon's creek, releasing a rush of water that drowned two people.
"It makes the tragedy all the more painful to realize it could have been prevented," said the spokesman, Mark Easton.


Clinton Facing Threat of Revolt On Budget Plan
As negotiators tried to resolve the differences in House and Senate budget bills, Democratic senators and representatives who are not on the conference committee threatened today to break ranks and bring President Clinton's deficit-reduction package crashing down like Samson's temple.
Senator David L. Boren, a thorn in President Clinton's side all year, delivered a speech on the Senate floor in which he threatened to switch sides and vote against the measure.
In the House, Representative W. J. (Billy) Tauzin has been telling his constituents in Louisiana that he could not vote for a gasoline tax, which is sure to be part of the final version of the legislation.


Conrad L. Wirth, 93; Led National Parks Service
Conrad L. Wirth, the longest-serving director of the National Park Service, died on Sunday at the Willowood nursing home in Williamstown, Mass.
He was 93 and lived in New Lebanon, N.Y., for the last several years.
He died in his sleep, his family said.


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Catholic Church Can't Follow Fashion in Morals; Gay Priests
To the Editor:
Thomas C. Fox manifests his homophobia in "Wrong About Sex, Absolutely" (Op-Ed, July 16) when he states that the disproportionate number of gay priests and seminarians, relative to the general population, is symptomatic of the Roman Catholic priesthood's collapse.


Computer Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


G.O.P. Legislator to Run For Comptroller Next Year
Assemblyman John J. Faso of Kinderhook today became the first Republican to announce his candidacy for state comptroller, and in the process provided a preview of his party's 1994 strategy for unseating the Democratic incumbent, H. Carl McCall.
Mr.
Faso tied Mr.
McCall to both Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins, calling them "a double-barreled disaster for the New York State economy and the New York City economy."


Court Sets a 2-Year Limit On Sex-Harassment Suits
Victims of sexual harassment will have to file suits within two years or lose their right to sue, the New Jersey Supreme Court said today.
The court said the question of the statute of limitations for such claims has been "murky." Sometimes lower courts have treated the cases as economic loss suits, with a six-year limit, and sometimes as personal injury claims, with a two-year limit.


Software Sounds the Alarm on Cellular Theft
One of the greatest strengths of the cellular telephone industry turns out to be its greatest liability.
By making it increasingly easy for customers to use their phones all over the country, the cellular carriers have opened their networks to marauding by thieves who are costing the industry $1 million a day by using bogus subscriber numbers and hot-wired phones to make free calls.


Lemieux to Undergo Back Surgery Today
MARIO LEMIEUX, the National Hockey League's scoring champion and most valuable player, is to have surgery today to explore the cause of back spasms he has had for the last three seasons.
The surgery was scheduled months ago.
The Pittsburgh Penguins' star had a herniated disk repaired three years ago, and he missed the first 50 games of the 1990-91 season.


Shopping for Assertive Cheese
THESE are some of the cheeses, both domestic and imported, that have assertive, complex flavors.
Prices quoted are from Dean &amp; DeLuca in Manhattan.
UNITED STATES Michigan Cheshire, made in Ann Arbor by Bill and Tom Loomis, is bright orange with a full-bodied cheddarlike flavor and a slightly crumbly texture ($10.50 a pound).
Sally Jackson's aged sheep's milk cheese, made in Oroville, Wash., is small, with a thickish dark rind, smooth ivory interior and grassy-tangy flavor ($21 a pound).


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR VISITS STARRETT CITY
Mayor Dinkins went to Starrett City to try to reassure residents unnerved by three sexual assaults on young girls in the sprawling housing complex over the last six weeks, most recently on Friday.
B2.
POLL SHOWS MAYOR'S SUPPORT STEADY
Mayor Dinkins appears to have suffered virtually no erosion of his political support in the aftermath of a report last week that criticized his handling of the racial violence in Crown Heights two years ago, according to a new poll.
B2.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Northville Classic
George Archer this week will attempt to do what no one has done on a professional tour for golfers since Walter Hagen in 1927.
The lanky 54-year-old will be seeking his fourth consecutive title in the same event when the Senior PGA Tour stops at the Meadow Brook Club in Jericho for the Northville Long Island Classic starting Friday.
Many of the game's great players have tried to match Hagen's accomplishment of winning his fourth consecutive P.G.A.
Championship in 1927 but none has succeeded.
Arnold Palmer had two chances to do it; Jack Nicklaus and Johnny Miller had one.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Announced the resignation of Greg Shea, assistant director of public relations, to become the sports information director for Northwestern University.


Giants' Meggett Is About Ready to Sign
Running back Dave Meggett will probably end his holdout and join the Giants today, according to his agent, Tony Agnone.
Agnone said that Meggett will likely accept a one-year deal and could sign it as early as Wednesday night.


Book Notes
A Big Year for 'Bridges'
It was rebuffed by some bookstore chains, treated most unkindly in a number of reviews, and scoffed at by the publishing elite in New York City, where one quite bitter editor recently said, "People buy it for the same reason they would buy a Mother's Day card."
But who cares?
"The Bridges of Madison County" -- the 171-page story of a four-day, one-time-only extramarital affair in farm country, which The New York Times Book Review dismissed as a "bodice-heaving" book filled with "quasi-mystical business" -- will, on Aug. 8, celebrate its 52d week on the New York Times best-seller list.
It is currently standing firm at No. 1, staring down at books by John le Carre, Robert Ludlum, Scott Turow and John Grisham.


For Illinois Town Battling River, a Sense of Doom
The 2,000 or so people who live in and around this historic southern Illinois village have pretty much resigned themselves to the likelihood that their levee, under tremendous pressure for weeks, will break when Mississippi River crests here next week.
Even before the National Weather Service predicted a record 48-foot flood crest on Aug. 3, residents of this area about 50 miles downstream from St.
Louis had been frantically working to contain three sand boils threatening the foundations of the main river levee, spurred on by news of other nearby levees succumbing to the river.


Hard Landing
The fortunes of the Airtran Corporation are closely linked to Northwest Airlines, for which an Airtran unit provides regional passenger and freight service.
Yesterday, Airtran shares fell after Northwest delayed paying the company $5.2 million.
Northwest had slowed another payment at the start of July, with even more dire impact on Airtran stock.


Undefeated but Second Billing on the Card
ERNEST MATEEN, who has never been defeated in 19 pro fights, has a reputation for taking on tough opponents, enough anyway that the light-heavyweight boxer from Brooklyn is ranked No. 10 by the United States Boxing Association and No. 13 by the World Boxing Council.
So how come Mateen's defense of his New York State title against TIM ST.
CLAIR of White Plains at the Ramada Hotel across from Madison Square Garden has second billing Friday night to a junior-lightweight bout between unranked opponents?


American Water Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. will cut 35,000 more jobs and shed factories and equipment.
The actions will cause a $8.9 billion charge against second-quarter earnings, but may in time save $4 billion a year.  [ Page A1. ]
An independent Federal commission ruled out dozens of tariffs on imported steel, opening big holes in the U.S. industry's protectionist wall.  [ D1. ]  Steel stocks were pummeled.  [ D1. ]


Bacteria in Water Prompts Warnings in Manhattan
After finding bacteria in the water supply, city officials last night warned residents and workers in large areas of the West Village, Chelsea and lower Manhattan not to drink or cook with tap water unless it is boiled first.
The Department of Environmental Protection said the water alert would be in effect for at least two days while the water supply is tested and flushed.


35,000 JOBS TO GO
Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chairman of I.B.M., began his campaign yesterday to revive the world's largest computer maker by announcing an $8.9 billion program to cut the company's costs sharply, trimming the payroll by 35,000 more people and getting rid of factories and equipment.
The International Business Machines Corporation reduced its second-quarter pretax earnings by $8.9 billion to cover the cost of shedding workers and shuttering plants.
It was one of the largest financial charges in corporate history.


Bears' Woolford Has 3-Year Extension
Cornerback DONNELL WOOLFORD yesterday signed a three-year contract extension with the Chicago Bears estimated to be worth slightly more than $3 million.
Woolford led the team with seven interceptions and 27 passes defended last year.


Top Officer At American Will Testify
Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of American Airlines' parent, the AMR Corporation, is not a defendant in the air fare antitrust case being heard here in Federal District Court.
Nonetheless Mr.
Crandall and his outspoken, fiercely competitive style are on trial.
The star witness in American Airlines' defense of charges that the carrier engaged in predatory pricing, Mr.
Crandall will take the stand on Wednesday to try to refute the contention by Continental Airlines and Northwest Airlines that American set fares so low last year that it would lose money, but so would the weaker competitors, which might be forced out of business.


Fast-Food Test: Giving the Children What They Want
PARENTS who are sick of mealtime skirmishes have learned that peace reigns under the golden arches, where children are happy to consume vast quantities of Big Macs, fries and shakes -- in short order and with dismaying caloric consequences.
They love the place they call Mickey D's or Old McDonald's.
Food served at home cannot compete, at least not in my suburban Detroit home, which is populated by a 5-year-old boy and two teen-agers -- a 14-year-old girl and a 17-year-old boy.
Certainly not leftovers, salads or "Mom's little makeup casseroles," as my daughter sneeringly calls them.
What's wrong with improvisation, or casseroles? my wife and I inquire.
Casseroles are tasty, contain the major food groups and inflict little fat.


Homophobia Takes a Hit
Among the gay-bashing referendums on state and local ballots last fall, Colorado's was one of the most sweeping and punitive.
Voters amended the State Constitution to forbid both state and local governments from enacting any laws protecting gay men and lesbians from discrimination.
Last week the Colorado Supreme Court, in a creative and thoughtful opinion, struck down the measure as unconstitutional.
The state court, by recognizing that the measure's main vice was a form of disfranchisement for a targeted group of Americans, may have found a constitutional antidote for the political poison of gay-hating campaigners.
The decision's reasoning could apply equally well to similar ballot maneuvers afoot in other states.


American Annuity Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Selling the Shreds of the Cold War
In a deal that only the end of the cold war could produce, America's largest munitions maker will soon begin cutting up more than 200,000 tons of surplus Ukrainian ammunition, much of it made for firing at United States troops, and selling it for scrap.
The joint venture between Alliant Techsystems Inc. of Edina, Minn., and the Ukrainian Defense Ministry is believed to be the first between an American company and a former Soviet republic for dismantling such materiel as tank ammunition, artillery shells and mortar rounds.


Armstrong World Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wheelchair Warrior Lays Siege to Schools
School officials hate to see Gregory Solas coming.
But to the handicapped he is a champion -- a wheelchair warrior in the fight to make schools accessible to the disabled.
Mr.
Solas is a 40-year-old former construction worker from Warwick, R.I., who has been in a wheelchair since his legs were crushed in an accident on the job seven years ago.
Since 1990 he has filed complaints against nearly 2,000 schools, colleges and universities over the absence of ramps for wheelchairs, signs for the visually impaired and other accommodations required by Federal law.


Homosexuals in Service Sue Over Clinton's Compromise
Just eight days after the White House announced compromise regulations governing their lives, seven gay and lesbian members of the armed services sued the Government today, contending that their treatment was unconstitutional.
In the first of what will likely be several court challenges to the new regulations, the plaintiffs -- gay and lesbian officers as well as enlisted personnel -- asked that they be treated not according to their sexual orientation but by their abilities.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article yesterday about the arrest of Brazilian military policemen in the killing of homeless boys misidentified the director of the Center for the Study of Violence at the University of Sao Paulo, who called Brazil's police the most authoritarian in Latin America.
He is Paulo Sergio Pinheiro.


India's Prime Minister Faces a No-Confidence Vote
Burdened by allegations of corruption and indifference to the growing polarization of Hindus and Muslims, Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao faces the most serious parliamentary challenge to his minority Government since assuming office 25 months ago.
India's usually fragmented and fractious parliamentary opposition, which together outnumbers Mr.
Rao's Congress Party, has banded together for the first time in two years and appears close to toppling his Government.
Three days of what has become an increasingly vituperative debate are to conclude on Wednesday with a vote on a motion of no confidence in Mr.
Rao's administration.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Profit Taking Deflates Dow by 2.24 Points
Tugged up by I.B.M. on the one hand and down by steel stocks on the other, the Dow Jones industrial average slipped 2.24 points yesterday to 3,565.46, falling from Monday's record high.
"I don't think you can conclude much from this, other than that the groups that were strong finally had some profit taking," said Lawrence R. Rice, a market strategist for Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross.
"It's a market that I think wants to go higher, but I think everyone should be cautious."


Travel &amp; Leisure Replaces Top Editor in Latest Change
Three months after announcing a much publicized $5 million redesign of Travel &amp; Leisure magazine, the American Express Publishing Corporation has dismissed its editor in chief and has named Nancy Novogrod, the former editor in chief of HG magazine, as her replacement.
Ila Stanger, who had been Travel &amp; Leisure's editor in chief since 1989, was dismissed on Friday while she was on vacation.
She could not be reached for comment yesterday, and American Express would say only that she was no longer with the company.


Review/Film; Sembene's Microscopic Look at a Vast Issue
Ousmane Sembene, the esteemed and daring Senegalese film maker, occupies a remarkable position in the realm of African cinema.
At 70, Mr.
Sembene manages to be both founding father and young Turk, as he demonstrates in "Guelwaar," the seventh feature he has made during a pioneering 30-year career.
This director has divided his energies between making films and writing fiction, and the scope of his work is especially clear in this beautifully observed human comedy.
"Guelwaar," a visually spare film that mixes political assertiveness with rueful wisdom and generosity, presents Mr.
Sembene at his considerable best.
The scale of "Guelwaar," which opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, is deliberately microscopic, limited to the events surrounding a funeral in a tiny Senegalese village.
The dead man is Pierre Thioune (Thierno Ndiaye), nicknamed "Guelwaar," or "Noble One," for his accomplishments as an outspoken community leader.
As Pierre's Roman Catholic family gathers to bury him, it is discovered that his body has disappeared from the local morgue.
At first this raises the possibility that the corpse has been stolen by fetishists, but the truth is even more troubling to the Thioune family: Pierre has been buried in a Muslim cemetery by mistake.


To Serve Justice in Salvadoran Massacre
To the Editor:
"Testimony in '82 on Salvador Criticized" (news article, July 16) reports that the State Department "sharply criticized the department's handling of the largest massacre of the Salvadoran civil war . . . but it rejected accusations that officials regularly lied to Congress about human rights violations in El Salvador to maintain the flow of military aid."


Memories From First Coach
For Anthony Lewis, the tragedy of Reggie Lewis's death last night was deepened by the fact that they had just spoken the night before.
"He was his usual, upbeat self," Lewis, a supervisor with the Baltimore Department of Parks and Recreation, said by telephone.
"He said he was exercising, walking with their new baby boy. Nothing heavy.


Book Notes
A Big Year for 'Bridges'


Foster Wheeler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


This Jet Tackle Fits the Order for Bulk
Ask Siupeli Malamala of the Jets about his weight any time you want.
He insists that at 6 feet 5 inches and 300-plus pounds he doesn't have a weight problem.
"On a good day I could be about 310, and they want me about 310," Malamala said after leaving the lunchroom at the team's practice facility at Hofstra.
"But after practice I could be around 303."


Celtics' Lewis Dies After Collapsing in a Gym
Reggie Lewis, the Boston Celtics' star who collapsed with a heart ailment during a playoff game last April and was warned by doctors that he would risk his life if he ever played basketball again, died last night after collapsing while shooting baskets at the team's training center at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass.
He was 27 and had resumed light workouts after seeking a second medical opinion and being told he really didn't have a severe heart ailment at all.


4 Wounded as Rebels Bomb U.S. Embassy in Peru
Guerrillas presumed by the police to be members of the Maoist movement Shining Path set off a huge car bomb early this morning in front of the American Embassy here, wounding four people, shattering glass and causing fires in the four-story concrete building.
The police said an unidentified Peruvian was killed in his car in the crossfire of shooting between guards and guerrillas.


LG&amp;E Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
BARRY and FRAN WEISSLER, the Broadway producers, seem to have developed a peculiar knack for scheduling.
Their road company production of "Falsettos" opens its national tour in Washington on Sept. 15, the eve of Rosh ha-Shanah.
The Weisslers closed the Broadway production of the show on Gay Pride Day, June 27.
And their revival of "My Fair Lady" will have its first preview performance on Thanksgiving night and its opening on Dec. 9, the second night of Hanukkah, though that is not so likely to keep audiences away.


Rivers Isn't Too Old To Spend Time With Kids
A handful of kids waited outside the Convent of the Sacred Heart High School on 91st Street and Fifth Avenue yesterday, anticipating the arrival of Doc Rivers.
A roar of excitement went up when the Knicks guard pulled in.
Rivers said hello, then joined the others in the gym who were there to listen to him talk and answer questions.
The youngsters did everything right as they listened attentively, cheering when Rivers mentioned the Knicks and booing when he talked about Michael Jordan and New York's disappointing loss to the Bulls at the Garden in Game 5 of the playoffs.


Lopez's Future May Be Topic A
Ferdinand Piech, chairman of Volkswagen A.G., scheduled a news conference early Wednesday at company headquarters here, presumably to discuss growing allegations of industrial espionage by the General Motors Corporation against a former executive, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who jumped to Volkswagen in March.
He is now VW's second-ranking official.
European newspapers and magazines have been full of reports that Mr.
Lopez will step aside to defend himself and that Mr.
Piech, in backing Mr.
Lopez, has suffered damage to his own reputation.


Snow Is Optioned to Minors by Angels
The rookie first baseman J.T.
SNOW, brilliant in April but an offensive disappointment ever since, has been optioned to Class AAA Vancouver by the California Angels.
"I think he knows that he needs it, and that it's the best thing for him," Manager BUCK RODGERS said after his team lost its 10th straight game, 11-4 to the Oakland Athletics on Monday night.
"He'll be down there for a month, and I hope he'll come back in September with his head straight and be the kind of player we know he can be -- not the player he was in April. That was Superman."


Nets Sign 6-Foot Guard While Thinking of Dudley
The Nets landed another player well short of their unrestricted free-agent center Chris Dudley yesterday.
About a foot short, in fact.
Based on his strong performance in the recently concluded summer league, 6-foot guard David Wesley was invited back to the team's October training camp with a one-year contract, said Willis Reed, the team's executive vice president.


Family's Battle to Put Child in Regular Classroom
Rafael Oberti's parents know their 8-year-old son will never make the dean's list.
"My boy has Down syndrome, and I know what he cannot do," said Carlos A. Oberti, Rafael's father.
"But that's not the point. I want to emphasize what he can do, and to build on that."


Coca-Cola Bottling Co. Consolidated (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Court Upholds New York Plan On Transportation Borrowing
A New York State Supreme Court justice upheld today a state plan to borrow $6 billion for transportation projects, rejecting a taxpayer's lawsuit that has jeopardized major rebuilding programs for roads, bridges, buses and subways across the state.
The decision by Justice Edward O. Spain removes, at least temporarily, a restraining order barring the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the New York State Thruway Authority from borrowing to help finance a transportation package that would include freezing New York City transit fares at $1.25 through 1994.


Jury Selection Starts Today in Beating of Los Angeles Truck Driver
A painstaking process of jury selection is to begin Wednesday in the racially volatile trial of two black men charged with beating a white truck driver in the riots here last year.
The widely televised beating of the driver, Reginald O. Denny, became a symbol of the violence of the riots in which more than 50 people died.


House Approves Flood Relief After Fight on Deficit
The House today narrowly approved a $2.74 billion relief package for Midwest flood victims, resolving five days of mostly partisan wrangling in favor of Democrats who insisted that emergency aid took priority over cutting the budget deficit.
The politics of flood relief had little to do with cresting flood waters, battered levees or submerged corn fields.
Not a single Republican or Democratic lawmaker argued against helping those who are suffering, but members disagreed sharply over how and when to pay for Federal relief efforts, which could reach $10 billion.


Panel Says Penn Police Overreacted
A review panel at the University of Pennsylvania has found that several campus police officers overreacted in April when they tried to stop eight black students from seizing copies of the student newspaper as a protest against a conservative columnist.
The university appointed the panel of teachers and administrators, including one security official from outside, to investigate the university police department's response to the incident after five of the students filed complaints.
The students said the officers had cursed at them and used unnecessary force, including handcuffing four and hitting one with a baton.


Convex Computer reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Catholic Church Can't Follow Fashion in Morals; Alienated Women
To the Editor:
"Wrong About Sex, Absolutely" by Thomas C. Fox (Op-Ed, July 16) raises troubling questions about the Roman Catholic Church's regrettable lack of sympathetic understanding of human sexuality as it concerns both clergy and laity.
The rule of celibacy for the clergy is responsible for many resignations from the priesthood and the decline of vocations among the younger generation.
Mr.
Fox also mentions that this month the church is celebrating the 25th anniversary of the papal encyclical "Humanae Vitae," condemning contraception.


Herbicide Tied to 2 More Veterans' Ills
A report released today by the Institute of Medicine in Washington said there was evidence to link Agent Orange and other herbicides with two health disorders in addition to the three already under suspicion.
But because of uncertainties about whether troops serving in Vietnam received a large enough dose of herbicide to cause such diseases, the committee said it was not possible to quantify the likely risk to them.
Nonetheless, the Department of Veterans Affairs announced that it would add the two further diseases to those for which veterans are already compensated.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  RAIDS ON LEBANON CONTINUE  Israeli warplanes and artillery pounded villages in southern Lebanon for the third straight day in attacks intended to drive residents out of the southern part of the country until assaults on Israel by pro-Iranian guerrillas are halted.
A1  120,000 LEBANESE LEAVE VILLAGES  United Nations observers estimated that 120,000 Lebanese had left their villages in southern Lebanon in the last two weeks.
A6


The Purposeful Cook; The Forecast: Cool and Crisp
WITH this refreshing vegetarian menu, we salute summer while lowering our calorie intake.
The fruit and vegetables represented here take advantage of the bounty of the season.
We begin with a cold corn soup that can also be served hot.
It consists simply of onions, corn kernels and potatoes, the last of which act as a thickening agent.
They are cooked together in water, then pureed in a food processor and finished with milk and chopped chives to create a kind of corn vichyssoise.


Books of The Times; The Mediterranean, in Glory and in Tragedy
The Inner Sea  The Mediterranean and Its People  By Robert Fox  Maps. 575 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
In the Mediterranean, artillery shells and jet bombers now scream over Homeric seas.
Renewed tribal feuds and religious conflicts are reminders of many centuries of strife in the region.
The glories and cultural contributions of the countries along the Mediterranean littoral remain influential; but the tragedy that continues to overwhelm the lives of people there is war.


NBC Wins TV Rights to 1996 Atlanta Games
With a record-setting bid of $456 million, NBC last night won the right to broadcast 168 hours of the 1996 Summer Olympics from Atlanta, the third consecutive Summer Olympics to be aired by the network.
With a bid that exceeds by $55 million its money-losing payment for the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, NBC defeated ABC's offer of $450 million and CBS's of $415 million.
The winning bid by NBC includes revenue sharing with the International Olympic Committee, but does not feature a cable TV partner.
ABC's proposal had included ESPN and the Turner Broadcasting Systems' TNT and TBS channels.
CBS had the option of uniting with the Turner channels and the USA Network.


Petty Politics on National Service
Two years or three?
It's a trivial difference, but Senate Republicans think President Clinton's national service initiative is worth scuttling for the sake of knocking a year off the life of the program.
But what is really at issue is not the length of the program, or even its cost.
The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, is marshaling a filibuster in an apparent effort to deny President Clinton a major legislative victory at any cost.
The Senate will vote tomorrow on breaking the filibuster; there's a chance enough Republicans will rise above partisan politics to support the worthy bill.


HUD'S CHIEF SEEKS WIDE NEW POWERS
Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros asked Congress today for broad new powers to deal with what he said was his department's most serious problem: the rapidly growing inventory of Government-owned apartment buildings.
The projects, many of which are in poor condition, have come into the hands of the Department of Housing and Urban Development because of a spate of defaults by private developers on Government-insured mortgages.
Government auditors have estimated that as much as $11.9 billion worth of mortgages may not be repaid over the next few years, probably expanding the number of buildings in Government ownership.


Electrohome Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Youth Guilty in Pool Case
A 17-year-old Bronx youth pleaded guilty yesterday to sexually assaulting a 14-year-old girl in a municipal swimming pool in Crotona Park during the Independence Day weekend, when a group of youths surrounded the girl in the water, pulled off her bathing suit and fondled her.
The youth, Philip Munoz of 1899 Belmont Avenue, told the court that he, acting with others, touched the girl's breasts and buttocks, Bronx District Attorney Robert T. Johnson said.


The Autistic Find Doubters Prevail
To the Editor:
"New Treatments for Autism Arouse Hope and Skepticism" (Science Times, July 13) discusses facilitated communication, "in which a helper holds or braces the hand, wrist or arm of an autistic person who uses one finger to type words on a keyboard." You fail to say that when autistic Sharisa Kochmeister writes by facilitated communication she is not touched: her father's hand hovers inches above hers on the keyboard.
She and her father Jan have learned to fade back his initial support.


Review/Film; Mel Brooks Aims His Comedic Barbs At Robin Hood et al.
"Robin Hood: Men in Tights" is Mel Brooks's breezy sendup of every Robin Hood movie ever made, with subsidiary references to other movies, most of them made by Mr.
Brooks.
The new film's favorite target is Kevin Costner's politically correct "Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves," which championed not only the civil rights of serfs but also feminism, racial understanding and maybe even whales, though my memory is now hazy about that.
The Costner film remains memorable mostly for the scenes in which the camera sometimes adopted the point of view of an arrow whizzing unerringly toward its mark.
The trajectory of "Men in Tights" is a good deal less certain.
The movie takes a long time to get off the ground, and then it wobbles.
It hits a couple of ecstatically funny high points, only to plummet into a bog of second-rate gags, emerging a long time later to engage the audience by the sheer, unstoppable force of the Brooks chutzpah.


Samuel Kurtz, 89; Architect Designed Hospitals and Bank
Samuel Mordechai Kurtz, an architect of hospitals and commercial buildings, died on July 15 at St.
Paul's Manor in San Diego.
Mr.
Kurtz, who was 89, had moved to San Diego from North Miami Beach in December.
He died of congestive heart failure, his son Gerry said.


Religion Returns to Russia, With a Vengeance
The venues are quintessentially Soviet -- the Lenin Stadium, the October movie theater, the Locomotive sports complex -- but what goes on there would have old Bolsheviks turning in their urns.
Thousands pack Lenin Stadium to hear the Rev.
Billy Graham, then a few weeks later Jack Finley, then Morris Cerullo.
At the dark, cavernous October Theater on the seamy New Arbat Street, just over a garish car dealership, an American charismatic preacher named Bob Wilcox calls the sufferers forward and cries out: "I speak to back pain! In the name of Jesus, I command you to go!" A Russian interpreter deftly echoes Mr.
Wilcox's gesture and rhythm, and the people stretch out their hands in ecstatic worship.


U.S. Hopes to Curb A-Arms By Restricting Fuel Output
The Administration is preparing a new arms-control plan that calls for a worldwide ban on the production of materials for nuclear weapons.
President Clinton promised during the campaign to step up efforts to slow the spread of weapons of mass destruction, and Washington has pushed diplomatic efforts to stop North Korea's efforts to develop nuclear weapons.


Inco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Faculty Leaders at CUNY Vote to Condemn Chancellor
Faculty leaders from most campuses of the City University of New York yesterday passed a strongly worded resolution condemning the university's Chancellor, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, faculty representatives said.
However the representatives, who say they feel betrayed by the Chancellor's decision to provide discretionary funds only to those colleges that have cooperated with her efforts to consolidate the university's programs, refused to disclose the content of the resolution until it is delivered to Dr.
Reynolds today.


Eating Well
THE Pritikin Longevity Center here has long been known as a place where people with severely clogged arteries have started the process of unclogging them by eating a low-fat diet.
In order to accomplish this worthy goal, patients were required to eat practically inedible food.
Robert Pritikin, whose father, Nathan, founded the center in 1976, has been working for the past three years to transform the food, and its image.
The heir to the Pritikin legacy has embraced the palatability theory.
It is a sea change from his father's belief that if you show people the health benefits of a portion-controlled, reduced-fat diet they will follow such a diet for the rest of their lives.
In fact, most of them won't.


Wrestling for Rubles
In the last two months, the first glimmers of progress have appeared in two central issues for Russia: slowing inflation and stabilizing the ruble.
Feeling encouraged, industrial countries pressed ahead with a $43 billion package of aid to help Russia make the transition to a market economy.
But today, after drastic currency controls were imposed over the weekend by the Central Bank and then eased by the Government, some diplomats are expressing new concern about the fragility of economic reform and the future of aid.


Interface Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


Masco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Becker Milk reports earnings for Year to April 30


Avery Dennison Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Book Notes
A Big Year for 'Bridges'


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.T.C. Sets New Rules on '900' Services
The Federal Trade Commission imposed tough new advertising restrictions today on companies that sell everything from psychic advice to sports scores over "900"-number telephone services that charge callers a fee.
Aimed at misleading and even fraudulent promotions, the new rules will force companies that provide "900" services to disclose their prices in unusual detail and will give customers new opportunties to dispute the charges on their phone bills.


Strong Holiday Retail Sales Predicted
Never mind that consumer confidence slipped again yesterday.
Ignore the specters of higher taxes and unemployment that are haunting shoppers.
And forget that the only way retailers have been able to build sales since January is by slashing prices -- and profits.
That seems to be the view of Ed Johnson, the gravel-voiced analyst who has tracked the financial ups and downs of the retail business since 1960 in the well-known Johnson Redbook, a weekly index of sales at the 25 largest national retail chains.
Mr.
Johnson believes shoppers will rush with wallets open and credit cards at the ready to fill the coffers of the nation's retailers this Christmas.


Sports of The Times; Lewis: The Guard Played On
"WHAT do you hear about Reggie Lewis?" Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' general manager, was asked yesterday, hours before the horrible news would come out of Boston and bring the sport of behemoths to its knees.
"What were the Celtics people saying last week?"
"Not much," said Grunfeld, on the telephone from the Knicks' offices at Madison Square Garden.
"They were being pretty tight-lipped, like they really didn't want to talk about it. I guess it's something they must not feel comfortable with."


Dr. Simon Greenberg, 92, Rabbi And Conservative Jewish Leader
Dr.
Simon Greenberg, rabbi, educator and religious thinker and vice chancellor emeritus of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, died on Monday at his home in Jerusalem.
He was 92 and moved to Jerusalem last year from Manhattan.
The cause was cardiorespiratory arrest, said a grandson, Joel Greenberg.


Ruling Spurs an Industrywide Selloff
The unfavorable resolution of some long-running trade disputes involving foreign steel imports sent the stocks of major American steel companies reeling yesterday amid signs that the country's largest steelmaker, USX, had a turbulent quarter.
The USX U.S.
Steel Group, whose stock is traded separately from its parent's other subsidiaries, fell 13 percent.
Bethlehem Steel skidded nearly 21 percent and National Steel plunged 27 percent.


35,000 JOBS TO GO
Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chairman of I.B.M., began his campaign yesterday to revive the world's largest computer maker by announcing an $8.9 billion program to cut the company's costs sharply, trimming the payroll by 35,000 more people and getting rid of factories and equipment.
The International Business Machines Corporation reduced its second-quarter pretax earnings by $8.9 billion to cover the cost of shedding workers and shuttering plants.
It was one of the largest financial charges in corporate history.


Oliver Agrees to Another Dolphin Pact
Miami Dolphins free safety LOUIS OLIVER signed a one-year contract yesterday and said he would take a chance on the National Football League free-agent market next year.
The strategy is risky for Oliver, 27, because the N.F.L. is expected to have a salary cap in place for the 1994 season.


American Healthcare Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Condom Plan Is Authorized In New Haven
Seeking to halt the spread of AIDS in a city that is the center of the epidemic in Connecticut, the New Haven Board of Education has approved a plan to give condoms to students in middle school and high school.
The board voted 6 to 1 on Monday night to provide condoms at school health clinics to students as early as the fifth grade, apparently making New Haven the first school system in the nation to adopt such a program for children so young.
Some board members said they felt they had to act after a student survey found that 27 percent of sixth graders and 49 percent of eighth graders said they were sexually active.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 23
July 16
July 24
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.5
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.1
Gasoline stocks
215.2
217.3
219.2
Distillate stocks
117.7
117.1
112.9
Crude imports, daily
6.1
7.9
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.4
1.4
Crude stocks
353.7
360.0
323.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
95.8
95.6
91.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Pierce to Seek Court Order on Father
MARY PIERCE, who dropped her father as coach a week ago, will go to court for a restraining order to enforce the ban against him attending tour events, a tournament promoter said yesterday in Carlsbad, Calif.
Pierce, ranked 14th in the world, is scheduled to file documents in San Diego County Superior Court in nearby Vista after arriving today to prepare for the Mazda Classic.


Classical Music in Review
Naumburg Orchestra  Lincoln Center Band Shell
Saturday night's casual crowd had cool, clear skies above and some very interesting music making down below as Jens Nygaard conducted the Naumburg Orchestra.
These free concerts have been going on in one venue or another since 1905, and the leisurely yet enthusiastic response here indicated that they are as popular as ever.


Garden Q.&amp;.A.
Mosquito Plant
Q.
Last year I heard about a plant that would repel mosquitoes.
What is it and does it work? -- Karen Windsor, Cincinnati.
A.
In recent years, a weedy-looking geranium with a citronella-like odor has been touted as a mosquito repellent and called citronella, citrosa or mosquito-repellent plant.


WHERE TO FIND IT
WHEN describing what he does for a living, Donald Moore could benefit from a series of before and after photographs.
Mr.
Moore, a partner in Artbag Creations Inc., repairs handbags, belts, wallets and other leather goods, and the results can be striking.
"We'll restitch the handles and refinish the leather," said Mr.
Moore, holding up a badly cracked, tooled-leather bag.
To revive a tired-looking black patent-leather attache case, Mr.
Moore plans to install a new lining and replate the hardware.


COMPANY NEWS
ALDUS CORP., Seattle, has acquired Cosa of Providence, R.I., a privately held software company.
Aldus will pay $1.6 million in cash and Aldus common stock and will pay an additional $1.6 million in stock in two years if Cosa meets performance goals.
CHEVRON CORP., San Francisco, has announced that its Chevron U.S.A.
Production Co. unit will eliminate 140 of the 642 jobs in its Concord, Calif., finance office because of a reduced workload.


Two British Ex-Cultists Win Reprieve on U.S. Extradition
Two British women won a reprieve today from extradition to the United States, where they face charges of plotting to murder an American lawyer eight years ago while they were members of a religious cult.
The High Court said Sally Croft, 43, and Susan Hagan, 47, who deny plotting to kill the lawyer, Charles Turner, had legal grounds to challenge an extradition order signed by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke in April.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the obituary on Tuesday about Gen.
Matthew B. Ridgway included contradictory dates for his retirement in some editions.
He retired in 1955, not 1959.


Sports of The Times; Lewis Death On Celtics' Conscience
IN sports, team doctors often refer to an athlete's injury as "a knee" or "a shoulder" or "an ankle." As if you could buy one in an auto-parts store.
And with today's sophisticated surgery, sometimes it's almost that easy.
But when team doctors talk about a heart problem, it's different.
It's never merely "a heart." It's too important, too personal to be anything but a particular athlete's heart.


No Reason to Readmit Death Camp Guard; Don't Implicate Poland
To the Editor:
In "Release Demjanjuk" (Op-Ed, July 16), Fredric Dannen writes that John Demjanjuk "was for a time, posted at a different Polish death camp, at Sobibor."


Party Lines Extra Hard and Fast
Rarely have the two parties in Congress been so united in opposition to one another.
Rarely have the political stakes been so high.
And rarely has it been so uncertain which side was gaining the political advantage.
When the final version of President Clinton's economic program comes up for votes in the House of Representatives and the Senate next week, no amendments will be allowed.
So the representatives and senators will have no choice but to vote for or against the entire package of tax increases and spending cuts.


Besieged 465 Days, Young Finally Breaks Free
He didn't end it with a strikeout, or a slider-induced grounder, or even a simple fly ball.
In fact, he didn't even end it on the mound.
Anthony Young was sitting on the dugout bench in Shea Stadium when Eddie Murray hit the line drive to the right-field corner, and he was on his feet screaming in celebration when Ryan Thompson bunny hopped across the plate.
New York had scored two runs in the bottom of the ninth inning.
And Young, the much-celebrated Mets' loser, had finally earned that long-elusive victory.


Remark Ends a Job Candidacy
Dale W. Lick, a finalist for the presidency of Michigan State University, has withdrawn in response to a campus uproar over a remark he made in 1989 asserting that some black athletes are naturally superior to white ones.
"In the minds of some people, it raised old issues that were very tender," Dr.
Lick said in an interview on Tuesday, after announcing his withdrawal over the weekend.
"I felt I didn't have a broad enough base of support to provide the leadership I thought was needed."


...As Rockets Force Israelis South
It came today without warning, as it always does: a thunderous explosion, shattering the eerie silence that has settled over this border town since the start of Israel's air and artillery offensive in Lebanon.
A Katyusha rocket fired by guerrillas in southern Lebanon slammed into a bomb shelter in the heart of a residential neighborhood but exploded harmlessly.
The reinforced roof of the shelter absorbed the blast, sparing the people below.
The rocket was the latest of more than 100 missiles that have been fired by guerrillas at Israel's northern settlements this week.


Four Farms Chosen for Agriculture Awards
Four family farms have won the annual Governor's agricultural awards for service to farming and to their communities.
The winners are a dairy farm, a poultry farm, a potato farm and a vegetable farm, reflecting the range of agriculture in New York State.
Farming is a $3 billion a year industry, measured in sales by farmers.


Parking Garage at Trade Center To Reopen for Some Vehicles
The parking garage beneath the World Trade Center will be reopened to some vehicles on Sept. 1, six months after the garage was gutted by a terrorist bomb that killed six people, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has announced.
But parking for most who work in the trade center remains months away, and public parking will probably never be permitted again, officials said.
A bomb in a rented van ripped a gaping hole through the garage's five levels on Feb. 26.


ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP. (N)
The Electronic Data Systems Corportation, the computer services subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, reported record net income for the second quarter yesterday, thanks partly to growth in Europe.
During the quarter, E.D.S. signed its largest European contract ever -- worth more than a billion dollars -- with Kooperativa Forbundet, a Swedish retail business cooperative group -- and also signed a contract with Spain's national telecommunications company, Telefonica, to set up a billings and collections system.


Bridge
The top-ranked teams continued to cruise ahead here in the Spingold Knockout and Women's Knockout at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
In the Spingold, the top 14 seeds of the original 148 teams survived to play in the third round today.
However, some upsets are to be expected today.
Cliff Russell of Miami and the team of stars he will take to play in the world championships next month are seeded third.
They are likely to have to work hard against a young foursome headed by David Rowntree of Cambridge, Mass.
The seventh-seeded team led by Dick Freeman of Atlanta had trouble last night and may have more today against Karen McCallum of Exeter, N.H., and three visiting Australians.


Ex-Banker in Rhode Island Gets 30 Years in Theft
Joseph Mollicone Jr., the former bank president whose multimillion-dollar theft set off the collapse of Rhode Island's privately insured banking system, was sentenced today to 30 years in prison.
It is the longest sentence ever received by a white-collar criminal in this state.
Mr.
Mollicone, 50, who enjoyed a lavish life style before his Heritage Loan and Investment Company failed and he fled the state, was also ordered to pay $420,000 in fines and $12 million in restitution.


BACTERIAL TAINT IN WATER SUPPLY BAFFLES EXPERTS
Bacteria that mysteriously survived more than three times the dose of chlorine that New York City uses to assure safety yesterday drove residents and office workers in lower Manhattan and Chelsea to boil water, avoid ice cubes and stock up on bottled water.
"Nothing alive should have been there," Albert F. Appleton, the city's Commissioner of Environmental Protection, said about 12 hours after his department issued a water alert in two neighborhoods with a combined population of about 25,000.


Clinton Says He's Ready to Hit Serbs Attacking U.N. in Bosnia
President Clinton said today that the United States was ready to take part in allied bombing of Serbian gunners who attack United Nations peacekeeping forces in Bosnia should the United Nations request such an action.
Aides said Mr.
Clinton's statement was not only a response to a recent Serbian attack on French peacekeepers, but also an effort to avert what officials feared could be a major disaster if Sarajevo is overrun by the Serbs.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.01
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.09
3.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.24
3.24
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.52
5.55
6.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.65
6.67
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.36
7.39
8.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.82
5.82
6.00
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pope Visits Basilica, Site of 'Pitiless Crimes'


Final Workout Ends in Tragedy
Deo Djossou, the forward for the Northeastern University Huskies, arrived at the Celtics' practice gym shortly after 6 P.M.
Tuesday evening for a low-key workout with Reggie Lewis, his friend and mentor.
"We must have missed him by 15 minutes," Djossou said today in a somber voice.


Summer's Odd Weather Is Returning to Normal
The weather pattern that has been locked in place over North America for at least six weeks, causing mammoth floods in the Midwest and parched conditions along the East Coast, is finally breaking up.
The emerging pattern promises drier weather for the Midwest, which has already begun to dry out, and warmer weather for states in the Northwest, which has had record low temperatures this summer.


A Revolutionary Benetton Campaign Uses The Real Thing.
ANOTHER advertising campaign for the United Colors of Benetton began this week when Luciano Benetton, the founder of the Italian apparel company, invited Fidel Castro to become a teacher at Fabrica, a study and research center for applied arts that the company intends to build near Treviso, Italy.
In a letter to the Cuban President, Mr.
Benetton said he recognized Mr.
Castro's role as a revolutionary, his "idealistic vision" and "the faith in the future you instilled in millions of disillusioned and submissive people." He told Mr.
Castro that the school administrators envisioned a diverse enrollment in which race and class prejudices would be eliminated and "would do our utmost to bar the privileged from being accepted."


Parents of Injured Girl Plan a Lawsuit
The two-year-old girl whose parents said she was wounded last Saturday by Vince Coleman's firecracker has lacerations to her right cornea, a blood blister in her right eye and no desire to return to Dodger Stadium.
The child, Amanda Santos of Los Angeles, spent this morning and afternoon with a pediatric ophthalmologist.
Meanwhile, her father and mother -- Derrek and Marivel Santos -- promised today in a news conference to sue Coleman within the next 30 days.
The family's lawyers also said, in "high likelihood," the suit would also name the Mets organization and left fielder Eric Davis of the Dodgers.
The lawyers were less certain about including Coleman's teammate, Bobby Bonilla, or the Dodgers organization in the suit.


No Deal to Free Troubled Addict
A plan to release Larry Hogue, who for years harassed residents of the Upper West Side in Manhattan, may have hit a snag, and prosecutors said yesterday that they may ask that he remain at a state mental hospital.
Mr.
Hogue, 49, was scheduled to be released to the care of his son, John Shawn Sells, in Bridgeport, Conn., but officials said there is a pending eviction case against the son.


St. Louis Braces; Other Cities in State Can Do Little
Reinforcement of a small section of this city's 11-mile-long flood wall and other flood barriers began in earnest today, while in Kansas City, 530 miles west of here on the Missouri River, cresting flood waters lingered longer than expected.
Midway between the two cities, at Jefferson City, surging water on the Missouri ripped a 20,000-gallon propane gas tank from its base and sent it down river, where it struck a bridge support and began leaking.
A spokesman for the Jefferson City Fire Department said that more than 800 people from a nearby industrial park had been evacuated for several hours until evening when the tank's contents had emptied and dissipated in the atmosphere.


People
*
Jeff Griffith, the creative director of Cox Landey &amp; Partners, New York, since January, has left the agency and is freelancing.
Martin H. Landey, the chairman and chief executive, said there were no plans to replace him.


A Big 'Gamble' on Bradley, a Big Player
SHAWN BRADLEY, the 7-foot-6-inch center who was the second choice over all in the National Basketball Association draft, signed a multiyear contract yesterday with the Philadelphia 76ers.
Terms were not disclosed, but HAROLD KATZ, the 76ers owner, called the signing of Bradley, who has not played in two years, "the biggest gamble I've ever taken by far."


Ojeda Is Given Permission to Leave Team
BOB OJEDA has left the Cleveland Indians, interrupting his rehabilitation from the injuries suffered in the boating accident that killed two teammates.
"This is a setback, but he still might be able to pitch by mid-to late August," said Indians General Manager JOHN HART.
"I really believe he'll pitch for the Indians this year. He wants it. It's important to him."


Merck Will Pay $6 Billion For Giant Drug Discounter
Heralding the far-reaching changes in the business of health care, Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest pharmaceutical company, announced yesterday that it would spend $6 billion to buy the country's largest mail-order drug company.
The purchase of Medco Containment Services Inc. gives Merck a discount drug distribution arm at a time when prescription drugs, its main business, are coming under increasing price pressure from Washington and employers eager to curtail rising health care costs.


David L. Domijan; Executive, 38
David L. Domijan, executive vice president and chief financial officer of the New York Stock Exchange, died on Tuesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 38 and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
The cause was cancer, the exchange reported yesterday.


Lewis's College Coach Discusses Pressures
He got the news through a fence at a softball field during a game his daughter was playing in.
His wife rushed down to whisper to him that Reggie Lewis, his prize recruit at Northeastern University, his friend, was dead of cardiac arrest Tuesday night in Boston.
Karl Fogel began to cry.
His voice choked as he told the story less than 24 hours later.
He was asked yesterday when he'd last seen Lewis, and he said that would have been a couple of weeks ago in the gymnasium at Brandeis University, the same place where Lewis would later meet his tragic fate.
They were both there to watch the Celtics' rookie camp.
They spoke, briefly.
Oh, and one other thing, Fogel remembered.
At Lewis's side that day was Dr.
Gilbert H. Mudge.


CHRONICLE
What's a co-anchor, if not someone with whom to share happy occasions (in addition to delivering the news)?
CORA-ANN MIHALIK will give a party for JOHN ROLAND, her WNYW-TV co-anchor on "The 10 O'Clock News," on Sunday evening at Nino's Restaurant on the Upper East Side.
The party will mark Mr.
Roland's 25th anniversary at Channel 5.
The two are on the air together every weeknight for an hour on the Fox Broadcasting station.


House Speaker and Ex-Attorney General Dueling Over Term Limits
Two lifelong Democrats, Speaker Thomas S. Foley and former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell, have drawn legal swords against each other in a fight to determine whether voters have the right to limit the terms of members of Congress.
To the dismay of some constituents, Mr.
Foley, who represents a district in eastern Washington, filed a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Seattle last month to overturn the term-limits law that Washington voters approved last fall.
Similar measures have passed in 14 other states, although their impact will not be fully felt until there is a court review.


Kiyoshi Hayakawa, Tokyo Publisher, 80
Kiyoshi Hayakawa, a Tokyo publisher who introduced Western writers to Japanese readers, died on July 9 at Hitachi Hospital in Tokyo.
He was 80.
He had suffered a heart ailment, his American literary scouts said in reporting the death in New York.


Editorial Notebook: Not an Anchorman in Sight; War Correspondents Remember Korea
Last weekend, vaguely inspired to commemorate the Korean armistice signed 40 years ago this week, some 100 correspondents who had covered the Korean War traveled to Washington D.C. to reminisce together.
War stories were out.
Blue blazers were in.
Most, it turned out, had retired since the group's last reunion 10 years ago.
That made this gathering feel more like a country club weekend than a convention of old barracks mates.
No one took a formal poll, but former CBS correspondent Lou Cioffi, at a reported 67, was considered the youngest.
His white ponytail seemed to clinch the title.


Books of The Times; The Minds of Kennedys as Imagined by McGinniss
The Last Brother  By Joe McGinniss  Illustrated. 626 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
How do you read Joe McGinniss's new biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, "The Last Brother," without being overwhelmed by the tempest it has already created?
You try to read it objectively, but it all too quickly becomes apparent that its problems are even greater than anticipated.
The book isn't bad; it's awful.


No Olympic Gold for Beijing
In legitimate protest against China's inhuman record on human rights, the House has registered its opposition to Beijing as host for the Summer Olympics in the year 2000.
The Senate should do the same quickly -- before its vacation.
The site for the turn-of-the-century games will be picked by the International Olympic Committee at a meeting in Monte Carlo in September.
Sydney, Australia, is rated most likely to get the nod, but there are still four other bidders besides Beijing -- Berlin, Brasilia, Istanbul and Manchester, England.


Memories of a Place Called Home
IN the 1940's, when Antonio Martorell was a little boy, his father abandoned the family, leaving Antonio's mother to raise three children in Santurce, P.R., on her seamstress's salary.
"She couldn't make ends meet," Mr.
Martorell, an artist, recalled.
In 1949, when he was 10, the family was evicted from their home.
For the next year and a half, they lived in an aunt's store, in a room in the rear.
Each night, two adults and three children would curl up on a single mattress.
"For my mother, it was misery, but for me, it was the biggest adventure of my life," said Mr.
Martorell, whose fond memories of his cramped quarters, with its wall-to-wall bed and omnipresent mosquitos, have become a source for his autobiographical art.


Jewish Theater Wins Ruling
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan issued a restraining order that enabled the American Jewish Theater to return yesterday to its performance space in the Susan Bloch Theater at 307 West 26th Street in Chelsea.
The action was the latest twist in an continuing confrontation between the American Jewish Theater and its landlord, the Roundabout Theater Company, which had denied the Jewish theater access to the space on July 16.


Design for Selling
Shares in Autodesk, a maker of computer-aided design systems, rose this spring in anticipation of strong first-quarter earnings.
But early this month, investors began selling on speculation that full-year earnings would be hurt by the slump in Germany.
Yesterday, when the company announced the departure of a vice president, the stock sank.


MICROSOFT CORP. (NMS)
The Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that both income and revenues at the computer software company were up sharply for the fourth quarter and for all of fiscal 1993.
The company's chairman, William H. Gates, said continued strong sales of Microsoft Windows were a key factor.
Microsoft has distributed more than 30 million copies of Windows and continues to ship more than one million copies a month, he said.
The company's Windows/NT operating system, announced in May, has not yet contributed to the balance sheet, though Microsoft said Monday that it had begun retail distribution.


Florio Signs Death Penalty Aimed at Terrorist Murders
In the type of carefully staged public ceremony that has become increasingly familiar this election year, Gov.
Jim Florio flew to Liberty State Park here today to sign a bill that makes terrorists who kill anyone in New Jersey liable to the state's death penalty.
With a battery of cameras in front of him, columns of police bomb squad members in blue jump suits flanking him and the Statue of Liberty and the World Trade Center towers as a backdrop, Mr.
Florio said he agreed with the Old Testament dictum that anyone who takes a life forfeits his own.


Macy West Chief Is Chosen; 2d Executive Is Promoted
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company yesterday named Michael Steinberg chairman and chief executive of Macy West, which operates the Bullock's division and Macy's stores in California and the Southwest.
The company also announced that Thomas C. Shull, senior group vice president for business development and human resources, had been promoted to executive vice president with responsibility for negotiating a plan of reorganization for Macy to emerge from bankruptcy .


Felons and Farmers Lock Arms in the Flood
This is a story of black and Hispanic drug dealers from Chicago who tried to help 200 white farmers and factory workers save their town.
They lost, but in the fight against the river they found each other.
The town, under water since July 10, was Niota.
The dealers, who belong to a boot camp prison program in Greene County, have moved down the Mississippi River, hurling sandbags in Quincy, Hardin, Marblehead and, this week, in Hillview, on the Illinois River.
But they still talk of Niota -- the people in Niota, the food they ate in Niota, the songs they sang in Niota -- as if the tiny town on the Iowa border were some lost utopia.


Airlines' Shootout in Texas Court Proves a Dud
Round One in the courtroom clash of the titans turned out to be not much more than a sparring match.
It was Robert L. Crandall, the outspoken head of American Airlines, pitted against Joseph D. Jamail, the Houston lawyer who has taken the lead in the suit brought by Continental Airlines and Northwest Airlines.
But at the end of the day, no blood was flowing.
No, Mr.
Crandall firmly insisted in a day of testimony, he did not set fares so low last year that American Airlines would lose money but its weaker rivals would lose more.


Australian Study Says AZT Slows Progression to Full-Blown AIDS
A report concludes that the drug AZT significantly slows the progression toward full-blown AIDS, appearing to contradict recent studies showing that people with H.I.V. gained scant benefit by taking the medication early in the course of their infection.
But scientists familiar with all the clinical trials of AZT said the data were consistent in essential ways and that the basic message remained the same: AZT is a moderately useful drug that can slow the course of AIDS in some patients for a limited period of time.


CHRONICLE
VIRGINIA KELLEY, President Clinton's mother, has signed a contract for the rights to her life story, which she will write with an Arkansas journalist, JAMES MORGAN.
"She has reached an agreement with Simon &amp; Schuster to do her autobiography, and we expect it to be published in the fall of 1994," her lawyer, ROBERT BARNETT, of the Washington law firm of Williams &amp; Connolly, said yesterday.
"Her editor will be Alice Mayhew, who edits among others Taylor Branch, Garry Wills and Robert Woodward, and the co-editor will be Rebecca Saletan. Mrs. Kelley is very candid, and this book will reflect her personality."


J. David Kuhn; Television Journalist, 50
J.
David Kuhn, a public-television journalist who raced vintage English cars for a hobby, died last Sunday when his car crashed at a meet.
He was 50 and lived in Lexington, Mass.
He was competing in the Pittsburgh Vintage Grand Prix at Schenley Park, Pa., when his MG-TD spun out of control in a single-car accident.
He died at the scene.


Allies' Air-Strike Ability In Bosnia Lacks Basics
Although the United States and its allies agreed in May to use air power to protect the United Nations troops in Bosnia, they have not yet put in place all the command and control arrangements needed to carry out air strikes against Serbian artillery and tanks.
While the allies have moved warplanes within striking distance of the Bosnian Serbs, military officials said today, they have not yet sent all the spotters or all of the communications equipment and target-designating devices that are needed for air strikes.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Close but No Ferrari  Colin Jackson's time was good enough for a new European record in the 110-meter hurdles.
It wasn't quite good enough for a new Ferrari.
The $140,000 Ferrari Testarossa, the prize for anyone setting a world record in Sestriere, Italy, at Europe's highest track -- 6,000 feet -- went unclaimed yesterday for the fifth consecutive year.
Plenty of big names tried, including Sergei Bubka, Kevin Young and Quincy Watts.
But it was Jackson who came the closest to winning the car as he won in 12.97 seconds, just 0.05 off the world record of 12.92 set by Roger Kingdom in 1989.
Running against a headwind of 1.6 meters a second, the Welshman became only the third man to break the 13-second barrier.
He broke his European record of 13.04, set last year in Cologne, Germany.
Bubka won the pole vault, clearing 19 feet 1/4 inch.
He barely missed at a world-record attempt at 20-1 3/4, hitting the bar with his arms after clearing it with the rest of his body.
Young, an American, won the 400 hurdles in 48.20.
Watts, another Olympic champion from the United States, won the 400 in 44.13 seconds, the third best time of the year. (AP) TENNIS  Martinez Overcomes Illness  Conchita Martinez, weakened by a virus and jet lag, defeated Camille Benjamin, 6-0, 6-3, yesterday in the second round of the United States Women's Hardcourt championships in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
Martinez, the top-seeded player, is from Spain.
Third-seeded Helena Sukova downed Tracey Morton, 6-2, 6-2, and sixth-seeded Chanda Rubin lost to Susi Lohrmann, 5-7, 6-3, 6-3, in a match suspended Tuesday because of darkness.
Other seeded players who won second-round matches were No. 8 Tami Whitlinger, a 6-2, 6-4 victor over Shannon McCarthy; No. 9 Kathy Rinaldi, who handled Miya Kidowaki by 6-2, 6-1; and No. 10 Caroline Kuhlman, who defeated Michelle Jackson Nobrega, 6-3, 7-6 (9-7).
Beverly Bowes upset No. 14 Christina Papadaki, 6-0, 1-6, 6-2.
Ann Stephenson, who received a tournament berth when Mary Joe Fernandez withdrew with a shoulder injury, trounced Amy Schwartz, 6-1, 6-0, to advance to the third round. (AP)


No Reason to Readmit Death Camp Guard; Testimony Misquoted
To the Editor:
Although the Israeli Supreme Court will announce its verdict in the case of John Demjanjuk on July 29, Fredric Dannen (Op-Ed, July 16) shockingly presents the testimony of a key witness falsely.


High Risk of Forest Fires in Parks


Survivor of June Ambush Is Shot to Death in Car Chase
A man who survived an ambush in the Bronx last month was shot and killed here early today after a high-speed car chase punctuated by gunfire.
The victim, identified as Wayne Carwin, 30, of Englewood, N.J., was shot four times in the head and once in the shoulder.
John J. Fahy, the Bergen County Prosecutor, said assailants overtook Mr.
Carwin's rented 1993 sedan about 4 miles from the George Washington Bridge after chasing it east on Route 46, a busy Bergen County highway.


Return of Houdini: He Works for Padres
Sometimes making players disappear is the most difficult task a general manager has.
If Joe McIlvaine, for example, or Al Harazin before him could find a club willing to take Vince Coleman in a trade, he would be a magician of the highest order.
Poof, gone is the surly, troublemaking, largely noncontributory left fielder.
Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, has earned his magician's wand more than once.
A year and a half ago, he traded Steve Sax to the Chicago White Sox when Sax was just beginning a four-year, $12.4 million contract extension.
Last August he traded Tim Leary, with one year left on his contract at $1.3 million, to the Seattle Mariners.


Classical Music in Review
'From the Heart' 'Vocal Music of the 20th Century'  Rutgers Summerfest
It is certainly true, as a three-concert series at the Rutgers Summerfest argues, that 20th-century music is no one thing.
But it is not quite true, as the second program seemed to imply this evening, that 20th-century music is everything but the one thing most people think it is.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the funeral of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, referred incorrectly in some editions to the source of a quotation used by President Clinton in his eulogy.
He was paraphrasing Leon Russell, the pop musician, not Leon Redbone, the jazz musician, when he said, "I love you in a place that has no space and time."


Classical Music in Review
Goldman Memorial Band  Damrosch Park Lincoln Center
The Goldman Memorial Band has been blaring classics and rarities of the concert-band repertory for 76 years, and this year was no exception.
Its summer-season finale on Sunday evening ranged from Sousa marches to suites from "The Music Man" and "West Side Story," from new pieces by Michael Valenti, Walter Skolnik and Kadish Millett to selections from Boito's "Mefistofele."


Robert Altman, Very Much a Player Again
At 68, an age when most of Hollywood's film makers are retired, ignored or treated like dinosaurs by movie executives and talent agents, Robert Altman has embarked on the most radical and adventurous journey of his career.
"People here have just come to the conclusion that I'm not going to go away," he said the other afternoon.
"I seem to have become like one of those old standards, in musical terms. Always around. Lauren Bacall said to me, 'You just don't quit, do you?' Guess not. I guess 30-year-olds out here have decided I'm not just an old man living in the past."


Lester W. Smith, 84, Architect of Schools
Lester W. Smith, an architect who specialized in the design of schools, died on Saturday at Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital in Hanover, N.H.
He was 84 and lived in Etna, N.H.
The cause was amyloidosis, a blood-plasma disease, his family said.


Ferlinghetti Reflects on Glow of City Lights
Although this city has christened its playful, humpbacked boulevards with the names of such drop-ins as Mark Twain, William Saroyan and Jack Kerouac, it has yet to confer any such honor on Lawrence Ferlinghetti, the poet, publisher and inveterate resident who has done more to put San Francisco on the literary map than any other living writer.
"Oh, there's a bill before the Board of Supervisors proposing to name a little alley after me," said Mr.
Ferlinghetti last week, still slim, spry and modest at the age of 75, "but I don't know what will come of it. This city, noted for poets and writers, has ignored them for years."


Our No. 1 Objective Is to Keep the Yankees in Yankee Stadium
To the Editor:
You casually contemplate the departure of the New York Yankees from New York City in "Mr. Steinbrenner's Threats" (editorial July 18), suggesting the city's "spirit, image and economy" could sustain such a loss and that the city would "surely live on if the Yankees desert."


Net Surges At Chrysler And Ford
Providing more evidence of the strong rebound in auto sales, the Ford Motor Company reported today that its earnings had doubled in the second quarter, while the Chrysler Corporation said its profit was nearly four times the level of a year ago.
Ford and Chrysler each benefited from the recovering automotive demand in North America.
But Ford, which relies heavily on overseas operations, said it lost money in Europe, where auto sales were off drastically from a year ago.
Chrysler, which does not have significant European operations, escaped the negative impact of Europe's weak economy.
Earnings Meet Forecasts
The General Motors Corporation, the largest auto maker in the world, is expected to announce improved earnings on Thursday but, like Ford, will almost certainly be hurt by poor sales in Europe.
The three principal nonautomotive subsidiaries of G.M. posted healthy earnings reports today.


A Wise Decision on Steel
It's tempting to criticize the decision by the International Trade Commission to eliminate many of the tariffs that protect American steel producers from foreign competition.
After all, the Commerce Department had ruled that many foreign suppliers were violating U.S. trade laws by selling at prices that did not cover their costs -- an injustice the tariffs were designed to correct.
But the criticism is off target.
The commission's decision is a model of professional discretion.
It carefully sifted the data to determine, as U.S. law requires, whether foreign subsidies and price cutting had injured the large, integrated steel mills that brought the complaints.
What the commission found was that in many cases the foreign imports weren't the villain.


Warner-Lambert in 2 British Deals
The Warner-Lambert Company said today that it would tie its nonprescription drug division to those of two large British pharmaceutical companies, highlighting both the growth potential and the intensifying competition in the over-the-counter drug business.
Warner-Lambert, based in Morris Plains, N.J., said it had reached agreements with Wellcome P.L.C. and Glaxo P.L.C. to market their nonprescription drugs in joint ventures.


Lifeguards Know: It's Always Good to Strrrretch Before the Race


Schnellenberger Signs Contract Extension
The University of Louisville football coach, HOWARD SCHNELLENBERGER, signed a six-year contract extension yesterday that will keep him with the Cardinals until the year 2000.
Schnellenberger, 59, became Louisville's 16th head coach in 1984.
He signed a five-year-contract in 1989 that lasts through next season.


Candidate for County Executive Calls for Cut in Nassau Sales Tax
Richard M. Kessel, a Democratic candidate for Nassau County executive, today proposed cutting the county sales tax by half a penny as part of a "total change" in the way the county conducts business.
Mr.
Kessel, who has taken an unpaid leave from his position as executive director of the State Consumer Protection Board, said the Republican incumbent, Thomas S. Gulotta, had "mismanaged this county into a state of utter chaos that is bleeding the taxpayers dry."


Edward Wilson, 84, Ad Agency Officer And a Civic Leader
Edward G. Wilson, a retired executive vice president of J. Walter Thompson advertising agency and a civic leader, died at home on Saturday.
He was 84 and lived in Sharon, Conn.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Private Meetings, Public Apologies
The Mets held two closed-door meetings before last night's game against the Florida Marlins in an attempt to address their plummeting public image and their increasingly volatile relationship with the New York-area news media.
Reporters were not allowed in the clubhouse before the game as the players met first with Manager Dallas Green and the assistant vice president, Gerry Hunsicker, then with Donald Fehr, the president of the Players Association.
Fehr had called an emergency meeting to discuss what he termed "an adversarial relationship between some members of the club and members of the media."


House Clears National Service Plan as Senate Remains Stalled
The House passed President Clinton's five-year national service proposal today while the Senate remained locked in a filibuster over a similar measure.
Administration officials and Senate Republicans spent the day futilely trying to find a compromise.
Despite an early evening Republican offer, there was no tangible evidence of progress.


Market Place; Big Japanese Railroad's Stock Will Have An Eager, Built-In Clientele.
FOR most people who live in Japan's urban areas, the morning-rush-hour ritual involves rail-station employees using fullback-like techniques to squash hapless passengers into cars as the doors squeeze past their errant briefcases, articles of clothing and limbs.
But what the system lacks in comfort, it makes up for as one of the most efficient railroads in the world, which is why the Government's plans to privatize the largest leg of its national rail system in September has drawn a good deal of interest in an otherwise wobbly stock market.


Music Has Long Had Political Undertone
To the Editor:
Bernard Holland's "Music and Virtue: Is Making Art Good Making Good Art?" (Critic's Notebook, July 20) makes cultural points, but misses a historical one: Music in the service of a political agenda has been the norm, not the exception in the West.


Kmart Shifting Cost Burden Onto Its Toy Manufacturers
The Kmart Corporation, the country's second-largest retailer, seems to be on an all-out offensive to force its manufacturers to carry the burden of its current problems on their books.
Not only is it drawing out payments to manufacturers, the company is trying to stock some goods without paying for them until they are sold.


Chief Is Chosen At Big Insurer
The board of the Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, the nation's eighth-largest life insurer, yesterday elected the company's president, James D. Ericson, to become chief executive effective Oct. 1.
Mr.
Ericson, 57, will replace the current chairman, Donald J. Schuenke, 64, who has served as Northwestern's chief executive since 1982.
Mr.
Scheunke will continue as chairman until he reaches the mandatory retirment age in January.


Where Modernism And Mysticism Converge
MANY roads were taken to reach Kent and Hedy Klineman's loft, a soaring triplex on lower Fifth Avenue with panoramic views of the Manhattan skyline.
Mrs.
Klineman, an artist, traveled a spiritual path to the penthouse, sometimes hand in hand with such deities as Buddha, Shiva and Krishna and accompanied by yoga, meditation and incense.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the deployment of National Guard troops in Puerto Rico gave incorrect rates for murders there and elsewhere.
The 1991 rates of 22.6 in Puerto Rico, 9.8 in the United States and 29 in New York City are per 100,000 people, not per 1,000.


Editors' Note
The headline of the main front-page article yesterday, about cutbacks at the International Business Machines Corporation, carried differing figures in various editions for the number of jobs being eliminated -- some versions using 60,000 and others 35,000.
In all editions, the article noted that I.B.M. was setting aside $8.9 billion, as a charge against its earnings, to pay the costs of cutting the jobs and closing surplus factories and office buildings.
Although the elimination of 25,000 had been disclosed earlier, the $8.9 billion charge -- newly reported -- applied to those jobs along with 35,000 more to be cut under the plans announced yesterday.


A Friend Remembers a Giving Neighbor
An hour before his East team played for the bronze medal today, Danta Bright sat alone in the bleachers, listening to music through earphones and looking as though his thoughts were miles away from the arena.
Indeed, during the last 24 hours, basketball, the United States Olympic Festival and medals had slipped several notches on Bright's list of priorities.


Calendar: A Bridge for Bryant Park
Down to Size  Bryant Park, Avenue of the Americas between 42d and 41st Streets; (212) 983-4142.
Today at 10:30 A.M. there will be a ribbon-cutting ceremony to open a 40-foot-long scale model of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge that was built by junior high school students.


New Jersey Court Says Victims of Car Chases Cannot Sue Police
In a decision that seems to go against the national trend to rein in hot pursuits by law-enforcement officers, the State Supreme Court ruled today that except for willful misconduct, officers are absolutely immune under New Jersey law for injuries or deaths resulting from such chases.
While various lower courts in New Jersey had split on the issue, police departments around the country, as well as state and Federal lawmakers, have generally clamped down on the wild, Hollywood-style chases that sometimes involve caravans of speeding cruisers.
So the decision today placed New Jersey among a small number of states to give police officers and the jurisdictions that employ them broad protection against lawsuits by innocent victims or criminals arising from chases.


From the Barrel of Weekend Guests, Tales of Bottom-Dwellers
ONE hostess described them as guests from hell, but perhaps that's going too far.
Still, it can't be denied that there are weekend guests who leave a lot to be desired and, all things being equal, will never be asked back.
Of course all things aren't equal, which means that some of the dregs of guestdom will get return invitations.
There's little doubt that men and women who are asked primarily for business and professional reasons can get away with a good deal that would banish friends.
And all kinds of boorish behavior and thoughtless acts are sloughed off if the guests are sufficiently famous and prestigious, or even famous and not prestigious. (In some circles, notoriety spells desirability and outweighs bad and even outrageous manners.)


Lintas New York Hires New Executive
Lintas New York said yesterday that as expected, Cary Lemkowitz, 45, would join the agency in the new position of executive vice president and group creative director, working on packaged goods accounts.
Since September, he had been the vice chairman and chief creative officer at Earle Palmer Brown/New York.


Officers Seize Cigarettes Bound for an Indian Shop
A four-month standoff between the state and the Golden Hill Paugussett Indians escalated sharply today when state troopers and tax-enforcement officers seized a truck and 5,000 cartons of cigarettes that the officers said were bound for the tribe's tax-free reservation smoke shop in Colchester.
In announcing the action, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said the 47 cents per pack the state is losing on cigarette sales at the shop was only part of the problem.
With tribe members armed and vowing to fight any intrusion by the state, Mr.
Weicker said the "volatile, highly charged and unpredictable situation" had to be defused.


Trump Sues Pritzker As a Feud Goes Public
A back-room feud between two giants of the American real estate world broke into the open yesterday when Donald J. Trump, the New York developer, filed a civil racketeering suit against Jay Pritzker, the Chicago financier, over the Pritzker family's management of the Grand Hyatt Hotel in New York City.
The Pritzkers and Mr.
Trump are equal partners in the Grand Hyatt, whose renovation in 1979 was the curtain-raiser for Mr.
Trump's flamboyant career.
The Hyatt Corporation, owned by the Pritzkers, manages the hotel under a contract that bars Hyatt from operating any other convention hotel in New York.


Review/Film; 'La Vie de Boheme' With a Finnish Lilt
"La Vie de Boheme" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 9, 1992.
The French-language film opens today at Film Forum 3, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
From the look and manner of his films, Aki Kaurismaki would seem to be like the character in "Li'l Abner" who walks the earth shadowed by a small dark cloud.
The cloud follows him with the fidelity of a severely depressed hound dog.
It's almost affectionate.
Yet the cloud isn't big enough to block out the sun completely, and life lived in the penumbra can sometimes be astonishingly rich.


Arnold Fortuna Gets Retail Chain Account
Home Quarters Warehouse, a home improvement retail chain based in Virginia Beach, Va., and owned by the Hechinger Company, said yesterday that it had selected Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston to handle its broadcast, outdoor and market planning account, with billings estimated at $12 million.
The account had been handled by Mutual Marketing in Boston, which retains the print portion.
Arnold Fortuna was awarded the account following a two-month review that also included Bernstein Rein of Kansas City, Mo.


Confirmation Hearings for Mondale as New Ambassador to Japan


I.B.M. Chairman's Decisive Cuts Get Mostly High Marks
How quickly and how deeply Louis V. Gerstner Jr. would cut to streamline I.B.M. had been a much-debated subject on Wall Street recently, but the new chairman was intent on cutting deep and soon almost from the day he joined the company in April.
"This was part of Lou's thinking from the start," Gerald Czarnecki, the International Business Machines Corporation's senior vice president for human resources and administration, said yesterday.


Questions On Signing Up New Voters
In an often partisan hearing, State Senate Republicans yesterday sharply questioned the credibility of a former New York City Board of Elections official who now works for Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign and raised concerns about whether duplicate registrations and other irregularities could skew a close race this fall.
At the hearing at the State Office Building in lower Manhattan, Board of Elections officials acknowledged that they had found as many as 22,000 duplicate registrations on file in the city between the time of the Presidential election last fall and this spring, but they said that a random check of 180 of them had found no evidence that any of those registrants had voted twice.
They said they were weeding out the duplicates from the three million voters on the rolls.
Duplicate Registrations
For years the board has been plagued by administrative problems, and Senator Michael F. Nozzolio of Seneca Falls, the chairman of the Senate's Elections Committee, called the hearing to examine recent reports of sloppy record-keeping and potential irregularities, especially in the wake of big voter registration drives last year.
Aides to the Republican-Liberal mayoral nominee, Rudolph W. Giuliani, who lost in 1989 by less than 50,000 votes, have repeatedly claimed there is potential for outright fraud, arguing that duplicate registrations, particularly in heavily black districts, could hurt their candidate this fall.


No Reason to Readmit Death Camp Guard
To the Editor:
To reach the conclusion that John Demjanjuk is not Ivan the Terrible (Op-Ed, July 16) and should therefore be returned to the United States, Fredric Dannen quotes selectively from the report of the special master, Judge Thomas Wiseman of Nashville, to the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit.
In the report, which will form the basis for hearings scheduled for Sept. 3 in Cincinnati, Judge Wiseman concludes there is serious doubt that Mr.
Demjanjuk served at the Treblinka death camp as charged, although that conclusion was beyond the scope of his investigation and was based on a limited portion of the material before the Israeli Supreme Court.


A Blind Solo Sailor Sets Out for England
The quest to sail alone across the Atlantic Ocean is a formidable challenge for anyone.
But for 58-year-old HANK DEKKER, blind since 1977, it is the next step in a series of long-distance voyages.
Having sailed for the first time 13 years ago, Dekker has crossed the Pacific Ocean alone twice.
Dekker plans to set out today in a 30-foot sailboat from Cape May, N.J., for a 3,000-mile solo voyage to Plymouth, England.
He will navigate with the help of a Braille compass and charts, and with the aid of voice-synthesized readouts from radar and a satellite tracking device, the Global Postioning System.


Israel Keeps Pounding South Lebanon
Israel continued to shell and bomb southern Lebanon today in what officials acknowledged was a campaign to reduce dozens of villages and towns to heaps of rubble, creating an uninhabited area inhospitable to anti-Israel guerrillas.
"Now we are at the stage in which we are firing into the villages in order to cause damage to property," said Gen.
Yehosh Dorfman, commander of the Artillery Corps.
"The aim is to create a situation in which the residents will leave the villages and go north. The aim is to damage the infrastructure, to destroy the villages and the houses of the activists and the locations from which the rockets are fired. A large part of the rocket-launchers were placed inside villages."


Former Salomon Trader Wins Legal Round
In a rebuke of prosecutors' actions, a Federal judge ordered the Government yesterday to reinstate a plea-bargaining agreement it withdrew in January from Paul W. Mozer, a former Salomon Brothers trader who was at the center of the 1991 Treasury markets scandal.
The decision was a bittersweet victory for Mr.
Mozer, who won the right to plead guilty to two felonies stemming from his submission of illegal bids in Treasury auctions when he was head of Government bond trading at Salomon.
Mr.
Mozer would face a maximum prison term of 10 years. 'Without Basis'
But the opinion was a jarring loss for Federal prosecutors.
In his decision, Federal District Judge Pierre N. Leval wrote that the Government's position was "altogether without basis." He sharply accused prosecutors of trying to mislead the former presiding judge in the case with false arguments they said required the agreement's withdrawal.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  CLINTON READY FOR BOSNIA  President Clinton said the United States was now ready to take part in allied bombing of Serbian gunners who attack United Nations peacekeeping forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as the United Nations requests it.
A1  COMMAND NETWORK IS NEEDED  The United States and its allies have not yet put in place all the command and control arrangements needed to carry out air strikes in Bosnia.
Western nations have quietly moved warplanes within striking distance of the Bosnian Serbs, but the allies never dispatched all the spotters or communications gear and target designating devices, military officials said.
A6


It's Just a Job


Review/Fashion; The Power Suit Chills Out
THE blue pin-stripe suit, that smug cocoon of corporate dressing, is being slowly unraveled by New York's men's wear designers, who are presenting their spring 1994 collections this week.
Donna Karan opened her show with a clear statement of the season's message: the blue pin-stripe suit was worn with shirttails untucked and a tie pulled well away from the throat.
Even Ralph Lauren, the safe house for the cautious man willing to acquiesce to a designer label, had some fun at the blue pin-stripe suit's expense.
His was split up for styling purposes, a double-breasted jacket with rolled-up, unhemmed wrinkled linen trousers and a collarless shirt, the tie wrapped around the waist as a belt.
And Calvin Klein just banned that corporate look completely.


...Nor Any Drop to Mix a Drink or Brew the Coffee
Suddenly, chefs were inventing waterless meals.
Teachers were telling children to line up not at the water fountain, but at the water bottle.


EASTMAN KODAK CO. (N)
The Eastman Kodak Company, which is developing a plan to improve its financial performance, reported slightly improved earnings for the second quarter, up 2.8 percent from the quarter a year earlier.
Sales from continuing operations -- which do not include Eastman Chemical Corporation, which is being spun off -- were $4.27 billion, down marginally from $4.29 billion a year earlier.


DEMOCRATS VOICING DOUBT ON CHANCES FOR ECONOMIC PLAN
Amid rising anxiety among Democratic leaders over the prospects for President Clinton's economic package, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, a quarterback in the drive to push the plan through Congress, proclaimed today that he lacked the votes to pass the measure in the Senate next week and was not sure how to get them.
As Mr.
Moynihan and Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Chicago shuttered themselves in the Capitol today, trying to work out a compromise version of the plan that could pass both houses of Congress, the plan's political woes only seemed to mount.


Our No. 1 Objective Is to Keep the Yankees in Yankee Stadium; Let Him Go
To the Editor:
During the John V. Lindsay administration, New York City spent about $75 million to renovate Yankee Stadium.
George Steinbrenner now threatens to leave the Bronx because he says the neighborhood is not safe.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposes that the $75 million go down the tubes, the city take over the ballpark, do what with is anybody's guess, and the public foot the bill for a new stadium on Manhattan's West Side.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
China International Trust and Investment Corp. is offering $250 million of 6.875 percent bonds due in 2003 at 99.706 to yield 6.916 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable bonds are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Richard J. O'Keefe, 87, Is Dead; Led Air Force in Mediterranean
Richard Joseph O'Keefe, a retired Air Force major general and a former commander of the 17th Air Force in Libya, died on July 21 at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Washington.
He was 87 and lived in Fairfax, Va.
The cause was cancer of the stomach, said his son Joseph Kirk O'Keefe.


Visit to Brooklyn Cousins Ends in Death for L.I. Boy
It was in many ways a simple life that Austin Smith led.
He rode his bicycle through the unhurried streets of Copiague, L.I.
He went for dips in the neighbors' pool.
And he attended Bible classes and Sunday school at his church.
To him, the reports of violence in neighborhoods like Brownsville in Brooklyn, where his cousins lived, were only tales.
But during a visit to his cousins, the 12-year-old boy died with a bullet in his back Tuesday night when he was caught suddenly in gunfire while going to pick up some snacks in a bodega near Decatur Street and Hopkinson Avenue in Brownsville, the police and his family said.


Dow Falls 12.01 Points in a Mixed Market
Despite several strong earnings reports, the stock market was mixed yesterday.
Most leading market indicators rose slightly, but the Dow Jones industrial average fell further from Monday's record high.
"It's a market that is really very stock-specific," said Robert Freedman, chief investment officer for John Hancock Mutual Funds in Boston.
"We're still in that trading range we've been in for so long, with an upward bias."


Balkan Mediators Fear Allies May Hurt Talks
With leaders of the warring Bosnian factions discussing a three-way ethnic split in detail for the first time, officials here expressed concern today that any new move to authorize NATO air strikes against Bosnian Serb forces could make agreement more difficult to reach.
In recent days the two Balkan mediators, Lord Owen of Britain and Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway, said they believed that Washington and its NATO allies would not move any closer to using air power against the Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina while the faction leaders were talking peace at the negotiating table.


Clinton Aide Appeared Depressed Before Death, His Associates Say
In contrast to White House assertions that there had been no signs of trouble, Vincent W. Foster Jr., the longtime friend of President Clinton who apparently committed suicide last week, had displayed signs of depression in the final month of his life, according to Federal officials and people close to Mr.
Foster.
Mr.
Foster, the deputy White House counsel, had been so depressed about his job that before his death he had spent parts of several weekends working reclusively at home in bed with the shades drawn, a close associate said today.


Autopsy Expected to Give Answers
Only the autopsy can determine what caused the death of Reggie Lewis, the Boston Celtics' captain, and help to clarify a bizarre public controversy over conflicting medical opinions about a possible heart ailment and what treatment might have been necessary.
Lewis, who collapsed during a playoff game this past April, collapsed again while shooting baskets Tuesday night at the team's training center at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., and was pronounced dead after doctors and paramedics tried for nearly two hours to resuscitate him.


Indian Government Survives Parliament Vote
After three days of vigorous public debate and intense private political bargaining, the Government of Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao survived a parliamentary vote of no confidence tonight.
The vote was 265 to 251.
For the first time in Mr.
Rao's tenure, all the opposition parties, some of them natural political enemies, had banded together to try to oust the Government.
So rare was this alliance that just 24 hours ago most political commentators said it was unclear whether the Government could win.


Saratoga Season Starts With an Upset
The Saratoga race track, the home of the upset and the graveyard of champions, opened its 126th season today with a fitting sense of history when a 38-1 long shot won the first race of the 286 that will be run here during the next five weeks.
The upset was pulled by a 5-year-old mare named Saturday Sunshine in a steeplechase run in bright Wednesday sunshine.
But the first major winner of the season was anointed eight races later when Strategic Maneuver rallied in the final yards to take the 76th running of the Schuylerville by a neck.


Meggett Signs a Pact, Then Clears the Air
David Meggett would like everyone to know that it's David, not Dave, as most people have called him since he joined the Giants five years ago.
He would also like to say that he is happy with his new two-year, $2.7 million contract, but not ecstatic.
Whether the checks will read Dave or David has not been determined.
Anyway, Meggett ended his holdout today and agreed to a two-year deal that gave him quite a raise.
Consider that last season he made $625,000 and this year he will make about $1.35 million.
Not bad.
Business Is Business
"How many guys you speak to actually are happy about their contract?" he asked.
"It's marketable. It's valuable, as to where I am and my importance to the team. The money is the money. It's the business side of the game."


Italians Seeking to Solve Bombing Riddles Can Only Peer Into a Fog
Over the past three months, Italians have been forced to contemplate a renewed surge of terrorism that recalls the "Years of Lead" in the 1970's and early 80's, when shadowy assailants focused their attention on killing people on trains and in railroad stations.
This time, though, after bombings overnight in Milan and Rome, Italians are confronted with the growing and worrisome certainty that it is the very cultural heritage that defines their land -- the churches and frescoes, the statues and art -- that is under assault.


Review/Dance; Late Nikolais, Horrifying and Hilarious by Turns
Visual beauty was so dominant in Alwin Nikolais's brand of mixed-media choreography that his fondness for the macabre always comes as a surprise.
That element balanced the decorative in the fourth and final bill of the Nikolais Retrospective, which is to continue through Saturday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).


Salvador Journal; For Brazil's Street Children, a Happy Path to Take
At age 15, Sinval Santos de Assis was one of thousands of Brazilian street youths teetering on the brink of delinquency or possibly death.
Home was a cramped, unhappy slum shanty he shared with his mother, stepfather and six younger siblings.
If Sinval went home at night without cigarette money for his stepfather, he could expect a beating.
Sometimes he was beaten just for going home.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR most adolescents, the mirror is both a comforting friend and a taunting enemy.
They are drawn to its reflection, even if they dislike or worry about what they see.
Many teen-agers become preoccupied with the shape of their ears, the size of their nose, or the predictable weight gain that accompanies puberty.
Unfortunately, some of the things parents do to help their children deal with these worries may make matters worse.
"It's normal for children to become concerned about real or imagined problems with how they look during late childhood through adolescence," said Dr.
Richard A. Gordon, a professor of psychology at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the author of "Anorexia and Bulimia: Anatomy of a Social Epidemic" (Basil Blackwell, 1992).


Bullpen Takes Over for Humbled Hutton
Tiger Stadium is a renowned setting where pitchers get swallowed up, where bites are taken out of their best stuff and where hits sometimes come in such bunches they send even the best mound artists scurrying for cover.
Quickly.
With the wind swirling and thunderstorms threatening, the old park claimed victims from both the Yankees and the Tigers on this sticky day.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  THE MICROBES TAKE MANHATTAN
Mysterious bacteria that survived more than three times the chlorine levels used to assure safety led residents and office workers in lower Manhattan and Chelsea to boil water, avoid ice cubes and stock up on bottled water.
A1.
Suddenly, chefs were inventing waterless meals.
Teachers were telling children to line up not at the water fountain, but at the water bottle.
B2.


Divided, They Are United
Rarely have the parties in Congress been so united against one another.
Rarely have the stakes been so high.
News analysis, page A18.


ON THE BUS WITH: Merle Haggard; Under the Growl, a Crooner
THE Hag is talking apocalypse. "It's like a war zone coming back here," he says.
"Back here" is the East Coast, and Merle Haggard, the country music legend, has descended from his Northern California ranch to cover it by bus, armed with his guitar.


New York to Play Host to Event in 1994
Although she will be playing tennis and not competing in the tournament, MARTINA NAVRATILOVA was honored at Madison Square Garden last night during a fund-raiser for the Gay Games IV and Cultural Festival that will be held around the New York metropolitan area next summer.
"I'm just trying to help bring more money and visibility to the games," said Navratilova.
"Sports is a wonderful way to bridge differences, and the Gay Games is just another way to show people we are just like everybody else."


Crown Heights: An Overestimated Mayoral Issue?
Campaigns are long, voters unpredictable and the conventional political wisdom can sometimes be as meaningful as a candidate's latest press release.
Just last week, New York City politicians were virtually unanimous in concluding that Mayor David N. Dinkins would suffer significant political damage from the release of a voluminous state report that criticized sharply his administration's handling of the Crown Heights disturbances two years ago.


Great-Grandson of Founder Is Promoted at McGraw-Hill
McGraw-Hill Inc. said yesterday that Harold W. McGraw 3d, whose great-grandfather James H. McGraw founded the publishing and information company more than 100 years ago, had been elected president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
McGraw, 44, has held several positions with the company since 1980 and was given responsibility for all of the company's business units last year.
He will take over the presidency from Joseph L. Dionne, who will remain chairman and chief executive.


Japan Coalition Gathers Votes to Oust Ruling Party
Opposition leaders from seven disparate parties said today that they had assembled the votes to oust the governing Liberal Democratic Party from office for the first time in four decades, and prepared to select a leader who would become Japan's next prime minister.
The leading candidate appears to be Tsutomu Hata, a former Finance Minister who led a rebellion against Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa last month, leading dozens of legislators out of the party and setting off a series of events that brought down the Government.
Tonight, however, several officials in the coalition said they were still pressing the candidacy of Morihiro Hosokawa, whose 18-month-old Japan New Party planted the seeds of collapse for the governing camp.


DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. (N)
The Digital Equipment Corporation fulfilled the expectations of financial analysts yesterday by announcing a quarterly profit for the first time since March 1991.
The profit compared with a $1.9 billion loss in the comparable quarter a year ago, which included a $1.5 billion restructuring charge.
Digital also announced that its loss for the year had narrowed substantially.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Merck will buy Medco, the country's largest mail-order drug company, for $6 billion.
The move places Merck in the discount drug business and the emerging field of managed health care.  [ Page D1. ]  Warner-Lambert will market nonprescription drugs for Wellcome and Glaxo of Britain.  [ D5. ]
Ford reported a doubling of earnings in the second quarter and Chrysler said profit was nearly four times higher, as both auto makers benefited from recovering demand in North America.  [ D1. ]


Democracy Stood Beside Carol Moseley Braun
To the Editor:
"The Senate's only black member, Carol Moseley Braun, made the chamber listen," you report July 23, "as freshmen seldom do. Her oratory of impassioned tears and shouts stopped Jesse Helms in his tracks as he defended the Confederate flag." You capture much of the spirit of the Senate's debate on the Helms amendment, which sought to preserve a design patent on an insignia that includes the Confederate flag.
But, having watched the debate live on C-Span, I had hoped to see you give the event more prominent coverage.
As one among the millions who have accepted cynicism as the normal response to our governmental institutions, I was powerfully stirred by the drama in the Senate chamber: Carol Moseley Braun, a first-year Senator, eloquently, movingly standing alone on an issue of principle, appealing to her colleagues' vision, not of politics as it is, but of the America most of us want it to be.


Fund Infusion for Dinkins; None for Giuliani
Mayor David N. Dinkins will receive $951,887 in public campaign funds today while his Republican-Liberal rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, will receive nothing until after the Sept. 14 primary, the city's Campaign Finance Board announced yesterday.
The Mayor is to get the money because he is facing a challenge for the Democratic nomination from two minor candidates, while Mr.
Giuliani has no primary opposition, finance board officials said.


Puccini's Original (Rejected) 'Butterfly'
Just when you thought it was safe to skip "Madama Butterfly," the New York City Opera has given Puccini's warhorse a new twist.
Or, actually, an old one.
When the company revives its 1967 Frank Corsaro production tomorrow evening, it will not present the well-worn standard edition.
Instead, Christopher Keene will conduct the American premiere of the score as it was performed at its world premiere at La Scala.
That version had only a single performance, on Feb. 17, 1904, and was booed off the stage for a complicated combination of reasons.
The audience found its Wagnerian-length acts too long, and objected to the absence of a tenor aria.
Some listeners derided the Japanese folk elements, and criticized other sections of the work as warmed-over "La Boheme." And some objected to the brutality and outright nastiness with which Puccini and his librettists, Giuseppe Giacosa and Luigi Illica, described this tragic meeting of East and West.


Accounts
*
Celestial Seasonings, Boulder, Colo., said yesterday that it had placed in review its estimated $6 million account, now at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York.
The review will include Ally and six other shops: Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander, Portland, Ore.; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago; Jerry Inc., New York; Karsh &amp; Hagan, Englewood, Colo.; Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, and Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Portland.
A decision is expected by Sept. 1. *
Cherokee Inc., Sunland, Calif., to Asher/Gould Advertising, Los Angeles, to handle its apparel account, previously handled by Davis, Ball &amp; Colombatto, Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million.


Young &amp; Rubicam Out of I.B.M. Review
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. said yesterday that it had withdrawn from the review for the estimated $80 million IBM Personal Computer Company's United States and European account.
The decision came just five days after the agency was named as one of the 12 contenders in the review.
A spokesman for Y.&amp; R. in New York said that "an internal review of its priorities and strategic objectives" was the reason for the withdrawal, but declined to elaborate.
There was speculation that Y.&amp; R. was concerned about the potential conflicts between the IBM PC account and a large, longtime client, A.T.&amp; T.


Economic Scene; Flood Control Errors Were Made. The Issue Is How To Undo Them.
TO the poor souls watching the not-so-lazy old river churning through their barns and living rooms, the question of the hour is why Washington did not do more to protect them from disaster.
But to many economists and environmentalists the question is whether the Government should have done less.
With hindsight, they say, it is plain that the system of levees and dams meant to harness the Mississippi has done great harm as well as good, reducing the river valley's natural defenses against flood damage even as it encouraged development that put more property in harm's way.
"We've been burning the candle at both ends for half a century," concludes Robert Stavins, an environmental economist at Harvard University's Kennedy School.


Albert Prago, 81, Dies; Historian and Scholar
Albert Prago, a scholar of Latin American history and Marxist economics and a Lincoln Brigade veteran of the Spanish Civil War, died on Tuesday at the Convalescent Care Center at West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 81 and lived in West Palm Beach.
The cause was cancer of the spine, said his nephew, Clifford Irving, the novelist.


INSIDE
Merck Buying Discounter, Seeing Era of Price Restraint
Merck will buy Medco, the country's largest mail-order drug company,for $6 billion, positioning Merck in the discount drug business as managed health care emerges.
Page D1.
Young Ends Losing Streak
Anthony Young got a victory after a record 27 straight defeats as the Mets beat the Marlins, 5-4.
Page B7.


Music In Concert With Good Causes
These days, projects like Club USA's dance benefit for AIDS on Aug. 5 are not emanating from Charles Hamlen's old high-rent headquarters at I.M.G.
Artists on Madison Avenue.
Mr.
Hamlen now works out of an unrenovated loft space on West 45th Street.
He and his associate, Deborah Edison, sit on donated furniture, typing their own letters, answering their own phones, taking turns going to the bank, making their own coffee.
Up until a year ago, Mr.
Hamlen shared the direction of one of New York's newest and most powerful classical-music managements, helping to oversee the careers of such bankable stars as Itzhak Perlman, Andre Watts, James Galway, Joshua Bell and Yevgeny Kissin.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Green Bay Packers
Wayne Simmons, the Green Bay Packers' top draft pick and a projected starter, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his right knee and miss four to six weeks, Coach Mike Holmgren said yesterday.
Simmons will have the surgery today to repair torn cartilage he suffered during Monday morning's workout.
A test Tuesday revealed the tear.
Simmons was the 15th player selected in the draft and had been slotted to start at left outside linebacker.
"It'll set him back a little bit, certainly," Holmgren said.
"But we're talking four to six weeks and he'll be back in there at the beginning of the season."
In Simmons's absence, the Packers will start Jeff Brady, a third-year man.
A knee injury limited him to 8 games and 18 tackles last year. (AP) San Francisco 49ers
What is a trip to a foreign land for his teammates is a homecoming of sorts for the San Francisco 49ers' offensive tackle James Parrish.
Parrish, a veteran of the Barcelona Dragons of the World League of American Football and now struggling to win a spot on the 49ers, said he was mobbed by young autograph-seekers during an evening walk on the Ramblas, the city's jammed promenade.
"It's great, I'm just glad to be back in the city and see some of my old friends," Parrish said before the 49ers and Pittsburgh Steelers scrimmaged at a practice for their American Bowl game in Barcelona, Spain, on Sunday.
"All the guys on the team know I played here and know the city and the people -- and my Spanish is pretty fluent," said Parrish, who played for the Dragons before the W.L.A.F. folded after the 1992 season.
Parrish was cut last season by San Diego after he spent the 1991 season on Miami's "physically unable to perform list." (AP) Miami Dolphins
At first it looked as if it were just another scuffle during two-a-day drills in Davie, Fla.
Hot, tired and suddenly angry, Huey Richardson reached out and grabbed offensive guard Charles Hope's face mask.
Then Richardson ripped it off, and the message was clear -- he'll fight to keep his career alive.
Richardson, a former Florida Gators star, is trying to win a job at defensive end with the Miami Dolphins, his fourth team in three years.
He was a bust with the Pittsburgh Steelers, who made him the 15th player selected in the 1991 draft.
The Washington Redskins and Jets waived him last year.
In two seasons, he made seven tackles.
"I had the opportunity at those other places; they just didn't pan out," said Richardson, 25.
"My dad always told me that adversity builds character, so I guess I'm getting a lot of character." (AP) Cincinnati Bengals
David Klingler, Cincinnati's starter in his second pro season, says he isn't worried about Jay Schroeder taking his job.
Klingler, last year's first-round draft pick, said he welcomes the experience Schroeder and quarterbacks coach Ken Anderson have to offer.
"If anything, having Jay there takes off the pressure," said Klingler, who has played in four N.F.L. games, compared with 100 for Schroeder.
"With Kenny, now you have two guys back there with a lot to offer."
Schroeder, once the starter for Washington and the Los Angeles Raiders, played for the 1987 Super Bowl champion Redskins.
He came to the Bengals as an unrestricted free agent, signing a two-year contract for up to $3 million, but was told he would be Klingler's backup.
"In the back of my mind, I'm thinking I could go 16 weeks and not get a shot," Schroeder said.
"But I've got to be prepared. That's the only way I can treat it. I've seen it happen for nine years. It's tough to go through a whole season with one quarterback. I don't think they would have brought me in here if they didn't think I could start." (AP) San Diego Chargers
Cornerback Gill Byrd, the San Diego Chargers' career interception leader with 31 over 6 years and the current player with the most time as a Charger, underwent reconstructive surgery on his left knee yesterday and is out for the season.
The team physician, Dr.
Gary Losse, repaired two ligaments and a tendon that Byrd, 32, tore when he apparently caught his cleats in the grass and fell during a non-contact, one-on-one drill Tuesday afternoon.
Byrd's loss means the Chargers have to fill both starting cornerback spots.
They lost right cornerback Anthony Blaylock to the Chicago Bears via free agency. (AP)


HOME IMPROVEMENT
STENCILING is an easy, inexpensive and surprisingly expressive decorating technique especially suited to furniture and surfaces like walls and floors.
Beginners can achieve masterly results with simple projects on the first try.
The craft consists of applying color (usually paint) onto a surface through a precisely cut pattern, or stencil.
Stenciling-supply stores, listed in the Yellow Pages, carry pre-cut stencils in an array of designs, or you can make your own.
Equipment for stenciling can also be purchased at art-supply stores and some wall-covering and paint stores.


IRANIAN ARMS SENT BY SYRIA, U.S. SAYS
Syria helped to ship antitank rockets and other weapons sent by Iran to the Party of God, or Hezbollah, days before the worst outbreak of violence between Israel and the militant organization in southern Lebanon in a decade, Government officials said today.
Disclosure of the shipments came from Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, in testimony before a House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee by the Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey.


Sure Thing: Ebersol Guarantees Profit on NBC's Winning Olympics Bid
Dick Ebersol made like Joe Namath yesterday.
The president of NBC Sports guaranteed a profit on the winning $456 million bid NBC made Tuesday night for the broadcast rights to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
If the stagnant advertising market doesn't improve between now and 1996, Ebersol predicted a $10 million profit.
If it perks up, well, there will be that much more profit to spread around.


Cellular Pay Telephones Are Installed in Taxicabs


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Released Scott Sanderson, pitcher.
Recalled Phil Leftwich, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Ted Power, pitcher.
Sent Bob Ayrault, pitcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Signed Steve Soderstrom, pitcher, and assigned him to San Jose of the California League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Shawn Bradley, center, to a multiyear contract.
Renounced options on Manute Bol and Charles Shackleford, centers; Ron Anderson, forward; Greg Grant and Mitchell Wiggins, guards; and Eddie Lee Wilkins, forward-center.
Waived Armon Gilliam, forward.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Signed Frank Johnson, guard, to a one-year contract.
Football  National Football League
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Named Clyde Powers director of pro personnel.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Mike Panasuk, punter-placekicker.
Waived Jim Jennings, guard.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Dave Meggett, running back, to a two-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Mike Jarmolowich, linebacker.
Waived Paul Peters, wide receiver.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NHL -- Named David F. Hancy director of creative services, effective August 2.
DETROIT RED WINGS -- Named Barry Smith assistant coach. American Hockey League
HERSHEY BEARS -- Named Jay Leach coach.


Trade Pact May Hinge on Border-Bond Plan
In an effort to win support in Congress for the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Clinton Administration plans to create a joint agency with the Mexican Government that would issue $6 billion to $8 billion worth of bonds to pay for the cleanup of the two countries' border, a senior Administration official said today.
"It's a new Mexico-U.S. binational authority," the official, who insisted on anonymity, said.
"It would be like the Port Authority in New York -- it would be able to go into the market and float bonds paid for by user fees."


Hentrich: Punt, Pray And Kick
After a college career at Notre Dame, Craig Hentrich should have no problem punting or kicking before a large crowd and a national television audience.
The real question for Hentrich and the Jets is: Can he kick better than the incumbent, Louie Aguiar?
Punters in the National Football League are ranked by the average net distance of the kick (the total distance of the kick minus the return yardage).
By that measure, Aguiar ranked third in the American Conference and fifth in the league, with 37.6 yards.
Still, there is a perception that Aguiar's job is in jeopardy because of Hentrich's mere presence in camp.
Al Roberts, the Jets' special teams coordinator, made it clear today that Hentrich, the team's eighth-round draft pick, was not being handed the job, but that he could kick his way into contention.


Bienvenidos a los Suburbios; Increasingly, New York's Outskirts Take On a Latin Accent
A rich man once advised Rudy Rodriguez, "Follow the sun and always stay close to where the wealthy people live, because you will find money there."
So after Mr.
Rodriguez left Bogota, Colombia, he settled in 1973 in this gritty harbor village on Long Island Sound, sandwiched between two of the nation's most prosperous towns -- Greenwich, Conn., and Rye, N.Y.
He took jobs for people in those towns, mowing their lawns, shampooing their carpets, driving their limousines and doing other manual labor.


Cuba Will End Restrictions On Exiles Wanting to Visit
Accelerating a drive to obtain desperately needed foreign currency, the Cuban Government will announce the lifting of tight restrictions on travel to the island this week for Cuban-American exiles that had forced most to wait for months or even years for visas allowing them to visit their families.
Travel agencies in Miami that specialize in trips to Cuba for Cuban-Americans say Havana has notified them that it will quickly seek a fivefold increase in the number of exiles visiting the island.
To accomplish this, the Cuban Government has said it will reduce the processing time for most visa applications to about two weeks.


No Headline
"They brought us Pepsi. They let us sit down in the shade and drink from their water hose. They were just nice people. That's what made you want to do more. When you saw the looks on their faces -- all they cared was that you were there." -- ALLEN CHURCH, a Chicago convict who tried to save Niota, Ill., from the flood.  [ D23:4. ]


A.T.&amp; T. Sees the Future in Games
The much-heralded "information superhighway" may well begin as an electronic amusement park in which people play video games over the telephone network.
A.T.&amp; T., the nation's leading long-distance company, said today that it had bought part of a company that lets people from around the country play games with one another on personal computers.


Health Plan May Give Small Businesses Break
Seeking to ease the fears of small businesses, Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that they might be allowed to pay significantly lower health care premiums under the Administration's health care proposals than large companies would.
At a closed meeting with members of the House Small Business Committee, Mrs.
Clinton suggested that the Administration was thinking of limiting what many small businesses would have to pay for health care to less than 3.5 percent of their payrolls.


No Reason to Readmit Death Camp Guard; From Their Nightmares
To the Editor:
"Release Demjanjuk," Fredric Dannen pleads (Op-Ed, July 16).
He says that the Israelis, who convicted John Demjanjuk as the sadistic Treblinka gas chamber operator Ivan the Terrible, have the wrong man.


Tandem Reports a $550 Million Deficit in Third Quarter
Tandem Computers Inc. yesterday reported a $550 million third-quarter loss because of charges for a corporate overhaul that will result in the loss of 1,800 jobs in the next year.
Wall Street analysts and industry experts were surprised at the size of the loss and the depth of the restructuring, even though the company had warned earlier this month that a quarterly loss and dismissals should be expected.


BORDEN INC. (N)
Borden Inc.'s plans to accelerate restructuring were made dramatically clear yesterday when it announced a 65 percent decline in second-quarter earnings.
The food company also said it was cutting its dividend in half from 30 cents, the level it has paid since August 1992.


For Sarajevo's Fearful Serbs, Misery Cushioned by Mercy
After several knocks, the door opened a crack.
The face peering anxiously into the darkened corridor was that of a 40-year-old Serbian teacher, one of about 55,000 Serbs still living in Sarajevo after 16 months under siege by Serbian nationalist troops.
The man was ashen-faced, so fearful that his hands trembled.
"Forgive me, I am not myself," he said, after ushering his guest in and taking a few moments to compose himself.
"We feel incarcerated here. We sit here languishing, afraid to go out, terrified that there will be a knock on the door from armed men who will drag me out, take me to the mountains and make me dig trenches or fight against my own people."


U.S. Vows to Close Doors to Demjanjuk
Spared a trip to the gallows, John Demjanjuk is for now a man without a country.
Clinton Administration officials said today that they would do everything they could to make sure John Demjanjuk does not return to the United States.
And critics here said the decision in Israel confirmed that American prosecutors had mishandled the case.


The Burden No One Is Willing to Take On
If it was so simple an equation that fainting spell plus heart abnormality equals end of career, Terry Cummings's statistical biography would have no entries beyond 1983.
Cummings is the flip side of Reggie Lewis.
He played on, and lived to talk about it.
He says, in fact, that he spoke to Lewis after the late Celtic captain received his conflicting medical opinions from bickering medical factions in Boston.
"I told him to be confident," said Cummings, now a 32-year-old veteran with the San Antonio Spurs.
"But an athlete has to think he can do anything."


Breaking Ground for Vietnam Women's Memorial


Clinton Gives His Tax Plan a Homey Touch
The flowers were fake, the books borrowed and the stiff poses could have been from "Family Feud." But the faux homey set on a White House stage had a real political purpose: to give a human dimension to President Clinton's fight for an economic plan that is being derided as taxing and spending.
Arrayed in awkward tableaux on sofas, love seats and chairs were three families who described themselves as both working and poor.
With coaxing from the President and his wife, Hillary, the families spoke in poignant terms about how a Federal tax credit was helping them escape the depths of poverty.


Fear Is Rife in Capitol As the Tax Figures Fly
The papers keep writing that a handful of wise and crafty lawmakers are closeted this week in big mahogany-slathered rooms in the Capitol, bifocals on and ties askew, reworking President Clinton's economic package to meet Congress's practical political needs.
Literally, this is true.
But something altogether different is also going on.
The mahogany doors have been closed for two weeks now without results, and fear is mushrooming among the political animals outside; rumor is riot, and everyone smells the annual August recess, now eight days distant, the way long horns smell water in cattle-drive westerns.


A Week That Unites 3 Disparate Athletes
The beepers worn by philosophers, psychologists and ethicists went off like car alarms this week as Vince Coleman, Reggie Lewis and Martina Navratilova all made powerful personal statements.
Commentators and sidekicks used words like "symbol" and "lesson" and "role model." It was the kind of week that will spawn fresh sources in courses on sports sociology, history and medicine and renew the basic questions: Whose body is it anyway, and at what point is the individual responsible?
Coleman is the least interesting and most accessible case.
For all his character flaws, the Mets' outfielder is not playing below potential merely to make fans unhappy.
It makes him unhappy, too, and if that causes him to act out in foolish, immoral and possibly criminal ways, it is understandable, if not excusable.


U.S. Seizes Goods by Company With Long History of Violations
Federal marshals today seized nearly $700,000 worth of prescription drugs and over-the-counter creams and gels from a drug manufacturer here with a 17-year history of violating Federal standards.
The action came as a result of a lawsuit filed against Ambix Laboratories by the United States Attorney, Michael Chertoff, on behalf of the Food and Drug Administration.
The suit, which includes charges that there are rodents and insects at the plant, seeks an injunction to halt the company's operations until its plant and manufacturing processes meet Federal guidelines.


U.S. Weighs Wider Role For Bosnian Air Strikes
As discussions with the allies about possible air strikes on Bosnia continue, the United States has proposed expanding them beyond protecting United Nations peacekeepers to safeguarding Muslim civilians and relief convoys as well, Administration officials said today.
While the Administration has contemplated broad military intervention in the former Yugoslavia before, the new discussions, with their broader context, reflect an important change and a new urgency.
Disagreement continued within the Administration and among the allies, however, about how far to go in assisting the Muslims.


RJR NABISCO HOLDINGS CORP. (N)
With cigarette price competition intensifying, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation said yesterday that second-quarter earnings fell by 11 percent, and the company held out little hope for any improvement before 1994.
"The extremely competitive domestic tobacco environment led to a significant decline in our earnings," said Charles M. Harper, chairman and chief executive of the company that makes Winston, Camel and other brands.
Citing recent moves to lower prices and the "significant expenses" of adjusting to the changes, Mr.
Harper said lower revenues from domestic tobacco would depress the company's financial results through the end of the year.


Review/Film; An Informal Tour of the Country
One of the more colorful characters interviewed in "Where Are We? Our Trip Through America," Jeffrey Friedman and Robert Epstein's engrossing documentary tour of the nation's byways, is a Southern woman who tends a miniature replica of Elvis Presley's Graceland mansion on her front lawn.
Standing next to her husband, who built the elaborate dollhouse, she carefully differentiates her feelings for Elvis ("I love Elvis") from those for her husband ("I'm in love with my husband").
At the thought that her husband, who has multiple sclerosis, will probably never get to see the real Graceland, she grows teary-eyed.
In the hands of other documentary film makers, the woman could easily have been patronized and made to seem slightly ridiculous.
What distinguishes "Where Are We?" is the uniform sympathy extended to a broad range of Americans talking about their hopes, dreams and fears.
Even the most eccentric and narrow-minded are given their say without editorial comment.


Great Summer For Conservative Stock and World Funds
Sparked by sales of more conservative stock and international funds, the mutual-fund industry is enjoying its best summer, fund executives said yesterday.
They added that seasonal patterns seemed to have disappeared.
"July will be our best month ever," said Neal Litvack, an executive vice president of Fidelity Investments, the largest mutual-fund group.
"This is the first year in Fidelity's history where July sales were greater than June."


Ojeda Is Undergoing Psychiatric Treatment
Cleveland Indians pitcher BOB OJEDA is undergoing psychiatric treatment in Baltimore as part of his recovery from a boating accident that killed two teammates, his agent said.
Ojeda was the only survivor of the March 22 crash in Florida that killed fellow pitchers Tim Crews and Steve Olin.
Ojeda suffered severe head injuries, but had rejoined the Indians as his rehabilitation continued.


G.D.P. Gain Is Stronger In Quarter
In a moderate rebound powered by the spending of consumers and businesses, the economy's growth rate climbed to 1.6 percent in the second quarter as inflation eased, the Commerce Department reported today.
While the rise in gross domestic product -- the output of goods and services within American boundaries -- was short of most expectations, there was wide agreement among analysts that the 1.6 percent advance was better than it appeared and represented significant improvement from the meager expansion of seven-tenths of a percent for the first three months of the year.


ResultsPlus
TENNIS Pernfors Stuns Courier in Canadian Open  Mikael Pernfors of Sweden, ranked No. 1,001 in the world in March 1991 after knee and tendon injuries virtually halted his game, pulled off a 6-3, 6-2 upset of Jim Courier yesterday in the Canadian Open in Montreal.
"It shows that I can beat the good players when they play bad," Pernfors said after dispatching the world's second-ranked player.
Courier, 22, in his first tournament since losing the Wimbledon final to Pete Sampras, turned in a lackluster third-round match after defeating a fellow American, Jeff Tarango, in his opening match on Tuesday.
"Everything was wrong," Courier said.
"Mikael played very well and let me beat myself." Pernfors's upset, a surprise in a tournament that was holding close to form, came in the early afternoon, just before heavy rain forced a short delay in play.
Another upset followed the delay, with Todd Martin, seeded 13th, eliminating third-seeded Boris Becker, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3). (AP) Haarhuis Knocks Out Brugera: Paul Haarhuis ousted the top-seeded Sergi Brugera by 7-6 (7-5), 6-3 yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of the Dutch Open clay court championship in Hilversum, the Netherlands.
Brugera, winner of the French Open, was one of four seeded players knocked out in the second round.
Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden defeated sixth-seeded Russian Andrei Chesnokov, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2; Carlos Costa of Spain beat No. 7-seeded Fabrice Santoro, 6-2, 6-4, and Richard Fromberg of Australia outlasted the eighth-seeded German, Marc Goellner, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3, 7-6 (9-7). (AP) GOLF  Newcomer Takes Lead After First Round  A PGA Tour newcomer, Michael Bradley, shot a bogey-free seven-under-par 64 yesterday for a one-stroke lead after the opening round of the Federal Express-St.
Jude Classic in Memphis.
The defending champion, Jay Haas, and Davis Love 3d each shot 65's, and Scott Gump, Michael Allen and Neal Lancaster shot 66's.
Bradley, who joined the PGA Tour this year and has missed the cut in three of his last five tournaments, got off to a quick start with birdies on the first three holes and four of the first five.
Haas won last year with a 21-under-par 263 and tied for third in 1991 over the 7,006-yard Tournament Players Club at Southwind. (AP) Goetze and Johnson Tied: Vicki Goetze, out of college and winner of only $4,934 in her first two events on the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour, shot a four-under-par 68 to tie Trish Johnson for the first-round lead in the $450,000 Ping-Welch's Championship in Canton, Mass.
Goetz had nine birdies and five bogeys.
Johnson, of Wales, had only one bogey and claimed a share of the lead by sinking a 10-foot birdie putt on the 18th hole.
Nine golfers, including the Hall of Famer Pat Bradley, were bunched at 69. (AP) YACHT RACING  One Boat Down in Admiral's Cup  One of the Irish boats sank yesterday, soon after the Admiral's Cup competition began off the coast of Cowes, England, and the day ended with Australia in the overall lead.
Harold Cudmore's One-Ton yacht, Jameson One, owned by the King of Norway, struck a rock and sank 20 yards from the beach a mile west of Cowes.
It was the first time a yacht has sunk during the Admiral's Cup.
Heavy seas made racing conditions tough for the 22 yachts starting the 27-mile inshore race.
The Australian crew won two of the three classes to take the overall lead with 43.25 points.
Italy was next at 36, followed by Britain with 32. (AP)


Art in Review
'An Uncommon Line'
Schmidt-Bingham Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Monday through Friday  Through Aug. 14
Not everything in "An Uncommon Line," a varied and carefully chosen show of five artists' drawings, is equally strong, but together the works create a subdued, slightly overcast mood redolent of a late-summer day in the country.


Cuba's H.I.V. Quarantine Takes Toll in Liberty
To the Editor:
"Cuba's Ills Encroach on Health" (news article, July 16) describes Cuba's sanitarium for those infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, without mentioning that the residents are there because of a compulsory quarantine policy.
Indeed, mandatory H.I.V. screening to identify the H.I.V.-infected, with forced isolation of the infected, have earned Cuba the unenviable honor of having the world's most repressive AIDS policy.


On Stage, and Off
'Kentucky' Adventure
How, exactly, do you make the commitment to produce a $2.5 million, six-hour play on Broadway by a non-brand-name author?
"You decide immediately that you're going to do it, based on your love of the work," said David G. Richenthal.
"And you say that before you get too scared by the prospect of making it, financially."
The play is "The Kentucky Cycle," the 1992 Pulitzer Prize-winning drama by Robert Schenkkan, which is to open on Nov. 14 at the Royale Theater.
The production, to be directed by Warner Shook, would set the Broadway cost record for a straight play.
"The $2.5 million sounds like a lot, but the capitalization isn't outrageous, since we're producing the equivalent of two plays with two sets," said Mr.
Richenthal, the primary producer.


Home Video
Facing Up to the Big Screen
A fresh set of statistics shows that amid much publicity about electronic delivery, home video via tape and the VCR is not only growing, but is more than holding its own against movies in theaters and on pay-per-view television.
The findings are from a new study by Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, a New York investment bank that specializes in the communications business.


Sins of the Booksellers
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Erwin Glikes, director of the Free Press, for alerting us to politically correct booksellers in Cambridge, Mass., and on the Upper West Side who don't like "The Real Anita Hill" by David Brock, his company's best seller, and fail to position it attractively close to the cash registers (news article, July 19).


Bosnia's President Is Considering New Plan for Multi-Ethnic State
Bosnia's President is considering a new plan that is intended as a compromise between the Bosnians' wish for a single, multi-ethnic state and Serbian and Croatian plans to split the country along ethnic lines.
Officials said President Alija Izetbegovic appeared unhappy today with the constitutional proposal presented by mediators here and had sought a recess in the talks until Friday.
The plan foresees three largely self-governing states combined in a weak federation called the United Republics of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Inside Art
Disney Says Thanks
These days, $100,000 Mercedes-Benz 500 SL's aren't the only presents given out in Hollywood for a job well done.
Even before Paramount Pictures gave the cars to several people connected with the hit movie "The Firm" earlier this month, Disney had bestowed a pricey gift.
But Disney likes to say thank you with art.
After the success of "Aladdin," an animated film whose revenues were reported to be $200 million, the actor Robin Williams (the voice of the genie) received a work by Picasso from Disney's chairman, Michael Eisner, and its president, Jeffrey Katzenberg.


As Mayor Learned From Crown Heights, Let Others Learn Too
To the Editor:
Richard Girgenti, New York State's criminal justice director, hopes that the Crown Heights report will serve the healing process in our city.
As clergymen who know something of healing, we believe the Mayor has aided our communal recovery through his own actions:


Special Pleaders: A periodic look at lobbying.; Lobbyists Appear Inept When They're the Issue
When they come up with just the right campaign to defeat a piece of legislation, Washington's lobbyists can bury Congress in letters and mailgrams.
They can overwhelm the White House switchboard with angry phone calls, forcing the Government to take notice.
But now that they are trying to devise a lobbying strategy on their own behalf -- to keep their tax deduction for lobbying expenses -- they seem so torn by insecurity about their own standing with Congress and the American people that they have become virtually paralyzed.


Tanana Finds He Can't Steal A Victory
Frank Tanana decided it was time for drastic measures.
He knew his stuff was good.
He knew he had a one-run lead.
He figured, though, that it was never good to take things for granted when your teammates happen to be the New York Mets.
He wanted a victory, and he figured it was about time he took things into his own hands.
And so he decided to steal.


Review/Film; Yes, Boy Meets Girl, But This Time the Girl Wields Sharp Objects
The mountain climber's school of film making tells us that Mike Myers is now a movie star because he's there.
Where he is, precisely, is at the spot where "Saturday Night Live" meets "Wayne's World," a locus that guarantees him the attention of younger audiences regardless of what he does or how funny it happens to be.
It comes as a welcome surprise that "So I Married an Axe Murderer," which might have been nothing more than a by-the-numbers star vehicle, surrounds Mr.
Myers with amusing cameos and gives him a chance to do more than just coast.
Peering out warily from beneath a boyish hair mass, Mr.
Myers plays Charlie Mackenzie, whose two salient traits are wariness about women and strong ties with his Scottish heritage.
The latter provides "So I Married an Axe Murderer" with its biggest comic bonanza, since Mr.
Myers also appears as his own father, speaking in an unintelligible accent and sometimes wearing kilts.
In his paternal role, Mr.
Myers has a way of unexpectedly bursting into Rod Stewart songs as he presides over an equally weird family.
The wonderful Brenda Fricker adds great spark to these scenes as Charlie's flirty, trivia-mad mother, even though this Oscar-winning Irish actress deserves better American film roles than she seems to be getting.


Banska Stiavnica Journal; After the Uncoupling, Slovakia Seems Unnerved
Alena Daubnerova, whose forebears stretch back generations in this traditional area of strong Slovak nationalism, represents the ambivalent streak of many Slovaks as they confront life in their new country.
Persuaded by the charisma of the man who promised both sovereignty and prosperity, she voted for Vladimir Meciar, who became Prime Minister and led Slovakia to independence on Jan. 1.


26 More Will Give Young 27 Victories in a Row
Ryan Thompson rounded third base, his feet flying as fast as he could move them, and he felt himself starting to fall.
Anthony Young was already out of the Mets' dugout, jumping in excitement, ready to celebrate the end of his losing streak.
Thompson could see him, and his body chilled for a moment with fear.


For Children
Public Library Events
Various locations
The public libraries in New York City have plenty to offer children besides books.
In fact, 17 of the Brooklyn Public Library's 58 branches are open on Saturdays this summer, as are about half of the Queens Borough Public Library branches and about a quarter of the New York Public Library branches, which are in Manhattan and the Bronx and on Staten Island.
Here is a sampling of activities going on today and tomorrow.
And all of them are free.


Israel Reinforces Its Troops in Lebanese Border Zone
Columns of armor and infantry reinforcements moved into the Israeli-controlled buffer strip in southern Lebanon today, as Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin vowed to press ahead with a huge offensive against Iranian-backed guerrillas of the Party of God.
Israeli warplanes and artillery pounded dozens of targets for the fifth straight day as diplomatic efforts intensified to arrange a cease-fire.


COMPANY NEWS
CISNEROS GROUP, a Venezuelan conglomerate, completed its $420 million acquisition of the Pueblo International Inc. supermarket chain from its parent company, Pueblo Xtra International Inc.
COCA-COLA CO., Atlanta, will build a $25 million bottling plant in Chongqing, China, with the Kerry Group, Hong Kong.


Review/Art; A 24-Hour-a-Day Show, on Gaudy, Bawdy 42d Street
It may have looked good on paper, the plan to have artists create artworks for some of the empty storefronts and theater marquees that line 42d Street between Broadway and Eighth Avenues in Manhattan.
But in reality this strange little show swerves erratically between silly and serious, amateurish and appropriate.
Organized by the 42d Street Development Project and Creative Time (a nonprofit arts group), it includes work by Jenny Holzer, Karen Finley, Glenn Ligon and the art teams of Kristin Jones and Andrew Ginzel, Elizabeth Diller and Ricardo Scofidio, and John Ahearn and Rigoberto Torres.
The 18 works in "42d Street Art Project" are on view 24 hours a day.
Most participants set out to contribute work that in some way parodies, examines or celebrates some aspect of this sordid yet vital corner of Manhattan, now on the brink of being radically changed by an urban renewal project that may or may not work.
The problem is that too many of the artists' efforts simply blend in and all but disappear.
There is definitely such a thing as being too site-specific.


Crandall's Testimony Ends
Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of American Airlines' parent, ended his testimony today in a "predatory pricing" suit brought by Northwest and Continental airlines and firmly acquitted himself of trying to crush weaker rivals.
Whether a jury in Federal District Court here will agree will not be clear at least until next week, after American Airlines wraps up its defense.


Soldier on the Front Line in the War Against AIDS; Once Resigned to Early Death, Volunteer in Drug Trial Finds Elation and Uncertainty
For Joseph W. Klene, yesterday morning began just like every other morning.
He pulverized two big round tablets in his coffee grinder, dissolved the powder in tap water and drank the concoction that he said tasted like "sweet salty chalk."
Throughout the day, he swallowed 10 other pills, all part of a daily routine that he has followed for the last two months to test an experimental three-drug treatment that was initially described as a possible breakthrough in the fight against AIDS.


CHRONICLE
LEONARD GARMENT, the lawyer who served as counsel to President Richard M. Nixon at the end of his Administration, is coming home -- for the third time.
Mr.
Garment will rejoin Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon, the New York law firm with offices in six cities in the United States, Europe and Japan.
He started his legal career in the Manhattan office, right after graduating from Brooklyn Law School, and worked there from 1955 to 1968.
Then he joined the firm the second time, from 1976 to 1980.


Market Place; A Company With Few Apparent Prospects May Prove A Winner.
THE shares of the company never recovered from a 1989 price collapse.
Its most important assets could be seized with a shift in political winds.
Its management's credibility was damaged by overly optimistic earnings projections.
And Wall Street thinks so little of the company that few analysts cover it.
So why is the Windmere Corporation starting to look like a hot investment prospect?


Review/Film; A Trailer Park and Its Offbeat Denizens
Timothy Leary plays a small role in "Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me," contributing to the sneaking suspicion that the whole film is vaguely his fault.
Without the kind of creative license that Mr.
Leary's psychedelic studies helped foster, there might not have been either Paul Morrissey's or John Waters's outrageous brands of humor.
Both those styles are strongly reflected in Joel Hershman's freewheeling, trash-filled debut feature.
According to production notes, Mr.
Hershman came up with the idea for this film (which opens today at the Village East) "when the investors' wish to make sexually charged action films for the Korean video market proved too expensive." The solution: a campy, garish quickie shot in a trailer park with a cast of camera-loving grotesques.
The possibilities for unpleasantness in such material are sizable, but Mr.
Hershman does succeed in keeping them under control.
It's a relief to note that Sean Young, dressed in spangles as a homicidal nut-case named Twinkle, is a lot more frantic than the rest of the tongue-in-cheek cast.


Israel Court Sets Demjanjuk Free, But He Is Now Without a Country
The Israeli Supreme Court's decision today to quash John Demjanjuk's conviction and death sentence left him a free man, but he will remain in Israeli custody until some nation accepts him.
Mr.
Demjanjuk was acquitted when the court ruled that there was "reasonable doubt" that he was the sadistic death camp guard known as "Ivan the Terrible," a gas chamber operator who tortured Jews and other victims on their way to execution at the Treblinka death camp in Poland during the Nazi occupation.


VICTORY NOW SEEMS IN CLINTON'S GRASP ON A SERVICE PLAN
President Clinton's national service bill tonight appeared headed for passage after three Senate Republicans abandoned their party's filibuster of the legislation and a fourth said he would join them.
Senator Bill Cohen of Maine had voted earlier today with his party when it defeated cloture, a motion to end debate, by a single vote.
But tonight he said of the Democrats, "They are going to get cloture, and I'll vote for it."


Arnold R. Fern, 40, Restaurateur and Artist
Arnold R. Fern, a restaurateur and artist, died on Tuesday at New York University Hospital.
He was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.


U.S. Review on Bosnia
The Clinton Administration proposed authorizing the use of air strikes to protect not only United Nations troops in Bosnia but also civilians and convoys.
But disagreement continued within the Administration and between the allies about how far to go in helping the Muslims.
Article, page A6.


Job Losses Easing but Labor-Market Indicators Still Lag
Though the New York metropolitan region's economy remained in the doldrums in the first half of this year, it did not lose jobs as fast as last year, according to a Federal midyear report released yesterday.
Still, the region fared badly in comparison to the rebound of labor-market indicators in most of the rest of the nation.
The lone bright spots were fat pay envelopes on Wall Street and a rebound by technological and information-service industries that moved to the outlying suburbs and prospered during the 1980's, said Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the Federal regional Labor Commissioner.


Hospital Delays Release Of a Mentally Ill Man
The release of a mentally ill man who has frightened residents of the Upper West Side for years was delayed yesterday as New York State mental health officials, who say he has been successfully treated for drug abuse and mental illness, tried to guarantee that he would have a place to live once he leaves a Queens psychiatric hospital.
The man, Larry Hogue, who was once convicted of pushing a girl into traffic, was to have been released from Creedmoor Mental Health Center yesterday to live with his grown son in Bridgeport, Conn.
Shortly before his release, however, officials learned that his son, John Shawn Sells, faced eviction.
Yesterday Mr.
Sells's landlord said he planned to evict Mr.
Sells and to sell the building.


A Cool Spot in the Heat


Missouri Governor Feels the Worst Is Yet to Come
From his office in the Capitol on a bluff above the swollen Missouri River, Gov.
Mel Carnahan pointed in the distance to the city's airport, where only the roofs of buildings peeked above the water's surface.
"The Air National Guard facility out there just went under this morning," he said of a building hard against the granite bluffs, once more than two miles from the Missouri's banks, "and we haven't even gotten the record crests that they have been predicting."


As Mayor Learned From Crown Heights, Let Others Learn Too
To the Editor:
Richard Girgenti, New York State's criminal justice director, hopes that the Crown Heights report will serve the healing process in our city.
As clergymen who know something of healing, we believe the Mayor has aided our communal recovery through his own actions:


Clerk Upgrades Record System For Nassau
The Nassau County Clerk announced today the completion of an integrated computer system that will help eliminate backlogs in recording deeds and mortgages, but lawyers and title searchers said the new system had so many errors that verifying information was taking longer than before.
The County Clerk, Doreen Banks, a Democrat, is up for re-election this fall.
She took office last year after her predecessor, Harold W. McConnell, a Republican, retired.
Mr.
McConnell, who held the office for 26 years, had begun computerizing the office's records after the County Bar Association sued it over a backlog of up to six months in entering new records.


Giants' Moore Faces Ban By N.F.L.
The National Football League has apparently reached a decision regarding Giants offensive lineman Eric Moore, and the news isn't good for the team.
According to several people close to the situation, Moore has been suspended for violating the N.F.L.'s substance abuse policy, in this case possession of anabolic steroids.
The exact number of games Moore has been suspended was unclear.
But the league's substance abuse policy states that players are prohibited from using, purchasing, possessing, selling and/or participating in the distribution of illegal drugs.
The penalty for a first-time violator is a suspension of up to four regular-season games.


TV Weekend; Words of Warning on 3 Medical Marvels
Dietary supplements, an arthritis drug and therapists who specialize in resurrecting what they call repressed memories are among the "health care hazards" under scrutiny in Sunday's peppy edition of "CNN Presents."
David Lewis goes after Nature's Sunshine Products, a big supplier of dietary supplements ($101 million a year).
Mr.
Lewis says the company and its 100,000 independent distributors are evading the spirit, if not the letter, of laws against offering medical diagnoses and peddling their concoctions as cures.


Sins of the Booksellers
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Erwin Glikes, director of the Free Press, for alerting us to politically correct booksellers in Cambridge, Mass., and on the Upper West Side who don't like "The Real Anita Hill" by David Brock, his company's best seller, and fail to position it attractively close to the cash registers (news article, July 19).


Crux of Debate On Energy Tax: $1.18 a Month
With everything riding on politics and perception, and substance amounting to little, seven Democratic Senators spent all day today and worked into the night to figure out how much they could raise the gasoline tax and still carry enough votes to pass President Clinton's deficit-reduction bill.
They got hung up over whether to require the typical driver to pay an extra $1.18 a month for gasoline.
At midafternoon, the Senators -- the Democratic conferees on the tax portion of the budget package -- decided that an increase of 6.5 cents per gallon in the 14.1-cent Federal gasoline tax did not do the trick.


Lewis's Widow Describes How He Planned His Comeback
The widow of Reggie Lewis, the late captain of the Celtics, maintained today that her husband had been in the early stages of a carefully constructed yet uncertain comeback attempt when he collapsed and died Tuesday.
Donna Harris-Lewis, in a statement read by one of Lewis's agents, Jerome Stanley, during an emotional briefing in the team's offices, said her husband was not going to take part in a vigorous workout until next week.


Sounds Around Town
Clearly the Right One
Ray Charles, Radio City Music Hall, (212) 307-7171.
Although age hasn't dimmed the emotional power of Ray Charles, the great soul singing giant who will turn 63 next month, it has changed his perspective.
On his newest album, "My World" (Warner Brothers Records), he offers a chortlingly avuncular "Still Crazy After All These Years" and a pained but loving "If I Could," a ballad that laments the impossibility of keeping your children from making mistakes.
Everything Mr.
Charles sings, from Broadway standards to soul classics, comes out sounding spontaneous and of the moment.
Show time is tonight at 8, and tickets are $30 and $35.
Watch Out!
The Kipper Kids, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 875-5050.
The Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center concludes this evening with what promises to be one of stronger programs in an uneven season.
The Kipper Kids (Martin von Haselberg and Brian Routh), both of whom call themselves Harry Kipper, play overgrown adolescents whose messy theatrical pranks elevate the food fight into a primal ritual.
Audience members in the front rows risk being splattered.
Show time is tonight at 8, and tickets are $25.


Diner's Journal
A Suburban Legend
In 1949, when Antoine Gilly opened La Cremaillere in Banksville, a hamlet in Westchester near Greenwich, Conn., it was one of the first European-style country restaurants in the New York City area.
In its heyday, in the 1950's and 60's, it was often necessary to book reservations weeks in advance.
By the 1970's, its reputation had begun to dim and it finally closed in February.
Now, Robert Olivier Meyzen has bought it from his father, Robert Meyzen, who had owned it since 1962.
Matthew Tivy, whose resume includes QV, Canal Bar and Man Ray in Manhattan and the Maidstone Arms in East Hampton, L.I., will be in charge of the kitchen, with a mandate to create a decidedly French menu that emphasizes fresh ingredients.
La Cremaillere has 90 seats, a small private dining room and a wine cellar with 12,500 bottles dating back to 1865.


The Floods' Environmental Legacy: Mankind's Bane Is Wildlife's Boon
For weeks it was all that state and Federal officials here in the Upper Mississippi Basin could do to cope with the vast destruction and hardship wrought by the great floods of 1993.
It is only now, with the water in large stretches of this region receding, that they are beginning to turn full attention to the environmental aftereffects.
What they are finding is that the danger of tetanus, toxic contamination and disease-carrying mosquitoes does not seem particularly severe at this point, although it may pose some threat to the people of the Midwest for quite a while.


Review/Photography; Poverty Among America's Children
Many of the scenes Stephen Shames depicts in "Outside the Dream: Child Poverty in America," his powerful documentary study now at the International Center of Photography, are depressingly familiar: the 12-year-old boy in Houston who accidentally shot and killed his playmate during an argument; the hollow-eyed 14-year-old girl in Chicago who sits in a rundown room, her baby on her lap; the 15-year-old boy shooting up with heroin on a Bronx rooftop.
Children like these have become staple characters in an unending stream of horrific news articles presented on television and in newspapers and magazines.
The pictures here also record other effects of poverty, ones that are less dramatic but in the long run as destructive.
Many of these situations, too, recall the headlines of the last decade, whether it is the story of the brothers, 11 and 13 years old, who sleep in the family car in Ventura, Calif., or of the mother and her six children forced to live in a decrepit hotel for the homeless in Brooklyn.


Art in Review
'The Final Frontier'
New Museum for Contemporary Art  583 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Wednesday through Sunday  Through Aug. 15
This exhibition exemplifies what seems to have become the New Museum's house style: a display of rather antiseptic, Conceptual-based artworks organized around a theme that is top-heavy with theory.
"This exhibition presents the body as a contested site whose borders are increasingly being reconfigured by technology," intones a brochure available at the show.


Review/Film; Humiliation As a Gauge Of Identity
It is sadly appropriate that the message of Ryu Murakami's film "Tokyo Decadence" should be voiced by a professional dominatrix.
High on cocaine in her luxurious Tokyo apartment, Saki (Sayoko Amano), an experienced prostitute, explains to Ai (Miho Nikaido), a relative novice to the profession, the reason so many Japanese businessmen are masochists.
They may have wealth, she asserts, but it is "wealth without pride."
The equation of sexual humiliation with a lack of self-respect is the grotesquely overstated premise that drives the movie, which Mr.
Murakami adapted from his novel "Topaz." The film, which opens today at the Cinema Village, follows in graphic detail the professional assignations of Ai, a Tokyo call girl who works for an agency that specializes in sadomasochism.


XEROX CORP. (N)
The Xerox Corporation reported yesterday that its earnings dropped 10 percent in the second quarter, making good on a warning in May that slow economies and a reorganization of its sales force would cut into profits.
In fact, net income of $112 million, or 96 cents a share, was worse than the consensus expectations of industry analysts, who predicted a profit of $1.02 a share.


Lemieux Has Surgery
MARIO LEMIEUX, bothered by recurring back pain this past season, had surgery yesterday to repair a muscle hernia in his lower back.
No complications were reported after the 35-minute operation, which allowed doctors to examine the lumbar region of the Pittsburgh Penguins star center's back where a disk was repaired in a 1990 operation.


W.B.C. Title Bout Shifted to Dublin


Cuomo Veto Spares Trees at Expense of Billboard Views
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vetoed legislation today that would have allowed owners of roadside billboards to ask the state to chop down trees that obscured their signs.
In rejecting the legislation, dubbed the "killer tree bill" by its opponents, Mr.
Cuomo said it ran counter to the state's efforts to beautify its roadways, which include spending $2 million each year on planting trees along highways.


U.S. Weighs Wider Role For Bosnian Air Strikes
As discussions with the allies about possible air strikes on Bosnia continue, the United States has proposed expanding them beyond protecting United Nations peacekeepers to safeguarding Muslim civilians and relief convoys as well, Administration officials said today.
While the Administration has contemplated broad military intervention in the former Yugoslavia before, the new discussions, with their broader context, reflect an important change and a new urgency.
Disagreement continued within the Administration and among the allies, however, about how far to go in assisting the Muslims.


Bonn's Rate Stance Is Blow to Currency Union
The foundations of European monetary union seemed gravely threatened today after Germany's central bank left a key interest rate unchanged, deciding that defending the mark from domestic inflation was more pressing than trying to help ease the recession in France.
Since France and Germany, the European Community's two strongest economic powers, had hoped to firmly establish the monetary union by the end of the century, it had been expected in Paris and elsewhere that the political importance of the two countries' alliance would outweigh parochial concerns about whether German inflation rose by a fraction.


Review/Film: Rising Sun; A Tale of Zen And Xenophobia In Los Angeles
THE opening sequence of "Rising Sun," Philip Kaufman's glitzy adaptation of Michael Crichton's best-selling mystery novel, establishes the movie's tone, method and manner.
There is first a series of grainy, definitely not high-definition television images from a sing-along music video: shots of wide-open Western spaces and, at the bottom of the screen, looking like subtitles, the lyrics of "Don't Fence Me In." Someone sings along offscreen.
Among other things, the singer wants land, lots of land, and a starry sky above.


Ginsburg's Nomination Approved


U.S. Aide Says Pilots Erred In Firing at Iraqi Radar Sites
Hours after American warplanes fired missiles at Iraqi antiaircraft batteries today, an Administration official said the pilots had been mistaken in thinking the Iraqis were preparing to shoot.
The official said another crew, in a similar incident on Sunday, also thought they were being shot at.


Where Sharks Face Off With Gentler Souls
WE, the people, stand in darkness.
They, the sharks, circle tirelessly in the eerily lighted water.
We are separated by three inches of glass and an ocean of cognition.
The animals' jaws never stop opening and closing.
Their hundreds of teeth are big, and as sharp as razor blades.
Their restless, unceasing purposefulness is unnerving.


QVC Plans New Channel
QVC, the home-shopping channel, said yesterday that it would start Q2, a new shopping service replacing the Fashion Channel.
Candice M. Carpenter, former head of Time-Life Television and video, will be president of the new channel, which is aimed at viewers with more money to spend than people who watch QVC's larger service.


10 Candidates on Short List for New York Schools Chancellor
Meeting behind closed doors as it resumed its lagging search for a new leader for the largest public school system in the country, the New York City Board of Education yesterday narrowed its list of candidates to about 10 names.
Among them are the two remaining finalists from the previous search, as well as an assistant secretary in the Federal Education Department and school superintendents in Washington, Baltimore and Detroit.


Notes by Suicide Withheld a Day by White House
The White House waited for about 30 hours before giving Federal investigators the scraps of a torn-up note found on Monday in the briefcase of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel who committed suicide on July 20.
Officials said the White House turned over the note to Park Police after an internal debate, involving senior staff members and eventually Attorney General Janet Reno, produced a consensus that the note should be turned over to investigators.
A senior White House official insisted that there was never any doubt that the note would be turned over, "the only question was what was proper," in terms of notifying the Foster family first and the President.


TV Listings
On Fridays, television and radio news and listings now appear at the end of section D, with Home Video.
Today, pages D15-16.


Taking the Plunge Into Dance


Major Dealt Another Blow as Tories Lose Seat
In a vote that was widely seen as a referendum on Prime Minister John Major's performance, the Conservative Government suffered a crushing defeat on Thursday in a race for a vacant seat in Parliament.
With the Government's approval rating having fallen sharply in opinion polls and with Mr.
Major bouncing from crisis to crisis, the defeat of the Conservative candidate in the town of Christchurch on the south coast was no surprise.
But the huge margin of defeat in a district that had been held by the Tories since 1910 was larger than expected and seemed certain to weaken Mr.
Major's political standing at a time when members of his own party have begun discussing whether he should be replaced.


No Headline
"We do not know how these statements came into the world and who gave birth to them, but we admitted them by the most lenient application of the law and procedure. And when they came before us, doubt began to gnaw at our judicial conscience; perhaps the appellant was not Ivan the Terrible of Treblinka." -- THE ISRAELI SUPREME COURT.  [ A8:3. ]


Bridge
Highly ranked teams went down to defeat Wednesday night in both major championships at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
In a stunning upset in the Spingold Teams, the group of Ronald Rubin of North Miami Beach, Fla., Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif., and Bob Levin of Orlando, Fla., who won the title a year ago, won the international playoffs in Memphis last month and will shortly represent the United States in the world championships in Chile, lost by 24 imps.
Their conquerors were Jim Looby of Burbank, Calif., Michael Tierney of Jacksonville, Fla.
Ron Feldman of Redondo Beach, Calif., David Siebert of Las Vegas, Nev., and Alan Le Bendig of Los Angeles.


ITT Registers a Big Jump In Second-Quarter Profits
The ITT Corporation, whose businesses range from auto products to hotels and insurance, yesterday reported that second-quarter earnings more than doubled.
Industry analysts said the results were better than expected, reflecting cost-cutting and improved profit margins in the company's insurance and finance units because of low interest rates.
About 55 percent of ITT's operating profit came from these two segments.


NBC's Sand Castles Have Moats of Money
A 30-foot high inflatable Miller Lite bottle sways in the wind on Belmar Beach, N.J.
Ten thousand fans in sun-worshipping regalia pack the grandstand.
On all four sides of the sand court, Coca-Cola, Evian, Miller Lite and Old Spice ads quietly rotate.
The official Spalding ball is smashed back and forth.
On the court,Tim Hovland and Bruk Vandeweghe (Kiki's brother) try to hold off a comeback by Sinjin Smith and Ricci Luyties.
This is pro beach volleyball, the AVP/Miller Lite Tour, specifically, a fascinating amalgam of sport and commerce, of sunny days and the California life style, of sheer athleticism and, well, great sinewy beach bods.


PROSECUTION HURT IN BANKING TRIAL
A New York State Supreme Court judge yesterday dismissed half of the eight charges, including an important bribery count, in the Manhattan District Attorney's criminal indictment of Robert A. Altman.
The decision was a serious setback for prosecutors trying to prove that he helped the Bank of Credit and Commerce International illegally gain secret control of a Washington bank.
Although the decision by the judge, John A. K. Bradley, to throw out the bribery charge is a blow to the prosecution, Mr.
Altman still faces charges that he participated in a scheme to defraud banking regulators by hiding the identity of the buyer of First American Bancshares Inc. in 1981, which at the time was the largest bank in Washington.


H.M.O. Pained
Health maintenance organizations like the Foundation Health Corporation have drawn investors looking for havens from health care reform.
But on Wednesday, Foundation lost business thanks to the Government, too, losing a Defense Department contract to an Aetna Life and Casualty unit.
Yesterday, Foundation shares plunged.


How to Make Donations To Help Flood Victims
Several American charities have established special funds and sent disaster teams to the Midwest.
Here is a list of organizations seeking donations:
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256. (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


Topics of The Times; Japan Speaks
A thousand Americans have flown from New York City to Tokyo in the last 10 days for a year of teaching English in Japanese classrooms.
They are enrolled in a Japanese Government exchange program established six years ago.
So far it has recruited more than 10,000 foreigners -- about half Americans -- to teach foreign tongues to Japanese students.
Altogether there are more than 1,700 Americans in this year's contingent -- 1,019 new to the program and 735 repeaters from last year.
For the most part they are recent college graduates, not professional teachers.
Living expenses are covered by a monthly stipend.


JURY SAYS ATARI INFRINGED NINTENDO SYSTEM
A Federal jury in San Francisco decided yesterday that the Atari Games Corporation had infringed a patent for a security system built into Nintendo of America games.
But the jury rejected a claim by Nintendo that Atari had infringed its packaging trademarks.


Publisher of 'Last Brother' to Wait and See
After enduring a month of highly unflattering publicity about Joe McGinniss's "Last Brother," and in the last few days uniformally bad reviews, Simon &amp; Schuster, the book's publisher, has adopted a wait-and-see attitude about whether or not to send Mr.
McGinniss on a previously scheduled 10-city author's tour.
And NBC said yesterday that it had not decided whether to go ahead with its planned mini-series of the book.
The Literary Guild said, however, that it still planned to offer the book as a "super alternate" to its three million book club members.
Arlene Friedman, the guild's editorial director, said "I think the book is wonderful."


Coleman Expresses Regret Over Incident
It was another day of damage control at Shea Stadium, one full of official statements, apologies, promises of investigations and more waiting as California authorities continued their inquiry into last Saturday's firecracker incident at Dodger Stadium.
Vince Coleman, although never specifically saying, "I'm sorry," read a prepared statement in front of television cameras and reporters in which he termed his actions in last Saturday's firecracker incident "very inappropriate." It was Coleman's first public comment since three people were injured in Los Angeles after the left fielder for the Mets threw a firecracker in a parking lot.


TV Weekend; Noir for 90's Made From Spice Old Ingredients
You want film noir?
Showtime is dishing out great gobs of the stuff in "Fallen Angels," a six-part anthology making its debut on Sunday at 10 P.M.
Rarely have so many detective fedoras and cigarette butts been stuffed into a single series.
Big names abound, both in front of and behind the camera.
The producers are Mirage Enterprises, run by the director Sydney Pollack ("Out of Africa," "The Firm"), and Propaganda Films.
The directors include Steven Soderbergh ("Sex, Lies and Videotape") and the actors Tom Hanks and Tom Cruise.
Topping the cast lineups are Gary Oldman, Isabella Rossellini, Laura Dern, Peter Gallagher and Joe Mantegna.
Pains have clearly been taken.
The upshot: uneven but diverting, even when just hovering around film-school level.


Officials Hoping to Lift Tap-Water Alert Today
New York City officials hope that today they will be able to tell people in two areas of Manhattan, Greenwich Village-Chelsea and the area around the South Street Seaport, that their tap water is again fit to drink.
But after other tests are completed, it is possible that residents of Little Neck, Queens, and the Morris Park section of the Bronx will have to start boiling their water, officials said.
As city workers in Manhattan flushed water mains and injected bleach into suspect pipes under the streets, laboratory technicians, processing the scores of samples that are routinely gathered every day from around the city, counted worrisome numbers of bacteria colonies in two from Queens and one from the Bronx.
Those findings prompted a second round of samples, which the technicians will analyze today and should tell them how serious the problem is. 2d Day's Results
Behind that mixed message is a complicated set of Federal rules for determining when people should be warned about bacteria, which are always present in the water in trace amounts, and when such warnings can be ended.
For reasons that no one can explain, the coliform bacteria multiplied in the two Manhattan areas in the last week but are declining again.


The Spoken Word
EXPLORING THE BROOKLYN MUSEUM, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"Highlights of American Paintings," by Diana Linden, today at 2 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Abject Art: Repulsion and Desire in American Art," tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "In the Spirit of Fluxus," tomorrow at 3:30 P.M.; "Hand Painted Pop," Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
All of the talks will be given by Marisa Kayyem.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


If You Can't Run for Health, A Walk Will Do, U.S. Says
Does jogging seem like too much trouble?
Is it hard to find time to get to the swimming pool or racquetball court?
If so, the Government has a new piece of advice: find a way to work a little moderate exercise into your everyday routine.
In a shift from earlier recommendations that emphasized vigorous, formal exercise as a prescription for health, Government and private health experts today cited the benefits of less strenuous activities, like brisk walking or taking stairs instead of elevators.


2 Challengers Put Holtzman on the Defensive in Debate
In the first debate in the New York City comptroller's race, the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, found herself on the defensive, fending off criticism from her two challengers about allegations that she helped a bank get city business in return for a campaign loan.
Ms.
Holtzman and her challengers, Alan G. Hevesi and Herman Badillo, spent much of the hourlong debate at a midtown Y.W.C.A. telling people about their accomplishments and sounding the themes that will shape their campaigns.


Natural vs. Adoptive: A Girl Tests the Limits
Kimberly Mays takes her case to court next week, seeking to sever all ties to her biological parents and remain with the man who has reared her since she was switched at birth with another girl in a Florida hospital.
Nearly five years after the error was discovered, Kimberly, now 14, has asked Judge Stephen Dakan of State Circuit Court in Sarasota to rule that visiting rights need not be granted to her natural parents, Ernest and Regina Twigg of Sebring in central Florida.
She says she was inspired to seek the court order by another Florida case, in which a boy called Gregory K. won a legal separation from his natural parents last year after they abandoned him and his mother sought to get him back.


Sears Will Begin Accepting Major Credit Cards
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that on Sunday its stores would begin accepting Visa, Mastercard and American Express cards for purchases, ending its policy of accepting only its own card or the Discover card.
"It's a win for us and it's a win for our customers," Arthur C. Martinez, chairman and chief executive of the Sears merchandising group, said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"It's more convenient for customers, and we also believe it will attract new customers to our stores."


Police Say Hunt for Bodies Is Futile in Serial-Killing Case
Acknowledging that they had reached an impasse in their search for the bodies of 4 of the 18 women Joel Rifkin is believed to have murdered, state police officials said today that their identities may never be learned unless investigators get a second chance to interview Mr.
Rifkin.
Col.
Wayne Bennett, who heads the state police Bureau of Criminal Investigation, said in an interview that investigators had exhausted virtually all their leads in pursuit of the identities of the four.
He said the lack of concrete evidence has made any further searches for bodies futile.


Editors' Note
The Advertising column in Business Day on July 22 reported figures from Simmons Market Research Bureau showing that The New Yorker was attracting a larger audience.
The account quoted a readership figure -- the number of people who read one copy of the magazine -- of more than 2.8 million, an increase of 13 percent from the previous year.


Daily News Selects Ally &amp; Gargano
The Daily News said yesterday that it had named Ally &amp; Gargano in New York to develop a campaign, to begin after Labor Day, to raise the newspaper's citywide circulation as well as promote the sections for Brooklyn, the Bronx and Queens.
The newspaper's account, recently inactive, was last handled by Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG after that agency absorbed Della Femina, McNamee Inc.
Billings were not disclosed.


INSIDE
Doubt on Iraqi Provocations
An Administration official said American pilots had mistakenly fired at Iraqi missile batteries, thinking Iraqis were going to shoot.
Page A2.
Germany Holds Line on Rates
Germany's central bank failed to cut its chief interest rate, defending the mark from inflation but threatening European monetary union.
Page D1.
Modest Growth in Economy
The economy's growth rate climbed modestly to 1.6 percent in the second quarter, but the increase was below most expectations.
Page D1.
Concern on New York Water
Water mains in Manhattan were flushed, but bacteria were found in other areas of the city.
Page B1.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  JAPAN NAMES COALITION LEADER  In being chosen to lead a coalition of opposition parties, a 55-year-old populist who wants to reduce the Government's economic role is to be Japan's first non-Liberal Democratic Prime Minister in 38 years.
A1  IN TOKYO, A FIERY REFORMER  Morihiro Hosokawa said the old ruling party had grown out of touch with the rest of the world.
A1


Lauren Ackerman, 88, Professor And an Author of Medical Texts
Prof.
Lauren V. Ackerman, a cancer pathologist whose textbooks guided a generation of physicians and teachers, died on Tuesday at the Health Sciences Center of State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I.
He was 88 and lived in Setauket, L.I.
The cause was cancer, said Prof.
Juan Rosai, an associate and former student of Mr.
Ackerman's who is now chairman of the department of pathology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.


DISNEY (WALT) CO. (N)
Despite a $30.9 million loss from its Euro Disney theme park, the Walt Disney Company said yesterday that its net income in the most recent quarter jumped 17 percent.
The profit of 48 cents a share was slightly better than many analysts' predictions.
Nevertheless, the company's stock fell $1.125 yesterday, to $38.625, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said there was little news in Disney's third-quarter report to disappoint investors and attributed the drop to profit taking after the stock's rise of roughly 10 percent in the last week.


Officials Say Bomb Plotter Tried to Flee
Only days after fleeing from a Queens garage at which explosives were being mixed, the latest defendant in the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets arranged to obtain a gun and sought a passport to leave the country, Government lawyers said in court yesterday.
But during a bail hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan, a lawyer for the defendant, Matarawy Mohammed Saleh, disputed the prosecutor's portrayal of his client, saying that Mr.
Saleh was not part of what the Government has called a plot to bomb the United Nations, F.B.I. offices at 26 Federal Plaza and two Hudson River tunnels.
He later said the accounts of the gun and passport were untrue.
A Secret Videotaping
The lawyer, Louis M. Freeman, gave a detailed account of video footage secretly taken in the Queens garage by Federal agents.
He said the videotape showed that Mr.
Saleh, a 37-year-old Egyptian immigrant, was in the garage for only 20 minutes, during which time he was held captive by the others and looked "so uncomfortable at one point that he is sweating, mopping his brow."


Another Auto Account, This One for the Korean Car Maker Kia, Goes to an Untraditional Agency.
FOR the second time this week, an automotive "bridesmaid" agency finally caught a bouquet.
Kia Motors America, the United States arm of South Korea's Kia Motors Corporation, said yesterday that it had awarded the assignment to introduce its subcompact cars and sport-utility vehicles in this country to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising of San Francisco.
Kia estimated billings at $30 million.


Art in Review
Elyn Zimmerman
Gagosian Gallery  136 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Monday through Friday  Through Sept. 11
Elyn Zimmerman's art does not suffer garages gladly, even those as well-proportioned and sleek as the Gagosian Gallery.
Her blocky fountains and basins, whose opposing geometric forms and contrasting tones and textures of granite are indebted to the work of Scott Burton, would seem to require woodland settings or glamorous corporate plazas to look at all distinctive.
Here they look merely generic, almost anonymous, although closer examination reveals a sound sense of proportion and an eye for detail, particularly in the stepped and gridded base of "Font."


Topics of The Times; Anthony Young Sheds the Monkey
When Eddie Murray drove in the winning run at Shea Stadium on Wednesday night, giving the Mets a 5-4 victory and ending Anthony Young's infamous 27-game losing streak, one's immediate reaction was there might be hope for all those Midwesterners cursed by endless rainfall.
If Mr.
Young's seemingly interminable siege of bad luck could end, so could anybody's.
Sometimes he pitched poorly and sometimes, when he pitched well, a hellish conspiracy of bad bounces, cheap hits, poor fielding and flagrant nonsupport from his teammates did the job.
Whatever the reasons, he produced the longest losing streak in major league history, lasting 465 miserable days and stretching across 81 appearances and two seasons.
He bore his adversity with dignity, though it weighed heavily on his back and soul.
"It wasn't a monkey," Mr.
Young said.
"It was a zoo."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Associates Corp. of North America., Dallas, a unit of the Ford Motor Co., is offering $300 million of 4.75 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.892 to yield 4.79 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Topics of The Times; Not Quite the Rose Garden
Richard Keil, an investigative reporter for The Associated Press in Washington, recently investigated the possibility of getting married in, of all places, the Richard Nixon Library.
He had read in "Nixonland," the library's official newsletter, that "the actual gazebo used during Tricia Nixon's and Edward Cox's White House Rose Garden wedding" is now on the library grounds in Yorba Linda, Calif., President Nixon's hometown.
Upon probing deeper, he learned that more than 50 couples have tied the knot there since the library opened in 1991, and that receptions and wedding ceremonies are $750 apiece ($1,000 as a package) plus $2.95 per guest.
The guest fee is based on the group rate for a museum tour, which sounds less romantic than smooching in the gazebo.


COMPANY REPORTS;
Benefiting from improved efficiency in auto making and a strong performance from its nonautomotive subsidiaries, the General Motors Corporation today posted an $889 million profit in the second quarter.
The profit compared with a loss of $703 million in the period a year earlier.
The earnings were within the range projected by analysts, and G.M. stock rose 50 cents a share, to $47.50.


Books of The Times; McMurtry's Cowboys Ride Off Into the New West
Streets of Laredo
By Larry McMurtry
589 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
It's been eight years since Larry McMurtry published "Lonesome Dove," his masterly epic about the Old West; and for the surviving characters of that novel, even more time has passed.
"Streets of Laredo," his affecting sequel to "Lonesome Dove," takes place some 20 years after the death of Gus McCrae and nearly a light-year later in terms of the settling of the frontier.
The Indian battles are pretty much over now, and the railroads have brought settlers and the veneer of civilization to the Old West.


Nine Wayward Democrats
The White House and Congressional conferees are desperately groping for a budget compromise that would split the difference between the House- and Senate-passed versions but still cut deficits by almost $500 billion over five years.
But the job has been made excruciatingly difficult by nine Senate Democrats.
The Senate passed its original version on Vice President Al Gore's tie-breaking vote.
Because no Republicans voted yes then or are expected to vote yes now, the matter lies with nine Democrats: the six who voted no the first time around and three who now threaten to reject any compromise.
The nine have different motives.
But none provide a reason that justifies holding the package ransom.


3 Youths Are Arrested in Assault at Public Pool
Three youths were arrested at a municipal swimming pool in Brooklyn yesterday and accused of touching a 12-year-old girl sexually and trying to strip off her swimsuit.
It was the latest in a series of similar incidents at New York City pools that have prompted denunciations and crackdowns by city officials.
The boys -- Brooklyn residents who are 12, 13 and 14 years old, whose names were not released because of their ages -- were seized by police officers at the Betsy Head Pool at Hopkinson and Livonia Avenues in Brownsville about 2:40 P.M. and were charged with sexual abuse, a misdemeanor, said Detective Ralph St.
Just, a police spokesman.


For These Yankees, The Babe Hits 6th
The numbers are dizzying and even difficult to fathom.
The Yankees were expected to field a productive lineup in their quest for the American League East crown, but their hitters have been much more potent than anyone anticipated, and that is why August is almost here and the Yankees have not wilted.
Maybe if the best offense in baseball ushers them along, the Yankees will remain in this race until the end.
The Yankee players mention confidence and togetherness as reasons why they feel they will not shy away from the Blue Jays, Orioles and Red Sox in the next two months.
Those intangibles will be pivotal to any Yankee success story, but tangible elements such as continuing to lead the major leagues in batting average and home runs will be even more critical.
They help win 12-7 games and help teams with occasionally erratic pitching, like the Yankees, win 58 of their first 103 games and stay within a sniff of first place.


Sports of The Times; Tarp Time For Entire Mets Team
THE tarp.
Where is the tarp when we really need it?
I am referring to the Busch Stadium tarp that nearly swallowed up Vince Coleman before a playoff game in 1985.
What if that tarp and its mechanical roller, having injured Coleman's leg, had acquired a taste for ballplayers, the way Captain Hook's crocodile kept salivating for the rest of him?


Stakes High in Apple's Bet on PC
In high-tech country this week, the favorite topic around the water coolers and Stairmasters is whether Apple Computer Inc. has a hit product or a flop in its hand-held Newton Messagepad computer.
First announced 17 months ago, with its debut set for a computer trade show in Boston on Monday, the Newton has generated a flurry of opinions on whether Apple has produced the next equivalent of the cellular phone for mobile workers.
The machine, which fits in the palm of the hand, is designed to read handwriting, serve as a digital appointment book and use radio waves to send and receive faxes and electronic mail.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption yesterday about prisoners who helped townspeople fight the flooding in Illinois misidentified the affected community in some copies.
It was Hillview; it is in the district of Hartwell.


Italy Mourns the Deaths of Bomb Victims


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about insurance reimbursement for an alternative cardiac-recovery plan referred incorrectly to a researcher who questions whether adherence to a low-fat diet is feasible, and misstated his title.
He is Adam Drewnowski, director of the Human Nutrition Program at the University of Michigan's School of Public Health.


As Mayor Learned From Crown Heights, Let Others Learn Too; A Preventable Death
To the Editor:
Richard Girgenti's Report to the Governor on the Disturbances in Crown Heights, as you note in "Crown Heights: Shared Failure" (editorial, July 21), emphasized the failures of the Dinkins administration, the Police Department and the ineptitude of the Brooklyn District Attorney.


Review/Music; Exultation Sinks Two Hoary Canards
One of Hugo Wolf's pithiest criticisms of Brahms, that he could not exult, might also have been leveled at the New York Philharmonic a few years ago.
The orchestra could play raucously, to be sure, and with childish exuberance, but seldom with focused energy, let alone cohesive abandon.
Wolf was wrong, of course.
If proof were still needed, Kurt Masur and the Philharmonic provided it on Wednesday evening with a rousing performance of the "Academic Festival Overture," to open the third and final program in their Schumann-Brahms series at Carnegie Hall.
And they cinched the case with the Hungarian Dance No. 1, played as an encore.





Cuba's H.I.V. Quarantine Takes Toll in Liberty; Medicine From U.S.
To the Editor:
"Cuba's Ills Encroach on Health" (news article, July 16) errs in reporting that United States laws, "recently tightened through new legislation . . . prohibit trade with Cuba by American companies and their subsidiaries, even in medicines." Recent changes in United States laws have greatly expanded the ability of United States companies to sell medicines in Cuba.


Can Our Businesses Pass Rights Test?
To the Editor:
In "Cash Incentives for Human Rights" (Op-Ed, July 23), Jonathan F. Fanton, chairman of Helsinki Watch, the human rights monitoring group, raises ethical questions that Western businesses could usefully ask before making deals in former Soviet lands.


Iran Helps Finance U.S., Not Vice Versa
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal makes much in "The U.S.-Iran Oil Scam"(column, July 16) of United States oil companies that trade in Iranian petroleum overseas, though American law does not permit them to import it into the United States.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SHE LOVES ME," Roundabout Theater at Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of the 1963 musical, based on the play "Parfumerie," by Miklos Laszlo.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $60.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"She Loves Me" is to reopen in previews at the Brooks Atkinson Theater on Sept. 28.
"DANCES FOR WAVE HILL," Wave Hill, Independence Avenue at West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Closes tomorrow.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $4; $2 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 549-2055.


Murray Is Released
United States Soccer has released BRUCE MURRAY from the United States National Team to allow him to pursue a professional career in Europe.
Murray, 27 years old, is the United States' all-time leader in appearances and goals, with 92 and 21, respectively.


Woman Convicted of Fraud In Efforts to Find Adoptees
In a case that highlights the bitter debate over adopted children's efforts to find their birth parents -- and vice versa -- a Florida woman who made a business of such searches was convicted yesterday on Federal charges of fraud and conspiracy for illegally obtaining confidential Government information.
Sandra Musser of Cape Coral, Fla., who asserts that her Musser Foundation reunited about 500 adopted children with their birth parents, was found guilty of conspiring with a Cleveland researcher to win access to confidential Social Security and medical records by using various ruses.


Woman Arrested in a Bail-Fraud Scheme
A group described by police as shake-down artists extorted $20,000 from families by posing as police officers and asking them to wire bail money quickly to release the families' relatives from jail, the police said.
One person has been arrested, they said.
The scheme -- which was operated by as many as three people and victimized 22 families in New York City -- apparently preyed on the victims' lack of familiarity with the legal system and the panic stirred in them by the telephone call with news of the arrests, the police said.


Florio and Insurer Battle Over Hint of Soaring Rate
Gov.
Jim Florio and Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey today accused each other of playing politics over reports that the company plans to raise insurance fees for its 200,000 individual subscribers as much as 30 percent.
Everyone had been expecting the state's largest insurer to raise its rates because of a new law that took away a subsidy that had totaled about $80 million last year.


Correction: Tenneco Operating Profit Rises
Tenneco Inc.'s stock continued to rebound yesterday after a sharp sell off on Tuesday, the same day that the company released its second-quarter earnings.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Tenneco's shares rose 50 cents to close at $49.625, following up a $1.125 gain the day before.
The two-day rebound offset much of the $2.50 drop on Tuesday.


76ers Clean House
The Philadelphia 76ers renounced their rights to six veterans and put a seventh on waivers Wednesday, the same day they signed their No. 1 draft choice, 7-foot-6-inch center SHAWN BRADLEY, to a multiyear contract.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Germany's central bank chose not to cut a key interest rate, as had been expected, opting to concentrate instead on defending the mark from inflation.
The move was seen as threatening European monetary union, and it prompted central-bank intervention to prop up the sagging franc's value.  [ Page D1. ]  Gold and silver prices soared to their highest levels in three years.  [ D14. ]
Stock prices climbed, lifted by a bond rally.
The Dow industrials gained 13.97 points, to 3,567.42, just shy of a record.  [ D4. ]  Treasury prices rose sharply and yields fell.
The yield on the 30-year bond dropped to 6.56 percent, near a 16-year low.  [ D12. ]


Brazil Mints 4th Currency, And Waits
With hyperinflation causing zeros to clog calculators and spill off checks, Brazilians will lop three of those zeros off their money Sunday and adopt their fourth currency in seven years.
The new version is to be called the cruzeiro real.
But with an initial exchange value just above one cent, the new currency is not expected to be any more "real" than its predecessors.


Sounds Around Town
A Big, Big Sound
Big Jay McNeely and Big Joe Houston, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Two of the bigger saxophonist stars of the 1950's, Big Jay McNeely and Big Joe Houston will get up on stage and honk and shout and make lots of noise this weekend.
It's generally forgotten that the saxophone was the guitar of that era, a rude instrument used to get people excited.
This show will recall an age long gone, when instrumentalists shared Apollo bills with jazz groups and singers and rhythm-and-blues stars.
History will be walking the bar.
Incredibly, the show is free.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Mix and Match
Marc Ribot, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
Marc Ribot, one of the downtown scene's better composers, likes to mangle the familiar and to mash genres.
He's a guitarist and a composer who is interested in classical music as well as pop, and in everything that comes in between.
It's salad music, all jumbled up.
Shows are at 9 P.M. and midnight; tickets are $10.
Funky, Funny Blues
Big Jack Johnson, Louisiana Community Bar and Grill, 622 Broadway, between Bleecker and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village, (212) 460-9633.
Big Jack Johnson is a fine, funky blues guitarist from Mississippi.
He writes funny songs, and plays brutal improvisations that can go on and on, without needing to stop.
This is a rare engagement, at the right price.
It's free.
The show tonight is at 9.


Paul A. Conley, 80, A Retired Chairman Of Wall Street Firm
Paul A. Conley, the retired chairman of a Wall Street investment firm, died yesterday at home in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
He was 80.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Oregon Lawmakers Ban Local Votes on Gay Bias
Last month two towns and four counties in Oregon voted overwhelmingly to prohibit local ordinances protecting homosexuals from discrimination.
But now the Oregon Legislature has passed a measure that would overturn those votes.
The bill, passed by the State Senate today and expected to be signed by Gov.
Barbara Roberts, a Democrat, would grant citizens the authority to bring legal action against local governments if they believe discriminatory measures are being enforced, and provide that legal fees be granted by the court "to a plaintiff who prevails."


Dan Dowling Political Cartoonist, 87
Dan Dowling, a longtime political cartoonist for The New York Herald Tribune, The Omaha World Herald and The Kansas City Star, died on Tuesday at Crestwood Convalescant Hospital in Monterey, Calif.
He was 87 and lived in Carmel-by-the-Sea, Calif.
His daughter, Blair Dowling Trimble, said the cause was congestive heart failure.


Herbal Wraps in a Land of Plaster Goddesses
THERE is no accounting for taste. Particularly one's own.
This bittersweet revelation came to me unexpectedly while walking along the beach at Gurney's Inn Resort and Spa in Montauk, L.I.
Experience told me that Gurney's, a splendid pile of a resort constructed like an ocean liner, wasn't my kind of place.
But love is unpredictable.


Chinese Gets 10 Years for Giving Data to Foreigner
In a harsh warning against sharing official information with foreigners, the Government has sentenced a former Foreign Ministry employee to 10 years in prison for providing documents to a reporter for The Washington Post.
The Beijing Intermediate People's Court confirmed this week that it had given Bai Weiji a 10-year sentence "for the crime of illegally providing national secrets to a foreigner." It said it had sentenced Mr.
Bai's wife, Zhao Lei, to six years for the same crime.


If Jet Allows a Sack, Mom Will Be Mad
There are six boys in the Willig family.
And the younger you go, the bigger they get.
The youngest two, Greg and Matt, were football standouts at St.
Paul High School in Sante Fe Springs, Calif., like their brothers.
And because of their size, it seemed they had an outside chance of playing in the National Football League.
So, it wasn't a complete surprise when they signed free-agent contracts to play in the league.
However, no one in the Willig household expected that they would wind up on the same N.F.L. team, but here they both are with the Jets.


Medco Chief Began Early In Mergers
Martin J. Wygod, who sold his mail-order and discount drug company to Merck &amp; Company on Wednesday for $6 billion, has always liked mergers and stock swaps.
With partners who are still with him, he started a brokerage firm 30 years ago, when he was 23 years old, and merged it with a publicly owned insurance company by the time he was 28.
That was a novel move back in 1968, he recalled yesterday.
The New York Stock Exchange directors did not approve.
"They took our seats away," he said, and that led him to go into investment banking.


Fencer Finds That the Sword Is Mightier Than the Piano
Felicia Zimmermann seemed embarrassed.
She blushed and smothered a laugh with her hand as she recalled an interview she had given about seven years ago.
She was 10 at the time and had been fencing for only two years.
But it was already apparent that she had the physical tools and an instinct for fencing that could take her a long way.


At Home Abroad; Fragments Of Hope
The United Nations is so beset by problems these days that one remarkable success should be noted.
That has been its effort to turn devastated Cambodia from endless war to rational politics.
Untac, the U.N.
Transitional Authority in Cambodia, began 17 months ago.
It has had 16,000 soldiers on the ground and 6,000 civilians.
The cost is expected to reach $2 billion: a large investment, but it may just have saved a country.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.98
3.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.07
3.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.22
3.24
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.41
5.52
6.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.56
6.65
7.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.29
7.36
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.79
5.82
6.08
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Testing Time for Mrs. Chamorro
Violeta Chamorro's effort to reunify Nicaragua is in deep trouble.
Her main problem is an abusive military establishment; she must move decisively to bring it under control.
Mrs.
Chamorro made a bold tactical decision when she won the presidency of Nicaragua in 1990.
To heal the divisions caused by 10 years of civil war, she awarded several key posts to members of the left-wing Sandinista movement.


Another Auto Account, This One for the Korean Car Maker Kia, Goes to an Untraditional Agency.
FOR the second time this week, an automotive "bridesmaid" agency finally caught a bouquet.
Kia Motors America, the United States arm of South Korea's Kia Motors Corporation, said yesterday that it had awarded the assignment to introduce its subcompact cars and sport-utility vehicles in this country to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising of San Francisco.
Kia estimated billings at $30 million.


CHRONICLE
DR.
JOE WILDER is all too well acquainted with crises.
As a surgeon, he spent eight years as the director of the emergency surgery service at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
But nothing prepared Dr.
Wilder, now a recognized painter, for the trauma he experienced the other day when he realized he had left one of his paintings on a park bench.
Dr.
Wilder was returning home to Riverdale from Manhattan on Wednesday when disaster struck.
With him was his large painting of race horses and jockeys that he described as "one of the half-dozen paintings I consider masterpieces."


Topics of The Times; Anthony Young Sheds the Monkey
When Eddie Murray drove in the winning run at Shea Stadium on Wednesday night, giving the Mets a 5-4 victory and ending Anthony Young's infamous 27-game losing streak, one's immediate reaction was there might be hope for all those Midwesterners cursed by endless rainfall.
If Mr.
Young's seemingly interminable siege of bad luck could end, so could anybody's.
Sometimes he pitched poorly and sometimes, when he pitched well, a hellish conspiracy of bad bounces, cheap hits, poor fielding and flagrant nonsupport from his teammates did the job.
Whatever the reasons, he produced the longest losing streak in major league history, lasting 465 miserable days and stretching across 81 appearances and two seasons.
He bore his adversity with dignity, though it weighed heavily on his back and soul.
"It wasn't a monkey," Mr.
Young said.
"It was a zoo."


COALITION IN JAPAN NAMES NEW LEADER TO BECOME PREMIER
A conservative populist who has promised to reduce the intrusive role of government in the Japanese economy was all but assured today of becoming the country's first non-Liberal Democratic Prime Minister in 38 years when he was chosen to lead a coalition of opposition parties.
The selection of Morihiro Hosokawa, a descendant of feudal lords who at 55 would be the second-youngest Prime Minister in the postwar era, is expected to be formalized at a special session of Parliament beginning next week.


Dr. John H. Harley, 77, an Expert On Radioactivity in Environment
Dr.
John H. Harley, a leading expert on environmental radioactivity, died on Sunday at New York University's Tisch Hospital.
He was 77 and lived in Hoboken, N.J.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Treasury Issues Advance Sharply
The Treasury market did another about-face yesterday, as the price of Treasury bonds and notes rose sharply and yields fell.
The yield on the 30-year bond dropped to 6.56 percent, just a shy of its recent 16-year low, from 6.65 percent.
With no clear trend in the economy or in the budget negotiations in Washington, the market has been jostled up and down recently by the day's news.
And one day's report has often been contradicted by another report a day or a week later.


C.I.A. Official Sees Cuba in Crisis
Riven by food shortages and economic hardship, Cuba is suffering its worst political crisis in 30 years, a senior Central Intelligence Agency official said today.
"Castro's Government is in acute distress," the official, Brian Latell, the C.I.A.'s top analyst of Latin American affairs, said at a rare open meeting of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
"The impact of the economic crisis on the populace has been devastating."


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 642 retail money market mutual funds increased $830.1 million, to $392.49 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 402 taxable retail money market funds rose $334.7 million, to $308.90 billion, while the assets of the 240 retail tax-exempt funds increased $495.4 million, to $83.59 billion.


Man in the News; A Crusader For Change: Morihiro Hosokawa
When he was Governor of Kumamoto, a prosperous prefecture on the southern island of Kyushu, Morihiro Hosokawa liked to tell about the time he tried to move a downtown bus stop.
"For an advanced country, this is embarrassing," he told two Americans lingering over coffee in his sunny office one afternoon.
"To move the stop a few hundred meters, I had to send a delegation to Tokyo. In Japan, you can't tie your own shoes without official permission."


UAL Reports Better-Than-Expected Net
The parent of United Airlines, the UAL Corporation, reported better-than-expected second-quarter results yesterday, providing further evidence that a sluggish turnaround in the airline industry is taking hold.
UAL, based in Chicago, reported net income of $22 million for the quarter, or 54 cents a share, compared with a loss of $91 million, in the corresponding period last year.
Industry analysts had predicted that UAL would report earnings of 18 cents a share.


Beating Denied on Stand
One of three former police officers accused in the fatal beating of a man took the stand today and disputed earlier witnesses who said he had kicked and punched the man as he was lying handcuffed in a street.
Testifying for the first time in the nine-week trial, Officer Robert Lessnau, who is white, acknowledged that he struck Malice Green, who was black, on the knuckles with his flashlight so he could see if the man had a weapon in his hand.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the second-quarter financial results for Tenneco Inc. misstated the operating results of the company's packaging, shipbuilding and Tenneco Gas subsidiaries.
The article also misstated the outlook of Wall Street analysts for the packaging subsidiary and the price of linerboard.
A corrective article appears today on page D2.


Museum Begins Excavation to Unearth The City's Past


At the Bar; After the Deluge, Midwest Lawyers Are Offering Free Ports in a Gathering Legal Storm.
The lovingly restored law office of F. Coulter de Vries, in what was once a warehouse in Kansas City, Mo., recently sat under several feet of the Kaw River and Turkey Creek, two tributaries of the swollen Missouri River.
His files were waterlogged, his furniture floating, his computers saturated with silt and sewage.
"There was brown slime everywhere," he said.
"An inch of mud covered the carpeting. And you could tell that everything had floated for a while."


Police Investigation Supervisor Admits Faking Fingerprints
In a widening scandal that has rocked the New York State Police, a lieutenant who supervised criminal investigations in seven upstate counties admitted yesterday that he had faked fingerprint evidence in three cases.
The lieutenant, Craig D. Harvey, also said in court in Delhi, N.Y., that he had been assisted in fabricating evidence by another lieutenant, Patrick O'Hara, who works out of state police headquarters in Albany supervising drug and organized-crime investigations.


Nader Assails A.C.L.U. on Tobacco Industry Gifts
Ralph Nader and the American Civil Liberties Union, often on the same side in the past, are fighting each other over the receipt by the A.C.L.U. of more than $500,000 from tobacco companies.
Mr.
Nader, Dr.
Sidney Wolfe of the Public Citizen Health Research Group and others active in organizations seeking to protect consumers held a news conference here today to implore the civil liberties group to stop accepting the money.


Precocious Dehere Wins at Saratoga
Maybe they were taking their first steps to next year's Kentucky Derby, and maybe they weren't.
But nine of the prime 2-year-olds in the country ran today in Saratoga's first stakes of the season for juvenile colts, and Robert Brennan's Dehere pranced to the head of the class when he won by a neck after a rocketing dash through the homestretch.
Dehere, in fact, made two remarkable dashes in the stretch today in the Saratoga Special.
He was trapped on the rail in fifth place as they turned for home, but Eddie Maple steered him through a sweeping end run to the outside, outflanking five other horses and running for daylight.
Then Maple and Dehere delivered a second dash that shot them past four other colts in the deep stretch and clipped Slew Gin Fizz by a neck at the wire, with Whitney Tower two lengths back in third place.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  U.S. DETAILS SUSPECT'S MOVES
Only days after fleeing from a Queens garage where explosives were being mixed, the latest defendant in the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets arranged to get a gun and sought a passport to leave the country, Government lawyers said in court.
B2.
RELEASE OF MENTALLY ILL MAN DELAYED
The release of a mentally ill man who has frightened residents of the Upper West Side for years has been delayed as New York State mental health officials, who say he has been successfully treated for drug abuse and mental illness, tried to guarantee that he would have a place to live once he leaves a psychiatric hospital.
B3.


Whittle Said to Shrink Its Schools Project
After months of trying to raise $750 million to start a for-profit chain of schools, Whittle Communications has substantially scaled back the project and may resort to an experimental version using a budget of as little as $40 million, an executive close to the company confirmed yesterday.
Chris Whittle, the company's founder and chairman, declined to be interviewed, and a spokesman said the company was not ready to comment.
When he announced his Edison Project of for-profit schools in May 1992, Mr.
Whittle had hoped to interest major corporations.
He spoke of raising $1.2 billion to build 1,000 technologically advanced schools by 1996 that would attempt to lead revolutionary changes in American education.


Review/Film; About a Cat And Mouse Who Make Sweet Music
Fifty-three years after they made their debut in the M-G-M short "Puss Gets the Boot," Hanna-Barbera's great cartoon characters, Tom, the raffish cat with the demonic grin, and Jerry, a mild-mannered, fast-thinking mouse, co-star in a feature-length musical, "Tom and Jerry: The Movie."
Unfortunately, Tom and Jerry here spend less time tormenting each other with golf clubs, mousetraps, mallets and other weapons than they do acting in concert to right the world's wrongs.
The principal beneficiary of their good work: Robyn, a sweet but drab, yellow-haired girl mistreated by her wicked guardian, Aunt Figg, after her father, an explorer, is presumed dead in a Himalayan avalanche.


Beefing Up Seen at I.B.M Marketing
I.B.M. will make its consulting group part of IBM North America, its marketing force, to give the force more knowledge in specific industries and greater access to executives of corporate customers, industry consultants said yesterday.
The move, the consultants say, is an effort to accelerate the growth of services at the International Business Machines Corporation, a bright spot for the computer company.
They also said it was another step in transforming I.B.M.'s 30,000-member marketing and services division into a corps of experts who advise companies about business challenges, like reducing costs and increasing productivity, and selling them the computer products and services to solve their problems.


Doris Jonas Freed, 90, an Expert on Family Law
Doris Jonas Freed, a national authority on family law who headed the American Bar Association's committee on divorce law and procedures, died on July 23 at Keswick Nursing Home in Baltimore.
She was 90 and had lived in Manhattan until May.
Her daughter, Gloria Kane, said the cause was heart failure.


Wager Case Agreement
The ringleader of a college sports-betting operation that took in hundreds of thousands of dollars in wagers will not serve any time in jail under a plea agreement with Rhode Island state prosecutors.


Paddlers Leave Albany
The 16 paddlers competing in the Finlandia Clean Water Challenge, a kayak and canoe endurance race that began June 27 in Chicago, left Albany yesterday in the last stage of the 1,000-mile competition.
MICHAEL HARBOLD, a champion kayaker from Washington, is ahead by 6 hours.


Caroline K. Simon Is Dead at 92; Led Fight Against Discrimination
Caroline Klein Simon, who overcame early obstacles to women in the legal profession to become a pioneering female judge, politician, state official and champion of laws against discrimination in jobs and housing, died yesterday at home.
She was 92 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, her family said.


F.B.I. Nominee Will Make Ethnic Recruiting a Priority
Judge Louis J. Freeh, President Clinton's nominee to head the Federal Bureau of Investigation, told the Senate Judiciary Committee today that one of his top priorities would be to recruit men and women of more diverse ethnic backgrounds to be bureau agents.
"We need diversity because without it the F.B.I. cannot function to its maximum potential," said Judge Freeh, who sits on the Federal District Court in Manhattan and is former bureau agent.
"We need diversity because it is simply the right and fair thing to do."


Immigrant Roots Aside, Town Pulls In Borders
IT is evening in summer, the men are home from work, and the glimpses through apartment doors held open to cross breezes along the hall of 24 East Columbia Avenue show what is bothering people around here: beds in the front room; beds too, presumably, beyond the head-high partition that divides the room at midpoint.
The men who live there are Guatemalan day laborers, many of them in the country illegally or in the semi-legal twilight of claims of asylum, deportation hearings, appeals.
Each morning, they shape up in their hundreds along the Columbia Avenue curb, from Pete's Pub to Gardners Delicatessen, hoping a contractor will nod them into the back of a pickup truck for a day's work.


He Wasn't a Monk or Named Rasputin
To the Editor:
"Diary Shows Mad Monk as Something of a Bore," your July 19 St.
Petersburg Journal reports.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Walter Mondale's confirmation hearings as Ambassador to Japan referred incorrectly to Mike Mansfield.
He retired in 1988 as Ambassador to Japan; the present Ambassador, whom Mr.
Mondale would succeed, is Michael H. Armacost.


Transactions
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Claimed Kevin Seitzer, infielder, off waivers from the Oakland Athletics.
Designated William Suero, infielder, for assignment.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Placed Pete Smith, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Pedro Borbon, pitcher, from Richmond of the International League.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Placed Jeff Parrett, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mo Sanford, pitcher, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Claimed John Hudek, pitcher, off waivers from the Detroit Tigers and assigned him to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Activated Sid Fernandez, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Dave Telgheder, pitcher, to Norfolk of the International League.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association  COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Traded the rights to John Bagley, guard, and Sean Higgins and Mike Sanders, forwards, to the Rochester Renegade for Jerome Harmon and Ralph Lewis, forwards.
FARGO-MOORHEAD FEVER -- Signed Charles Thomas, guard.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Joe Behling, forward.
QUAD CITY THUNDER -- Acquired Marcus Stokes, forward, from the Hartford Hellcats for Dan Bingenheimer, forward-center.
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Re-signed Scott Conover, offensive lineman, to a two-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Greg Gilbert, left wing.
College
CALIFORNIA -- Named Beth Breyer assistant media relations director.
CHAPMAN -- Promoted Rex Peters, assistant baseball coach, to head baseball coach.
Named Pam Gibbons women's swimming coach.


Restaurants
Nothing and no one could ever live up to the hype that has accompanied the arrival of Daniel -- with three syllables, not two.
But it may not matter.
The first available dinner reservations at the 10-week-old restaurant where Daniel Boulud, late of Le Cirque, is master of the universe, are for Aug. 23.
At 6 o'clock.
Eating at a civilized hour will require a seven-week wait.
And it's summer.


Cuba's H.I.V. Quarantine Takes Toll in Liberty; Embargo Myth
To the Editor:
"Cracks in the Cuban Permafrost" (editorial, July 16) perpetuates the myth of the United States embargo.
Since it is not a blockade as Fidel Castro always refers to it, Cuba can and indeed does trade with the entire world.
Cuba buys United States products in Mexico, Canada, Venezuela and anywhere else it pleases.
It is the failure of the Stalinist system and President Castro's own stubbornness, not the embargo, that has plunged the island into economic chaos.


ACQUITTAL IN JERUSALEM: A Mixed Verdict; Court Decision Brings Pride to Many In Israel and Dissatisfaction to Others
Whatever else it may have done yesterday in the "Ivan the Terrible" case, the Israeli Supreme Court did not pronounce John Demjanjuk an innocent man.
Quite the opposite, even though that point is obscured in the more immediate, bottom-line finding of reasonable doubt as to whether Mr.
Demjanjuk was indeed the monstrous "Ivan," operator of the gas chamber at the Nazis' Treblinka death camp.


Corrections
An article on March 22 about control of acid rain misstated some results of a 1990 Government study providing statistical support for the argument that acid rain affects a small portion of waterways.
The study found high acidity in 4.2 percent of 28,300 lakes assessed and 2.7 percent of 125,000 miles of streams assessed.
A letter from a reader in June pointed out the error; editing lapses added to the delay.


He Wasn't a Monk or Named Rasputin; Known for Debauchery
To the Editor:
Your July 19 St.
Petersburg Journal omits Rasputin's real name, Novykh.
He was nicknamed Rasputin by the villagers of his native trans-Uralic Pokrovskoye for being a "rasputnik," or debauchee.
LOUIS MARCK  New York, July 19, 1993


Review/Music; City Opera's 'Carmen': An Old Friend
It is a strange thing to complain about in today's musical world, but there was something almost too self-effacing and insignificant about the way the New York City Opera chose to open its 50th-anniversary season on Wednesday night.
The lobby was festooned with banners, and a special Stagebill program book was distributed to honor the occasion, but the restraint was obvious.
There was no gala concert with stars returning to pay tribute to the company they once sang with, stars like Samuel Ramey, Placido Domingo, Carol Vaness and Frederica von Stade.
There was no attempt to open the season with a major revival of a neglected work the City Opera had championed during its half-century of life: a work like "The Rake's Progress" or "A Midsummer Night's Dream" or "Street Scene" or "Six Characters in Search of an Author." Christopher Keene, the general director, did not conduct, and there was no honoring of the company's American character with a native work and cast.


Court Rebukes New York City Over Homeless
A state appeals court dealt two blows yesterday to New York City's policies on homelessness, strongly rebuking the Dinkins administration for failing to adequately shelter both homeless families and single adults.
In one ruling, the Appellate Division upheld a finding by Justice Alice Schlesinger of State Supreme Court that the city has illegally sheltered 1,200 men in two dangerous, overcrowded armories, and it upheld her order that the number of men in the armories be cut to 400 within 60 days.


Iran Helps Finance U.S., Not Vice Versa
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal makes much in "The U.S.-Iran Oil Scam"(column, July 16) of United States oil companies that trade in Iranian petroleum overseas, though American law does not permit them to import it into the United States.


Promotions at Tribune Co.
Jack Fuller, the editor of The Chicago Tribune, will become the president and chief executive of the Chicago Tribune Company on Sept. 1, John W. Madigan, the president and chief executive of the newspaper's parent, the Tribune Publishing Company, announced on Thursday.
Mr.
Madigan, who holds the positions that Mr.
Fuller will assume, will remain the publisher of The Chicago Tribune.
No one has been named to replace Mr.
Fuller, 46, as the editor, a company spokesman said.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error a paragraph in a July 27 letter by J. Richard Gott 3d about his paper in Nature's May 27 issue appeared incorrectly.
It should have read: "Popper's criterion for a good scientific hypothesis is that it makes predictions that can be falsified. My hypothesis can be falsified if we detect radio signals from civilizations around any of 1,000 nearby stars (there is a big NASA project testing this now), or if more than 2.7 trillion more humans are born. This is how science works: hypotheses are framed, predictions made and tested."


House Offered To Son of Man Without Home
A landlord whose eviction threat delayed the release from a state psychiatric hospital of Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who Upper West Side residents say has harassed them for years, said yesterday that he was willing to sell a house to Mr.
Hogue's son in Bridgeport, Conn.
Mr.
Hogue's son lives in the house now, but has not been paying the rent because of a dispute with the landlord.
"I've said all along, all I want to do is sell the house," said the landlord, Robert V. Goodrich.


Saipan, 15 Years On, Correcting Labor Abuses
To the Editor:
I respond to "Saipan Sweatshops Are No American Dream" (front page, July 18) as a citizen of the United States and a resident of Saipan, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Yes, many issues in the commonwealth need to be and are being addressed.
Many have to do with supporting an island economy that is rapidly changing from primitive to progressive.
I have been a part of workshops and planning groups on economic and social reform.


Don't Celebrate Broadway on a Matinee Day
To the Editor:
While the idea of bringing Broadway to the masses is admirable (news article and Topics of the Times, July 15), the sponsors of this event laid a giant egg for those who held tickets for matinee performances July 14.
As one who adores theater but cannot afford to go more than three or four times a year, I look forward to these occasions.
I prudently leave home a good two hours before curtain (in this instance, 2 P.M.) for a drive that normally takes 45 minutes.


Review/Music; Beethoven and Eine Kleine Mozart
The Mostly Mozart program that Pinchas Zukerman conducted at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday evening suggested that criticism of the festival's failure to make good on its intention to offer thematic programming has been off base.
The key, it seems, is to think of the programs not as thematic, in the normal sense, but as parodies of thematic programs.
That would explain Mr.
Zukerman's program, which on the surface accommodated the week's Beethoven and Mozart theme but which actually emphasized distinctions rather than connections.
The opening work, in fact, tore through any presumed bond between the composers.
Even on its own terms, Beethoven's brooding, introspective String Quartet in F minor (Op. 95) inhabits a world alien to Mozart at his darkest, and is certainly worlds removed from the program's sole Mozart offering, the Piano Concerto No. 21 in C (K. 467).
But on Tuesday, the Beethoven was presented in Mahler's arrangement for string orchestra, a version that tears away the work's last links to Classicism and emphasizes its tendencies toward Romantic high drama.


Gold Continues to Lead the Pack
Equity investors have made the most money this year by leaving the country.
The average stock fund that invests domestically rose 4.3 percent through July 16, compared with 15.1 percent for overseas equity funds.
Analysts blame political uncertainty and the sluggish economy for the poor showing so far.
Then too, growth stocks amd small company stocks are cooling off after several years of superior performance.


He Buys Rockets and Promises Trade
LES ALEXANDER, a Florida businessman, yesterday completed his $85 million purchase of the Houston Rockets and announced he already had a "major trade" in the works.
Alexander, who has promised to take a hands-on approach to running the National Basketball Association team, declined to give more details of the upcoming deal."It will probably be completed in the next day or two and we'll announce it," he said.
"I think it's significant."


Parks Worker Arrested at Pool for Touching Girl Sexually
A Parks Department summer employee, praised as "extraordinarily intelligent" and "well-behaved" by his co-workers, was arrested Thursday night and accused of touching a young girl sexually in one of the city's public pools.
The incident at the Red Hook Pool in Brooklyn follows more than a dozen other recent reports of similar attacks in the city's pools.
But this was the first time that a worker at a pool was accused of such a crime, the Parks Department said.


Lure's Successful Return to Saratoga
It may not shake governments or alter global strategy, but it may become part of the lore of horse racing, one of those subtle things that works spectacularly.
Trainer Shug McGaughey calls it "the turning point," the transformation in the career of his colt Lure, a horse who once raced with unfulfilled promise as a sprinter on dirt tracks.
For McGaughey, the turning point came when Lure started training on turf a year ago, at Saratoga.
He went on to win five of his next eight races -- all of them on grass and one of them a victory in the Breeders' Cup Mile -- while running second in the three others and running up a bankroll of $1.3 million.
And today he returned to Saratoga for the first time since the turning point, and won the $119,400 Daryl's Joy Stakes on the grass with style, command and a relentless rush through the homestretch that buried Fourstardave by three lengths.
Star of Cozzene Isn't Here
There was some pressure on Lure to win this one, and not just because he was coming back to Saratoga.
The main pressure came from his rival and nemesis, Star of Cozzene.
Four times in the last three months, they have dueled in major races; Lure won the first two, Star of Cozzene the next two.
The rivalry rested today because Star of Cozzene was home priming for the Arlington Million on Aug. 29, a race that will offer a purse of $1 million and championship stature.


Ondieki Won't Be Running in Stuttgart
YOBES ONDIEKI, the 10,000-meters world-record holder, will not compete in the world championships in Stuttgart, Germany, next month because he failed to show up for Kenya's team trials.
Ondieki became the first person to run the 10,000 in under 27 minutes when he was clocked in 26:58.38 in Oslo, on July 10.


Nassau County Finds a Bond Rating It Likes
In what Nassau County officials hailed as a sign of fiscal recovery, a credit-rating agency today gave the county's bonds a small but significant boost.
Only eight months ago, a different agency, Moody's Investors Service, had dropped the county's bond rating to its lowest level ever because of continuing budget problems, including a $120 million deficit.
The Moody's rating of Baa is the agency's lowest investment-grade rating.


A Vote for Dr. Elders
Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, President Clinton's pick for Surgeon General, is over the first hurdle.
Yesterday the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee voted 13 to 4 to confirm her appointment.
Next week her nomination may reach the Senate floor.
Americans can consider themselves lucky if Dr.
Elders leaps that second hurdle.
She is an unflinching realist -- precisely what the nation's First Doctor needs to be.
During her years as public health director of Arkansas, Dr.
Elders forced her fellow Arkansans to take a good, hard look at the facts of life in their state, especially the facts of adolescents' lives.
She spoke of the threat of AIDS, the sexual abuse of children, the necessity of sex education and of easy access to contraceptives.
She fought for school-based health clinics that could dispense contraceptives on request, for AIDS prevention programs, better childhood immunization and prenatal programs.
Above all, she fought for giving kids information that would allow them not only to make informed choices -- but to save their lives.


South Africa in the Open
Angela King's mother lives in Kingston, Jamaica, where she watches CNN on her bedside television and frets about her daughter's safety here in the reputed carnage capital of the world.
Miss King, who heads the United Nations observer mission in South Africa, knows that South Africa has dangerous places because it is her job to visit them, but like almost everyone else who can afford to she goes home at night to a safe suburb.


Balloons Readied for Take-off at New Jersey Festival


Vacationers Go Undercover at Sea to Film Dumping
Encouraged by environmental groups, and with the prospect of six-figure rewards by the Federal Government, passengers aboard cruise ships are using their video cameras not just to record vacation moments but to help prosecute illegal dumping in the high seas.
Earlier this month, Princess Cruise Lines paid a record $500,000 fine to the Federal Government after pleading guilty to illegal dumping.
The major evidence for the United States Attorney in Miami was provided by a Michigan couple, Alvin and Marilyn Levett, who videotaped the crew of the Regal Princess hurling more than 20 plastic bags of garbage into the ocean five miles off the Florida Keys.
Under the reward system for environmental whistle-blowers, the Levetts received half the fine, or $250,000.


G.O.P. Quits Blocking Senate Vote on Service Plan
With their troops beginning to desert, Senate Republican leaders surrendered their filibuster today to voting realities and allowed President Clinton's national service bill to move forward.
But Senate leaders put off a final vote on the bill until Tuesday, as the approach of the weekend winnowed the ranks of senators.
Passage appears certain for the $1.5 billion, three-year measure, which is intended to encourage public service among young people and provide living allowances and grants to some participants.


G.O.P. Blitz Against Budget Puts Democrats on Defensive
It had to be a little unnerving for Lynn Schenk, a first-term Democrat elected to Congress from a heavily Republican district in San Diego, land of right-wing talk shows, Navy captains and stressed middle-class taxpayers trudging through recession.
For six days recently, radio advertisements placed by the Republican Party took her to task for voting for Mr.
Clinton's "tax and spending" package.
The ad then gave her phone number in Washington and urged people to call and "tell her that Californians aren't taxed too little -- the Government spends too much."


Three Steelmakers Brace for Possible Strike
Three steelmakers whose labor contracts expire late tonight have yet to accept union demands for more representation in the board room and on the factory floor.
Bracing for a possible strike, the National Steel Corporation said yesterday that it had begun to shut down blast furnaces and other equipment that has to be disabled in an orderly fashion if the company fails to reach agreement with 6,300 employees whose contracts expire tonight.


Religion Notes
Hymnals Welcomed
Hymnals are something that churchgoers hold close to their hearts, both figuratively and literally.
That is why the introduction of a new hymnal often causes uncertainty and discomfort in the pews.
The United Methodist Church, which unveiled its new hymnal amid considerable dispute three years ago, seems to be over the worst of it.
A new survey of Methodist churches across the country finds the new song book has received a warm reception.


Peter H. Guertler, 69, Expert in Restoration
Peter H. Guertler, an authority on decorative painting and restoration of antique rooms, died on Thursday at his home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 69.
His wife, the former Mary Louise Cutler, said the cause was chronic pulmonary disease.
Mr.
Guertler was considered an expert in glazes, finishes and the restoration of wallpaper, spanning many periods and styles.
He is best known for his work for Jacqueline Kennedy at the White House, including the restoration of the Diplomatic Reception Room and the Blue Room.


A Correction: Economic Growth
A table in Business Day yesterday with an article about second-quarter growth in the gross domestic product reversed the figures shown in current dollars and those shown in 1987 dollars.
Here is a corrected table for the second quarter of 1993.
All dollar amounts are in billions at seasonally adjusted annual rates.
Percentage changes are from the previous quarter at seasonally adjusted annual rates.
Last
Percent
CURRECT PRICES
Quarter
Change
Gross Domestic Product
$6,206.9
4.0
Consumption
4,301.0
6.4
Business investment
593.1
14.1
Inventory Change
6.3
N.A.
Housing
231.9
-5.5
Net exports
-49.9
N.A.
Government
1,124.4
2.8
Memo: Final sales*
6,200.5
6.0
1987 PRICES
Gross Domestic Product
$5,019.5
1.6
Consumption
3,398.1
3.8
Business investment
564.9
13.3
Inventory change
8.2
N.A.
Housing
198.0
-9.5
Net exports
-69.9
N.A.
Government
920.1
0.2 Memo: Final sales*
5,011.3
3.7
G.D.P. price deflator
2.6
*3*G.D.P. fixed-weighted price index
2.6
*G.D.P. less inventory change.
N.A.
Data are not applicable.
Source: Commerce Department


Nice Tie: Yankees Ride Guns of July Into First
The pitch was about a foot outside and a foot off the ground.
It was ball four.
But Mike Stanley saw something that he liked about the fastball that only Yogi Berra could love.
He swung, the ball zoomed off his bat and then barely dipped over the right-field fence.
It was a three-run homer in a six-run fourth inning in which Stanley's massive bat continued to unleash magic.
It was an inning in which the Yankees crushed Cal Eldred and in which the best offense in the major leagues helped catapult them to an 8-4 victory over Milwaukee at Yankee Stadium and into a first-place tie with the losing Toronto Blue Jays in the American League East.


Corrections
An article on June 30 about the new Arthur M. Sackler Museum of Art and Archeology in Beijing omitted the name of the architect.
He is Lo-Yi Chan of Prentice &amp; Chan, Ohlhausen in Manhattan.


Vivian E. Browne, 64, Painter and Professor
Vivian E. Browne, a professor of art at Rutgers University and a painter whose work linked abstraction to nature, died on July 23 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 64.
The cause was bladder cancer, said her mother, Odessa Browne.


CHRONICLE
LULA COOPER, the mother of Alvin Ailey, the late choreographer, dancer and director, stood before a crowd assembled in the civic center in Rogers, Tex., yesterday morning and said, "I want you to know that Alvin Ailey is here today and he might at this moment be directing a ballet in heaven. He's saying, 'Thank you, Rogers.' "
Actually, it was the tiny farming town of Rogers in central Texas -- population 1,310 -- that was saying thanks to Mr.
Ailey, its most renowned native son, who died in 1989 from a rare blood disease.
The town named a street for him, and friends, relatives and admirers came from surrounding communities, as well as Houston, Dallas and Los Angeles, to pay tribute and share their recollections of the dancer, who lived in Rogers through the second grade.


Review/Music; Loose Links and None
Now that the Mostly Mozart festival is halfway through its first season of thematic programming, perhaps someone should let Lincoln Center know: this fad works only if the programs adhere to the proposed themes.
If this week's series was meant to illuminate the musical ties that bind Mozart and Beethoven, as the schedule contended, then making Schubert's "Trout" Quintet the centerpiece of Monday evening's program was probably not the best idea.
What's more, Thursday evening's blockbuster was Tchaikovksy's "Souvenir de Florence," a work far from the sensibilities of either Beethoven or Mozart.
Lincoln Center, faced with charges of fad abuse, said it meant to draw only casual connections between composers.
But that's exactly the point.
Casual connections have always been the rule at Mostly Mozart.
Simply affixing a trendy label to a tired formula does not constitute the renovation this series needs.


Israel Says It Won't Use Ground Troops
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said today that Israel would not use ground forces as part of its heavy aerial and artillery bombardments against pro-Iranian guerrilla positions in southern Lebanon, despite the failure to stop guerrilla rocket attacks on northern Israel.
"Not under any condition will we consider the alternative to expand the security zone," he said, referring to the strip of southern Lebanon Israel has occupied as a buffer zone.
"We have decided clearly against that, or the use of ground forces."


Pachmarhi Journal; The Hills Are Still Alive, but Face New Intruders
This former British hill station, where British officials and their families recovered from the rigors of the blistering Indian summer, is struggling to hold on to its traditions in the face of Indian tourists who come for its waterfalls and parks.
Away from the crowds and their noise, the Jammu and Kashmir Military Band poised under the shade of a great banyan tree, as squirrels scampered along its boughs and the song of sparrows and blue jays rose in the crisp, cool morning.


Ukraine Willing to Admit Demjanjuk, Leader Says; Demjanjuk to Leave Israel
Mr. Demjanjuk is expected to leave Israel in a matter of days, his lawyer said today.
The lawyer, Yoram Sheftel, told reporters, "He will find refuge in a place we'll disclose after he is there physically -- and not a moment before."


Q &amp; A
Limited Partnerships Q. How are limited partnerships different from corporate stocks?
SYLVIA PRITIKA, North Babylon, L.I.
A.
A limited partnership is a business entity established to buy real estate or other items formed by one or more general partners and one or more limited partners.
Limited partners purchase units and receive a pro-rata share of the proceeds at the end of the partnership, which exists for a specific period, generally 7 to 10 years.
Furthermore, limited partners own the underlying assets held by the partnership.


New Conflict Threatens Between Croat and Serb
As leaders of the warring factions in Bosnia reached a tentative peace settlement in talks in Geneva, conflict in neighboring Croatia threatens to resume as early as this weekend.
Under an accord signed on July 16 by the Croatian Government and Serbian nationalist forces that seized a large chunk of the country in 1991, the Serbian side promised not to interfere as the Croats rebuilt a strategic bridge at Maslenica, which links the northern and southern parts of Croatia.
In exchange, Croatian troops are obliged to withdraw from surrounding areas and turn them over to United Nations control.


Browns' Receiver Decides Not to Retire
Cleveland Browns wide receiver HASSAN JONES has changed his mind and decided not to retire, Coach BILL BELICHICK said yesterday.


How Are They Doing?


What Now for Ivan the Acquitted?
The Israeli Supreme Court showed extraordinary wisdom and courage in acquitting John Demjanjuk of charges that he was Ivan the Terrible, a viciously brutal operator of the gas chambers used to murder Jews at the Treblinka death camp in Poland.
The decision, on an emotionally charged issue for Holocaust survivors, was a stirring affirmation of the integrity and fairness of Israel's judicial system.
It was also a rebuke to the thoroughly botched investigation of Mr.
Demjanjuk by the U.S.
Department of Justice, which ignored evidence available years ago that it was mixing up identities.


Postal Museum Opens in Washington


Denis Savard Opts for Lightning
DENIS SAVARD, one of hockey's most exciting players for the past 13 seasons, left the Stanley Cup champion Montreal Canadiens for the Tampa Bay Lightning yesterday.
The six-time All-Star, a free agent, signed a three-year contract that will give him an opportunity to become the focal point of the second-year team.
Terms were not disclosed.
Savard's playing time diminished in Montreal last season and he didn't expect an increase this fall.
"This is where I wanted to play," the 32-year-old center said.
"I hope to play 20-25 minutes a game, which wasn't going to happen in Montreal . . . I could have stayed around to try to win another Cup, but I would have hardly played."


A Re-election Campaign Grows in Brooklyn
Mingling governmental duties with political needs, Mayor David N. Dinkins spent most of yesterday in Brooklyn, trying to shore up his support in neighborhoods that were among his main bastions of strength in the last election.
Mr.
Dinkins's aides said the trip was part of a wider strategy to take to the streets more often as the election nears, using his incumbency to highlight the good news he can announce and assuring that press cameras find him among the people instead of in the more secluded setting of City Hall.


Quarterback Quartet Set for Scrimmage
The conventional wisdom is that Boomer Esiason was obtained from Cincinnati to be a bridge over the Jets' troubled quarterback waters, to hold the fort while Browning Nagle matures.
Bucking that notion, though, Coach Bruce Coslet, trying not to tip his hand yet, said today that he would play all four quarterbacks in camp during Saturday's scrimmage against the Washington Redskins in Bethlehem, Pa.


How to Make Park Safer for Everybody
To the Editor:
Wheel accidents in Central Park are at an all-time high.
The city should take two measures promptly.
(1) Lanes should be created to segregate skaters from bicyclers so that both can use the park safely.
Rollerblading is not compatible with cycling, especially with novice skaters who cannot control their speed or direction and the blithe skaters who listen to headphones while swerving unpredictably from side to side.
Also, the counterclockwise direction of the park's main road should be enforced.


A Theme Of Endless Variations: Wagner
Aside from Heiner Muller's new production of "Tristan und Isolde," other Wagner operas are being offered at Bayreuth this summer, all tilted toward the early end of the canon of 10 works that constitutes this festival's eternally revolving repertory.
The four stagings date from 1985, when Wolfgang Wagner's "Tannhauser" was new, to 1990, the year of Dieter Dorn's "Fliegende Hollander." In between come Werner Herzog's "Lohengrin" from 1987 and Mr.
Wagner's "Parsifal" from 1989.
Of these, Mr.
Dorn's magic show, abetted by Jurgen Rose's sets and costumes, has become a Bayreuth classic, almost universally praised by the critics and deliriously received by the audience.
Already, its coup de theatre from the second act, an entire house revolving in a starry sky, has become an image indelibly linked with Bayreuth, akin to the legendary staging of Siegfried's awakening of Brunnhilde in Wieland Wagner's first "Ring" in the 1950's.


2 Big Names Are at the Gate
American Winner and Presidential Ball, superstars of their respective harness-racing divisions, are the favorites in two major stakes races tonight.
American Winner, who has won nine straight races, is the 4-5 favorite in the $414,500 Beacon Course Trot final at the Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.
The Beacon is the final prep race before the Hambletonian, the second leg of trotting's triple crown.
The Hambletonian will be run at the Meadowlands on Aug. 7.


Chapter 11 Ends as Zale Reorganizes
The Zale Corporation, the nation's largest jewelry retailer, emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection today as a publicly traded company after almost 18 months battling its creditors.
Under the reorganization plan, approved by a Dallas bankruptcy court in May, Zale restructured about $1.6 billion in debt with cash and securities.
The company, based in Irving, Tex., plans to offer 35 million shares of new stock, which is expected to begin trading in a few weeks.


Water Crisis Is Extended In Chelsea
The bacteria that have come and gone in New York City's water supply this week have come again in Chelsea, forcing city officials, who still do not know the cause of the problem, to continue advising 25,000 residents there to boil their drinking water, at least for the rest of the weekend.
But the bacteria are gone from lower Manhattan, tests indicated last night, and the alert was lifted there.


Editor's Note
An article on yesterday's Op-Ed Page criticized Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Senator Carol Moseley Braun for remarks last week at Judge Ginsburg's hearing before the Judiciary Committee.
The headline, by referring only to Judge Ginsburg, exaggerated the emphasis her comments were given in the article.


Shooting at Rap Event Wounds Seven
Seven people were wounded early today outside a downtown nightclub after on-stage taunting between a rap artist and the audience provoked a gunman to open fire, spraying a panicky crowd fleeing into the street
Two of the injuries were serious enough to require surgery, but none were considered life-threatening.
Nevertheless, the shooting, which ended when a police officer wounded the gunman, was another instance of violence marring a rap event.


Spanish Peacekeeper Dies
One Spanish soldier attached to the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Bosnia was killed today and 17 were wounded, some of them critically, when two mortar rounds hit their headquarters in the town of Jablanica, United Nations officials said.
A spokesman for Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said that the incident could be the "trigger" for NATO air strikes, once it became clear who carried out the attack.


Green Benches Coleman For Fourth Game in Row
Vince Coleman was not in the starting lineup.
Manager Dallas Green was on the defensive.
The turmoil in Metsworld goes on.
Green, clearly wrestling with an awkward set of circumstances and emotions as well as public criticism about his clubhouse being out of control, insisted today that Coleman's absence from the lineup was not "a punishment" and that he wasn't "concerned about my image."


VW Chairman Talks to G.M.
More information about the trade-secrets dispute between the General Motors Corporation and Volkswagen A.G. came to light today.
VW said its chairman, Ferdinand Piech, had spoken briefly by telephone with John F. Smith Jr., G.M.'s president and chief executive.
VW said Mr.
Piech telephoned Mr.
Smith earlier today "to discuss the matter without influencing legal issues." The company did not elaborate.


Review/Rock; Moonshake: One Band, Many Sounds
Matador Records, a New York label that brought five bands to Irving Plaza on July 23, is a leader among independents.
Its founder, Gerard Cosloy, had previously guided Homestead Records through its heyday in the mid-80's, discovering or supporting dozens of great post-punk bands from America and abroad.
His newer label embraces a wider array of sounds, more amenable to the new alternative audience and, therefore, more unpredictable.
A case in point is Moonshake, Matador's newest overseas acquisition.
This English quartet runs the gamut, sometimes delivering jazzed-up guitar rock, sometimes veering toward a techno-groove sound.
David Callahan, the lead singer and guitarist, sings gutter tales in a startling voice, blending Morrissey's warble and John Lydon's sneer; Margaret Fiedler (who plays synthesizer, guitar and vocals) is cooler, her lyrics more insinuating.
What it adds up to is hard to say, but the band was sharp throughout, and viscerally forceful in the song "City Poison."


CHRONICLE
JOANN BEATTIE describes herself as a "Levittown housewife with three children, a station wagon and a hamster named Houdini or Carmel, depending on which of my children you ask."
On Monday, Mrs.
Beattie will have a new identity.
She will replace JIM RYAN, the avuncular anchorman of "Good Day New York," the morning news and talk program on WNYW-TV, Channel 5.


Yanks Get Cubs Lefty In 3-Way Trade
The Yankees attempted to refine their beleaguered bullpen yesterday when they finally obtained left-hander Paul Assenmacher from the Chicago Cubs in a three-way trade that also sent Yankee right-hander John Habyan to the Kansas City Royals and minor-league outfielder Karl Rhodes to Chicago from Kansas City.
In a deal that had been rumored for three weeks and strongly denied by General Manager Gene Michael only last week, the Yankees acquired a left-handed setup man for the bullpen with the highest earned run average in the American League.
Although the Yankees now have three left-handed relievers, Paul Gibson could soon become a roster casualty.


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column in Weekend yesterday about a fall Broadway play, the two-part drama "The Kentucky Cycle," misstated a day of the week on which both parts will be offered.
After preview performances begin on Nov. 3, both parts will be performed on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays; only Part 1 will be shown on Thursdays.


Art Appreciation With the Mind's Eye
Judith Druck gave the paintings hanging in her apartment to her son.
She no longer had any use for them since becoming blind when she was 55.
"Now I'm 80," she said. "And I'm seeing with my mind. Now we're seeing the paintings."


EUROPEAN SYSTEM TYING CURRENCIES FACES A RUPTURE
The European Monetary System, the cornerstone of exchange-rate stability within the European Community since 1979, was threatened with extinction today after speculators decided that France could no longer defend its currency and mounted an all-out attack on the franc.
The battle, pitting currency traders against both the French and German central banks, is especially bitter because it is about a lot more than money.
The steady exchange rate in recent years between the German mark and French franc has come to symbolize the strength of the French-German alliance and Europe's aspirations toward greater monetary and political union.


Wall Street Addresses Women's Distinct Needs
IN "The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and Capitalism," George Bernard Shaw directed his message to only half the public.
A man, he said, is supposed to understand politics, economics and finance, and is therefore unwilling to accept essential instruction.
"He is ashamed to expose the depths of his ignorance by asking elementary questions," the playwright said, "and I dare not insult him by volunteering the missing information." A woman, having fewer pretensions, he said, is far more willing to learn.
Wall Street has also begun addressing women directly, with an emphasis on capitalism.
Investment firms have learned from surveys that women are either more baffled than men or more willing to confess.
More important, women not only earn less, 70 cents to each dollar for men, but also are less likely to adequately provide for their retirement.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  CURRENCY CRISIS IN EUROPE
The European Monetary System was threatened as speculators mounted an attack on the franc after deciding that it could not hold up against German interest rates.  1  BOSNIA'S LEADERS AGREE TO PACT
Bosnian Muslim leaders agreed to Serbian and Croatian demands for their country's division into three ethnically based republics within in a loose federation.
But yet to be agreed upon are the precise frontiers of the three republics.  1
The U.S. continued to press ahead on plans for air strikes in Bosnia.  4
Croatian Serbs and the Croatian Government may clash again.  4  TO BE NOUVEAU RICHE IN MOSCOW
Shopping in Moscow isn't what it used to be as Russians go on a buying spree at stores selling imported goods, from French clothes to German hardware and from Finnish kitchen cabinets to Italian salami.  1  JAPAN PARTY SELECTS NEW LEADER
Trying out its new role in the opposition, the Liberal Democratic Party of Japan selected a 56-year-old onetime rebel with a clean image to be its leader.  3  FEAR IS GROWING IN SOUTH AFRICA
News analysis: Whites and others in South Africa are becoming more fearful, because not only is crime growing in general, but when it does penetrate white enclaves, it is often gratuitously brutal.  3  ISRAEL RULES OUT GROUND TROOPS
Israel's Foreign Minister said that his Government would not use ground forces in its attacks against pro-Iranian guerrillas in southern Lebanon and that Israel would not expand its "security zone" there.  5  DEMJANJUK TO GO TO UKRAINE
One day after his acquittal in Jerusalem, John Demjanjuk applied for a temporary visa to go to his native Ukraine, and he is expected to leave in a matter of days.  5  Pachmarhi Journal: A summer resort fights to keep its character.  2  National 6-10  BUDGET AGREEMENT UNRAVELS
Only hours after the White House trumpeted a done deal on a budget agreement, House and Senate negotiators plucked at a thread on the $500 billion package and it seemed to unravel again.  1  AN ASSAULT ON BUDGET BILL
The intensity of the lobbying effort being directed at California Democrats offers a quick primer on why President Clinton's budget bill is on such precarious ground.  1  REPUBLICANS END FILIBUSTER
With their troops deserting, Senate Republican leaders ended their filibuster today and allowed President Clinton's national service bill to move forward.  9
A compromise bill will lower the cost of college loans.  9  CLINTON NOMINATION ADVANCES
Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, President Clinton's nominee for surgeon general, won the endorsement of the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee today.  9  FLOOD CONFOUNDS PREDICTIONS
The cresting Missouri River moved past Jefferson City, Mo., a day earlier and six inches higher than had been predicted, with devastating results.  1  SIGNS OF RECOVERY IN IOWA
The war mentality that has gripped Des Moines for almost three weeks is ending, and the great flood of 1993 is receding into the realm of war stories.  7  BUYING POLITICAL ENTREE
At this year's annual meeting of the National Conference of State Legislatures, lobbyists, who pay for many of the sessions to press their concerns, are as visible as the lawmakers.  6  GREEN SLEUTHS AT SEA
Encouraged by environmental groups and the prospect of six-figure rewards from the Government, cruise-ship passengers are using home video cameras to document illegal dumping in the high seas.  6  FINAL RULING IN CUSTODY FIGHT
The Supreme Court refused to delay a state court order that a 2-year-old Michigan girl be returned to her biological parents in Iowa.  6  GROWING PRAISE FOR HYMNAL
A new survey of the nation's Methodist churches finds that a hymnal that met resistance when it was introduced is now well liked.  10  A psychologist testified against former patients in a murder trial.6  A passing comet has forced NASA to postpone a shuttle flight.  10  The Administration defended the Pentagon's gay ban in court.  10  Metro Digest 23  CITY BUS HELD UP IN QUEENS
Three young robbers boarded a city bus in Queens yesterday, brandished guns and staged a frontier-style holdup, making off with $300 in cash and fistfuls of jewelry.  1  Arts/Entertainment 11-17  ACTRESS FOR ARTS ENDOWMENT
A White House official confirmed reports that President Clinton would name Jane Alexander as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  Ivan the Acquitted.
Voters' reward in Japan.
A vote for Dr.
Elders.
Angora goats and honey bees.
Letters  Russell Baker: It's a child's world.
Tom Reiss: The banality of Ivan.
Osha Gray Davidson: Get the facts on gun deaths.
Benjamin Bycel: Doing the health-care hustle.
Judy Karasik: National service, from the ground up.
Chronicle 22 Bridge 14 Crossword 12


Push Begins On Trade Side Pacts
The Clinton Administration has begun a final push to wrap up labor and environmental pacts linked to the North American Free Trade Agreement but faces strong resistance from Mexico, Canada and American business leaders.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, concluded two days of talks today with his Canadian and Mexican counterparts.
His office kept a block of rooms at a hotel here so that lower-level negotiations could continue through the weekend and early next week.


Conferees in Congress Agree On Revamping College Loans
House and Senate negotiators have agreed on a compromise version of legislation to lower the cost of college loans by providing money directly from the Treasury, rather than having the Government guarantee bank loans.
Their deal, with final details still being hammered out today, is intended to keep the existing system in place, though in a diminished role, while the new program is phased in.
Thus the old system would be preserved as a fallback if the new program failed.
The Senate version of the bill had provided for such a fallback, but the House bill had not.


Russia's New Rich on a Giant Buying Spree
From $30,000 Cartier watches to $150,000 stretch limousines, there is a brisk business to be done in Moscow these days catering to the gaudy and gargantuan appetites of Russia's new rich.
At the Escada shop on the second floor of the old State Department Store, known as GUM, across Red Square from the Kremlin, young women breeze through racks of $2,000 suits without even a grimace.
At the Almaz Jewelry Store on Kutuzovsky Prospekt, less expensive Cartier watches, priced at about $6,000, sell out as fast they are shipped in.


As Its Water Supply Returns, So Does Des Moines
The war mentality that has gripped this city for almost three weeks is ending, and the great flood of 1993 is receding into the realm of war stories.
Military helicopters no longer rattle overhead day and night.
Water is plentiful again: people can now bathe, shower, flush and even drink city water.


Ukraine Willing to Admit Demjanjuk, Leader Says
John Demjanjuk will be allowed to come to Ukraine on a temporary visa, President Leonid M. Kravchuk said today.
The Israeli Supreme Court has overturned Mr.
Demjanjuk's conviction and death sentence for war crimes committed by the death camp guard "Ivan the Terrible."
Mr.
Demjanjuk, a native of Ukraine, was stripped of his United States citizenship in 1981 and extradited to Israel in 1986.
On Thursday the Israeli high court ordered him freed, ruling that there was reasonable doubt that he was "Ivan the Terrible," who mutilated and tortured his victims as they were led to the gas chambers at the Treblinka death camp in Poland during the Nazi occupation.


Deal? Fernandez Sharp as Yanks Watch
The scenario has as much imagination and daring as anything the season has held for the Mets to date.
Trade Sid Fernandez for prospects now.
Sign him again after the season when he becomes a free agent.
The deal would begin at once the reconstruction of the Mets and preserve the quality of pitching needed to be competitive soon.
"There's the chance you could do it," said Joe McIlvaine, the general manager of the Mets.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column last Saturday about a benefit to be given in Sagaponack, L.I., by the painter Ross Bleckner for the Community Research Initiative for AIDS misstated the date.
It is next Saturday, not tonight.


Review/Pop; African Rhythms, In a Rapid Flow
The audience crammed into Summerstage last Sunday afternoon, overflowing to the Central Park lawns beyond Rumsey Playfield, neatly mirrored the music.
There were Senegalese and Haitians, speaking Wolof, French and Haitian Creole; there were other New Yorkers and tourists from all over.
The concert was Africa Fete, a package tour of three African singers -- Baaba Maal and Ismael Lo from Senegal and Angelique Kidjo from Benin -- along with the Haitian band Boukman Eksperyans.
All of the performers record for Mango Records, which assembled the tour.
The tour is about ambition, with performers who want to reach a worldwide audience; it's also a gauge of the latest tensions and synergies between local, traditional elements and international rhythms and technology.
For American audiences, Africa Fete offers a glimpse into the French-speaking zone of world music; the three African singers and their groups have connections in Paris, where up-to-date studios and contact with all kinds of music push them toward new hybrids and fusions.


Corrections
A chart yesterday describing the conflict along the Israeli-Lebanese border carried an erroneous figure in some editions for the speed of a Katyusha rocket.
Depending on the model, the rocket has a range of 11,810 to 22,288 yards and a speed of 1,476 to 2,264 feet per second; "35" was a tank mileage reproduced through a computer entry error.


Parents of Murdered Children Gather in Sacramento to Remember Victims


Results Due Tuesday In Coleman Incident
Mets outfielder Vince Coleman should know Tuesday whether he faces criminal charges for throwing a lighted firecracker, but, in the interim, could be confronted with two more lawsuits.
Earlier this week, the parents of 2-year-old Amanda Santos showed graphic photos of a blood blister in their daughter's right eye, deemed Coleman responsible and promised to sue him.
Today, a person close to Coleman's legal advisers said Cindy Mayhew, the 33-year-old woman who allegedly aggravated an inner-ear problem from the incident, and Marshall Savoy, a 13-year-old boy who allegedly suffered shin lacerations, have obtained counsel and also plan to sue.


A Home of Their Own, Tenant Included
Keith Spears, 30, and Carolyn Johnson, 28, plan to be married in December.
Earlier this year they decided it no longer made sense to pay $1,742 a month for the one-bedroom apartment thay rented on the upper East Side.
Thay figured that at currect home prices, thay could find a house with mortgage payments near the amount they paid in rent.


On a Bus in Queens, Three Bandits Stage A Frontier Robbery
Three young thugs boarded a city bus in Queens yesterday, brandished guns like Wild West bandits and staged a frontier-style holdup.
They strode up and down the aisle, fired shots into the roof, terrorized and robbed 22 passengers, struck a girl in the face with a gun butt and escaped with $300 in cash and fistfuls of jewelry.
The outlaws -- one armed with a silver revolver and another with a pair of guns, while a third carried a book bag -- made no effort to conceal their faces as they boarded the Q-85 bus at 8:30 A.M. at 140th Avenue and Edgewood Avenue in Springfield Gardens, a residential neighborhood just northeast of Kennedy International Airport.


Going to the Source to Buy Stocks Cheap
Three years ago, Constance M. Davis did not own a single share of stock.
Now the 36-year-old computer programmer in Richmond and mother of two boasts a $25,000 portfolio, having hit on an investment strategy that is as smart as it is simple.
Mrs.
Davis got her start by buying single shares of the fast-food giant McDonald's and RPM Inc., a maker of protective coatings and products for hobbyists.
She then tended these seeds by instructing the companies to reinvest her dividends automatically and by adding regular dollops of spare cash for more stock.


MEDICARE DISPUTE HOLDS UP ACCORD ON A BUDGET PLAN
Only hours after the White House declared it a done deal and all wrapped up, House and Senate negotiators plucked at a thread on President Clinton's $500 billion package of spending cuts and tax increases late today, and it seemed to unravel again.
After a night of fruitless work, the negotiators quit until Monday.
Already lagging in delivering the package to the House and Senate for votes next week, the negotiators have "taken an oath" to finish by next week, said the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, Jim Sasser of Tennessee.


White House Plans to Fight For Discharge of Gay Sailor
The Clinton Administration argued in a court brief today that the old Pentagon ban on homosexuals was constitutional and indicated that it would continue fighting for the discharge of a gay sailor.
In a brief filed here in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the Administration criticized Judge Terry J. Hatter Jr. of Federal District Court for overturning the discharge of Keith Meinhold, a sonar operator at Moffett Field Naval Air Station in Mountain View, Calif.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.04
3.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.01
3.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.16
3.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.44
5.41
6.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.56
6.56
7.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.29
7.29
8.46
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.78
5.79
6.11
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


N.F.L. Suspends Moore for Four Games for Steroid Possession
Giants right guard Eric Moore had anticipated that the hammer would fall.
It had only been a question of when, not if.
So when the announcement came today that the National Football League is suspending Moore for the first four games of the regular season without pay because he violated the league's policy on possessing anabolic steroids and related substances, he wasn't surprised.


INSIDE
New Role for Alexander
Jane Alexander, now appearing on Broadway in "The Sisters Rosensweig," will be appointed by President Clinton to head the National Endowment for the Arts.
Page 11.
Demjanjuk to Go to Ukraine
One day after his acquittal in Jerusalem, John Demjanjuk applied for a temporary visa to go to his native Ukraine, and he is expected to leave in a matter of days.
Page 5.
Key Vote on Surgeon General
Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, President Clinton's nominee for surgeon general, won the endorsement of a key Senate committee today.
Page 9.
Part of Water Alert Lifted
The bacteria in New York City's water supply returned to Chelsea, but the alert was lifted in lower Manhattan after clean test results.
Page 24.


U.S. PRESSES PLANS ON BOSNIA DEFENSE
Despite the agreement reported in Geneva today on Bosnia, Clinton Administration officials said they were pressing ahead with their efforts to develop a plan for air strikes to protect the besieged Muslims in Bosnia.
Clinton Administration officials said there was broad agreement within the Government that Washington should be prepared to use air power to protect United Nations peacekeepers, insure the delivery of food and other aid and prevent the fall of Sarajevo and other key Muslim enclaves.


No Headline
"At first, I thought it was a fake gun they were shooting. Then I saw the holes in the ceiling." -- AMINATA LEE, a 15-year-old witness to a bus robbery in Queens.  [ 24:3. ]


Japan: The Voters' Reward
Democracy is alive and well in Japan.
It's only a first step, of course, but the millions of Japanese who voted two weeks ago for an end to the corrupt "money politics" of the long-ruling Liberal Democratic Party are about to get their reward.
Morihiro Hosokawa has been chosen by a wide coalition of former opposition parties as their nominee for Prime Minister.
His ratification by Parliament next week is considered a sure thing.
The aristocratic Mr.
Hosokawa quit the L.D.P. more than a year ago, before such defections were seen as a shrewd career move.
He has become the personal symbol of a new, cleaner political style.


In Revival Bid, Japan Party Opts for a Younger Leader
Battered though it may be by scandals and defections, the Liberal Democratic Party tried to begin its comeback today by selecting its youngest president in two decades.
It then attacked a coalition that seems bound to assume power next week, as the party tried out its new role in the opposition for the first time.
In a surprisingly solid vote of 208 to 159, the party that has held power for nearly four decades rejected Michio Watanabe, 70, an old bull who runs one of its largest factions, and chose Yohei Kono, a 56-year-old onetime rebel with little influence but with the clean image the party desperately needs to recover its credibility.


In Flux, Trade Panel Gains Power
Like Australia's duck-billed platypus, a hairy mammal that lays eggs like a bird, the International Trade Commission is an unusual beast that defies easy classification.
But the power of the six-member body, which on Tuesday stripped away much of the American steel industry's protection from imports, is real and growing.


U.S. Stocks Lose Out To Europe's
Money flowed into stocks in Europe yesterday, where currency turmoil has raised hopes for lower interest rates.
The shift hurt American stocks, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling 27.95, to 3,539.47.


Judge Warns About Leaks In Bomb Case
A Federal judge demanded an end yesterday to law-enforcement leaks in the World Trade Center bombing case and what prosecutors say was a foiled plot to blow up other New York City targets.
If the leaks continue, he warned, he will ask law-enforcement officials to answer questions under oath about the origins of the disclosures.
"In my day, whoever did this would have been afraid for his or her job," Judge Michael B. Mukasey said at a hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DENTO-MED INDUSTRIES, Boca Raton, Fla., announced that its shareholders had voted to change its name to Hydron Technologies Inc. to promote recognition of its patents for a new moisturizing technology and also reflect its product focus.
LIFETIME CORP., Boston, announced its shareholders had approved a merger with Olsten Corp. into one health care and temporary office services provider.
SALANT CORP., New York, announced that a Federal bankruptcy court had confirmed its reorganization plan and that it expected to drop its Chapter 11 creditor protection by mid-August.
The company's restructuring will convert $200 million debt into equity.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD Christie Beats Lewis Olympic champion Linford Christie burst clear of Carl Lewis, the world record-holder, to win a 100-meter showdown in 10.08 seconds yesterday in Gateshead, England.
Lewis was third in 10.22 behind another American, Jon Drummond, who led for most of the race before a sellout crowd of 14,797 at the Gateshead International Stadium and finished in 10.12.
Christie and Lewis were guaranteed $150,000 apiece.
Christie, 33 years old, was faster out of the blocks than Lewis and was a meter clear of his 32-year-old rival at the line after overtaking Drummond in the last 20 meters.
Calvin Smith, a former world record-holder, was fourth in 10.33.
Lewis said he was affected by a slow start, but Christie said Drummond's stunning speed off the blocks inspired him to victory.
It was the first time Lewis and Christie had met since the 1991 world championships final in Tokyo, which Lewis won in a world-record time of 9.86, with Christie fourth in a European-record 9.92.
Both marks still stand.
Despite Christie's triumph, Lewis holds a 12-2 lead in their head-to-head races. (AP) TENNIS Korda Upsets Lendl Sixth-seeded Petr Korda defeated fourth-seeded Ivan Lendl, a six-time winner, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Player's Ltd.
International Canadian Open in Montreal.
Korda, the highest seeded player left in the tournament, advanced to a semifinal meeting today with unseeded Mikael Pernfors, who followed his victory over Jim Courier on Thursday with a 6-2, 6-1 victory over No. 8 Aleksandr Volkov.
Korda extended his record against Lendl to 5-1.
He has known the Czech-born American citizen since childhood, when his father, Petr Korda Sr., worked with Lendl on the Czechoslovak Davis Cup team.
"I don't read his shots well," said Lendl, the former No. 1-ranked player who is now ranked seventh.
"He has no backswing, and I have trouble picking up the ball. If he's making his shots, he's hard to play against." Also advancing yesterday was unseeded Richey Reneberg, who defeated Brett Steven, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2.
He will face the winner of the late quarterfinal between Andre Agassi and Todd Martin. (AP) Reinstadler Upsets Sukova: Unheralded Beate Reinstadler advanced to the semifinals of the Acura U.S.
Women's Hard Court Championships yesterday with a straight-set victory over third-seeded Helena Sukova.
Reinstadler, 150 places behind Sukova in the world ranking, used a variety of passing shots to befuddle the Czech in her 7-6 (7-3), 6-3 victory in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
"I'm just so happy," said Reinstader, who earlier this week upset seventh-seeded Lisa Raymond.
"It's almost my dream come true." Top-seeded Conchita Martinez cruised into the semifinals with a 6-4, 6-1 victory over Jolene Watanabe.
Also advancing were fifth-seeded Zina Garrison-Jackson and fourth-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere.
Maleeva-Fragniere regoupred during a rain delay to defeat Tami Whitlinger, 5-7, 6-4, 6-1, and Garrison-Jackson defeated Claudia Porwik, 6-3, 7-6 (8-6). (AP)


Brooklyn Woman Arrested in Shooting of Teen-Ager
A Brooklyn woman who the police said had shot a teen-ager she believed had terrorized her 13-year-old son was arrested yesterday outside her home in Crown Heights.
The woman, Joanne Jones, 45, was charged with assault and possession of a deadly weapon two days after a 14-year-old boy who lived next door, Jomi Butler, was shot in the groin.
A police spokesman, Scott Bloch, asserted that Ms.
Jones assaulted the boy because she thought that he had taken her son's watch.


How to Make Donations To Help Flood Victims
Several American charities have established special funds and sent disaster teams to the Midwest.
Here is a list of organizations seeking donations:


Doing the Health-Care Hustle
If the actor Eddie Murphy had wandered into Washington's Mayflower Hotel on Thursday, he might have thought they were shooting a sequel to his film, "The Distinguished Gentleman." In the movie, Mr.
Murphy plays a petty hustler who is elected to Congress in order to get campaign contributions from lobbyists.
"Hey, man, this scam is so easy and it's legal," said his character when he realized how Washington fund-raising works.
The latest version of the ploy stars two Democratic senators, Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia and Bob Graham of Florida (both playing themselves).
They figured out that more than 200 health industry lobbyists were anxious enough about the Administration's reform plan to fork over $5,000 each to attend, among other things, the Democratic Senate Campaign Committee's "issues forum" on health care reform.


Exports Can Fuel Recovery for U.S.
To the Editor:
Your July 17 front-page analysis of a national economic recovery too weak to create many jobs lays the bulk of the blame on American consumers, who "have simply not purchased with their usual gusto." Yet you do not mention exports as a way to offset weak demand at home.
Despite the slump in world growth, United States exports continue to increase, creating about 800,000 jobs in the last two years.
These tend to be higher-paying jobs, in part because 80 percent of our exports are in competitive manufacturing industries.


Getting a Good Dollar Deal While Abroad
The European currency crisis has created confusion for many Americans who plan to visit Europe soon.
With currency exchange rates in flux, many people are seeking ways to get the best possible deal when they convert dollars into European currencies and protect themselves from sharp declines in the dollar while they are overseas.


Nigeria Will Find Democracy by Itself
To the Editor:
Two editorials on Nigeria, "The Shrinking African Giant" (July 1) and "Democracy, Nigerian Style" (July 15) are so caustic and insulting that a response is necessary.
Nigerians do not think that because of the present crisis their nation suddenly begins to shrink.
The "clever and energetic peoples" of Nigeria whom you refer to, despite present difficulties, remain confident of their future and of their ability to translate their natural material and human resources into development.


New Reasons for Doubt About Monetary Union
Encouraging economic interdependency has always been the primary means by which the European Community has sought to avoid conflicts among its members and to promote a unity of national interests.
The European Monetary System is the centerpiece of the community's attempt to extend that strategy all the way to a single currency.
However elegant the theory, today's market chaos made clear once again the extreme practical difficulties of maintaining semifixed exchange rates among the leading European currencies.
And to the extent that the mechanism is the first step toward a single currency, those difficulties threaten not only to extinguish what hopes remain for a unified currency but also to undermine the community's main achievement, a single market for goods, money and people.


Business Digest
Europe's Currency Crisis
The European Monetary System was threatened after speculators mounted an attack on the franc, deciding that France could no longer defend its currency against Germany's persistence to keep its interest rates high.  [ Page 1. ]  Investors rushed to buy gold, pushing prices to levels not seen in nearly three years.  [ 46. ]


Archer Hoping To Make History
George Archer is attempting to make history this weekend by becoming the first golfer since 1927 to win the same tournament four years in a row, and he liked the position he was in after today's first round of the Northville Long Island Classic.
Archer shot a three-under-par 69 this afternoon in the Senior PGA Tour event being played at the Meadow Brook Club.
Archer's round on the 6,775-yard course left him a shot off the lead, shared by Charles Coody and Harold Henning, who shot 68's in swirling winds that made club selection difficult.
Orville Moody is tied with Archer for second after the first round.


Harry Sakin, 57, Detective Sergeant In New York, Dies
Sgt.
Harry Sakin, a highly decorated New York City police detective, died on Thursday at his home in Garden City, L.I.
He was 57 years old.
The cause was cancer, his family said.
Sergeant Sakin retired in 1988 after 25 years in the police department, where his assignments included the Central Robbery Division, the Organized Crime Control Bureau, and the Major Case Squad.
At his death, he was a principal rackets investigator for the Statewide Organized Crime Task Force in the Inspector General's office of the New York City School Construction Authority.


Anger Over Rise in Malpractice Fees Shows Loss of Trust in a Regulator
The State Insurance Department's decision to raise medical malpractice premiums has demonstrated that the department's difficulty in regulating Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has left it open to second-guessing that extends far beyond Empire.
The average 14 percent rate increase approved on Monday by the Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, generated an instant outcry from physicians, lawyers, patients' rights advocates and legislators.
While some critics armed themselves with statistics, many based their objections largely on the skepticism created by Mr.
Curiale's previous decisions to grant questionable rate increases to Empire.


Debris From Comet Forces New Delay of Shuttle Flight
Celestial events rarely influence the course of human history, but a passing comet has forced the space agency to postpone a planned flight of the space shuttle Discovery.
The comet has left an unusually heavy shower of debris in the intended path of the Discovery, raising the risk of collision.
It is the first time in the history of the nation's space program that a NASA mission to launch astronauts into orbit is being delayed by a meteor shower.


Caught in a Bind? I.R.S. May Let You Pay Less
TAXPAYERS who dealt with April's agony by filing an automatic four-month extension on their tax returns face their day of reckoning on Aug. 16.
Many of these people are expected to owe money, and some will find that they simply do not have it.
In a change of policy, the Internal Revenue Service granted extensions this tax season even to people who owed money.
It was extended to provide some relief to taxpayers affected by the Government's decision to decrease withholding last year in hopes of encouraging spending.


Russian Bankers Looking West
It was a classic socialist concept.
A power plant would be built in Russia and rather than being paid for by local citizens would be financed by a state-owned bank.
"Can anyone tell me what's wrong with that?" asked Suresh C. Chugh, a managing director at J. P. Morgan Securities Inc. who was on loan for the day to Fairfield University in Fairfield, Conn.
The 40 Russian bankers in the class held headphones to their ears and concentrated on the translation of Mr.
Chugh's question.


Jefferson City Watches River Defy Forecasts
The cresting Missouri River moved past this bluff city today a day earlier and half a foot higher than had been predicted, ripping three buildings from their foundations, knocking out a gas line serving 1,500 people and forcing the early morning evacuation of a tiny community to the east.
Overnight the surging river ripped out whole sections of Route 54, the main highway and river crossing into the city from the north, but Interstate 70, the main artery across the state from St.
Louis to Kansas City, was spared.
This morning, flood water from the Missouri River was just five feet below the roadbed at Rocheport, about 40 miles west of here, but began dropping as the crest passed.
Des Moines Drinks Again
Although the flooding continued to deliver destruction across the Midwest, residents of Des Moines received some good news tonight: almost three weeks after flood water contaminated their water treatment plant, drinking water was being pumped to their homes and businesses again.  [ Article, page 7. ]


Bridge
Two more high-ranked teams were ousted from the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here Thursday night.
One was the third-seeded group, headed by Cliff Russell of Miami, which lost by 54 imps to Sidney Lazard of New Orleans, Mark Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J., Bill Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., and Edgar Kaplan and Mark Feldman, both of Manhattan.
Two Brazilian world champions, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, were eliminated.
They were part of the fifth-seeded team, led by Jim Cayne of Manhattan, which lost by 18 imps to Grant Baze of La Jolla, Calif., and his team.


MUSLIM LEADERSHIP BOWS TO DEMANDS ON BOSNIA DIVISION
In a first step toward ending the 16-month civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Bosnian Muslim leadership headed by President Alija Izetbegovic yielded to international pressure today and agreed to Serbian and Croatian demands for the country's division into three ethnically based republics joined together in a loose federal structure.
The breakthrough opened the door to a final peace settlement to end a conflict that has cost up to 200,000 lives, appalled the world by its wanton brutality and popularized the chilling euphemism "ethnic cleansing" to describe the deliberate expulsion of hundreds of thousands of people from their homes out of religious or ethnic prejudice.


Las Feministas of Mexican Cinema
In her 25 years as a film actress, Ofelia Medina has seen three Mexican "new waves," so the term makes her smile.
But this third one, distinguished by the entry of women as film directors and producers, holds unusual promise.
"I think the feminine spirit has come to change the macho spirit of the old Jurassic system," she said on Tuesday in an interview in her Manhattan hotel room.
"We now have a generation of women directors and producers. They are the new wave."


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday with an article about second-quarter growth in the gross domestic product reversed the figures shown in current dollars and those shown in 1987 dollars.
A corrected table appears today on page 36.
A chart based on the same data gave the annual rate of change in the gross domestic product incorrectly for the second quarter.
It was 1.6 percent, not 4 percent.


British High Court Reaffirms Europe Treaty's Ratification
A British court today rejected a legal challenge to ratification of the Treaty on European Union, improving the treaty's chances of taking effect by the end of the year.
The High Court in London turned aside arguments brought by Lord Rees-Mogg, a former editor of The Times of London and one of the most prominent critics of the treaty, that the ratification process in Parliament was unconstitutional.


Jane Alexander Is President's Choice For Arts Endowment
President Clinton has decided to name the actress Jane Alexander to head the National Endowment for the Arts, perhaps as soon as Monday, a White House official said today.
The decision to appoint Ms.
Alexander was reported today by Liz Smith in New York Newsday.
The Administration had hoped to announce the appointment next week, during a meeting of the National Council on the Arts, which is the endowment's advisory board, said a Congressional aide familiar with arts issues.


Corrections
An article last Saturday about the British Parliament's acceptance of the Treaty on European Union misstated the deadline for Prime Minister John Major's Government to call the next election.
It is 1997, not 1995.


F. R. MacGinnis, 69, Retired British Envoy
Francis R. MacGinnis, a retired British diplomat, died on Wednesday in an automobile accident on the way to his home in Fayence, France.
He was 69.
The British Information Services Office in Manhattan said his wife, Carolyn, had been seriously injured in the crash.


Small Businesses May Hold Fate of Clinton Budget Plan
As far as business is concerned, the biggest debate about President Clinton's budget plan is whether it will inhibit small businesses from creating jobs.
Straining to swing small-business owners (and voters) against the plan, Republicans assert that the President's proposed higher taxes will hurt about a million small businesses and cause thousands of them to lay off workers.


Traders Play Weak Franc For Profits
The frenzy in the currency markets yesterday stemmed from a speculative trading strategy designed, in essence, to force the French Government to devalue the franc and deliver enormous profits to traders.
When the Bundesbank did not cut a critical interest rate on Thursday, it signaled that the Germans were willing to worry about domestic concerns first before the needs of the European monetary union.


Plan for Air Strikes Continues
Administration officials continued to develop plans for air strikes in Bosnia, saying there was broad agreement to prevent the fall of Sarajevo and other enclaves.
Page 4.


Lady Thatcher's Barony
To the Editor:
Margaret Thatcher, the former British Prime Minister, is now the Baroness Thatcher, sitting in the House of Lords and causing a ruckus there, not because she was awarded a baronetcy, as you report in "Lords Turn Back Thatcher Revolt on Europe," (news article, July 15), but because she was awarded a barony.
The recipient of a baronetcy is a baronet, a sort of hereditary knight.
As far as I am aware, the title descends exclusively through the male line, and has never been awarded to a woman.
Furthermore, a baronet is still a commoner, and there is no way he could sit in the House of Lords.


Sports of The Times; First Dance With Reality, Mortality
ALEX RODRIGUEZ sent a ripple of laughter through the room when he told reporters how eager he was to resolve negotiations that will result in either a pro baseball contract with Seattle or a college career this fall at the University of Miami.
In either case, the young man regarded last season as the best high school shortstop in baseball said he was eager to be on his own.


Saipan, 15 Years On, Correcting Labor Abuses; Slave Wages
To the Editor:
You are to be congratulated for your hard look at the sweatshops in the Northern Marianas Islands (front page, July 18) and the commonwealth government's apparent lack of interest in solving the problem.
It's an embarrassment that any jurisdiction of the United States is allowed by law to import foreign workers, pay slave wages and force them to live and work in substandard conditions.
I introduced legislation last April to put a stop to these practices by applying Federal immigration laws to the commonwealth.
Our immigration laws were meant to protect the rights of United States citizens wherever they reside, and those laws should apply equally to all Americans.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BUS PASSENGERS ROBBED  Like an Old West stagecoach robbery, passengers on the Q85 bus were robbed after it was stopped at 140th and Edgewood Avenues in the Springfield Garden section of Queens by two men with semi-automatic handguns who boarded the bus and made their announcement of a robbery to the accompaniment of shots fired into the roof of the bus.
Page 1.


Corporate Money Gilds Legislators' Conference
As state legislators from around the country sipped champagne over a breakfast sponsored by Stimson Lane Wine and Spirits, they discussed whether states should relax restrictions on the wine industry.
A few doors down, the California Milk Producers and other industry groups picked up the tab for legislators at a breakfast session on farm and dairy issues.


London Calling. Wake Up, Lennox.
Score it a knockout by default for FRANK BRUNO.
It was supposed to be the first joint news conference promoting the Oct. 1 world heavyweight title fight between Bruno and World Boxing Council champion LENNOX LEWIS.
Bruno, Britain's most popular sportsman, showed up right on time in London yesterday.
Wearing a baby-blue suit, he stole the show with his playful manner and one-liners.


Angora Goats and Honey Bees
The Senate has suddenly come to its senses and voted to kill the bewhiskered subsidy for wool and mohair.
But old farm programs rarely die, and the farm lobby seems likely to get this one resurrected when Senate and House conferees work out the final allocation of farm funds for next year.
That would be a pity.
As subsidies go, the payout to sheep and goat ranchers is trifling, at $200 million a year.
It began as a sop to the ranchers, when President Eisenhower rejected their plea for tariff protection.
The nominal justification was "national security" -- the need for cloth for military uniforms.
It was suspicious at the time; the availability of synthetic substitutes makes it irrelevant now.


Youths Dare to Explore The Mine Field of Race
THE permutations of racism can be strange and subtle.
Ask Araina Jewell.
The young woman from Manhattan, who will be a freshman at Brown University this fall, says she has encountered little discrimination in her 18 years.
But some people tell her she is simply not what they expect of a black woman.
"It's little things," Ms.
Jewell told a group gathered at a New York City public television station the other day to tape a "Rap on Race."


Report Says Bradley Getting $44.2 Million
SHAWN BRADLEY, the 7-foot-6-inch center who hasn't played competitive basketball in two years, signed a contract with the Philadelphia 76ers worth $44.2 million over eight years, a report published yesterday says.
Sixers General Manager JIM LYNAM declined to comment to the Philadelphia Daily News, but the newspaper attributed the figure to an unidentified National Basketball Association source.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Randy Velarde, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.


A Bad Review Can Be a Killer
As a cop, Luis Guzman has tracked down droves of evildoers.
With undiluted success, he has caught Mafia members, unrepentant murderers, impudent drug dealers.
True, it's dicey work; he often gets shot.
"Let me think, I don't believe I was ever killed," he said.
"No, definitely, I was never killed."
Well, then, how about working for the New York City Police Department?


Visionaries Offer Eyewear to Uzbeks
When the idea of selling eyewear to the Uzbeks was presented to her more than a year ago, Norma Scalzulli was caught off guard.
Not only was she unfamiliar with the latest consumer trends in Central Asia, she had only the vaguest notion where -- or what -- Uzbekistan was.
"Very honestly, I did not know anything about it," said Ms.
Scalzulli, vice president for franchising of Cohen's Fashion Optical, a Long Island-based chain with 104 stores in the Northeast and Florida.


No Headline


Observer; It's A Child's World
Look, children, look.
Look and see George.
George is smiling.
Do you see George smile?
He is smiling at Governor Cuomo.
He is smiling at Mayor Dinkins.
Do you see Governor Cuomo and Mayor Dinkins being smiled at?
Governor Cuomo and Mayor Dinkins do not look happy, do they?
No, they do not look happy.
They look unhappy.
Look, children, look and see Governor Cuomo and Mayor Dinkins look unhappy.


New Jersey Court Bans Use of Guards as Police
A Superior Court judge today threw out a two-month-old contract between the tiny Borough of Sussex and a private security company that replaced the borough's four-member police force, which was disbanded after a corruption scandal.
Although there is no law forbidding such an arrangement, Judge Reginald Stanton said, the contract violated "a general regulatory scheme" put in place over many years by the Legislature to regulate the qualifications, training and accountability of police officers.


