Yields of Money Funds Up As Investor Demand Sags
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds rose smartly in the latest week, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
And as in the previous three reporting periods, tax-exempt yields were up sharply in the seven-day period ended Tuesday.
Analysts note that the supply of new municipal issues continues to outpace investor demand, but with a difference.
While yields had been pushed up earlier by a heavy supply of new issues, they are now rising as a result of weak investor demand.


A Shaky Spring: Gooden's Asterisk at Risk
The 10-13 record of 1992, an unprecedented season of failure for him, is for the moment filed with an asterisk in Dwight Gooden's memory.
His shoulder was not right, so the statistical accounting of his talent was tainted.
"A rehab year," Gooden said.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Snow-on-the-Mountain
Q.
Last autumn
, I bought some branches that had white-striped
leaves and tiny green flowers.
I was told it was snow-on-the-mountain.
I'd like to grow it myself.
How? -- Frances Mulroony, Philadelphia.
A.
Also called ghost weed, this native American succulent grows wild from Texas to Minnesota.
In his new book, "Rare and Unusual Plants" (Simon &amp; Schuster, $40), William C. Mulligan explains that it is a bushy annual that can grow well over two feet tall and "needs damp soil in spring for the seeds to sprout and sufficient moisture to draw the roots downward." Once established, though, "it's a drought-buster," he says.
Full sun is best, although snow-on-the-mountain will tolerate light shade.


Strang Cancer Center Receives $27 Million Gift
Wanda Jablonski, who built a publishing fortune on inside information about the oil industry, has left $27 million to the Strang Cancer Prevention Center in Manhattan -- the largest sum received in its 59-year history.
Miss Jablonski, who wanted to be a doctor but fainted at the sight of the dissection of animals, was a trustee of the center.
She made a gift of $3 million in 1990 and helped create its High-Risk Breast Registry, a data base that now includes information about the genetic history of 15,000 women and 250,000 of their relatives.


A Cyclical Lead
Consumer growth stocks -- food, tobacco, drugs and such -- are starting to come back into fashion.
As of late last month, the Morgan Stanley cyclical index had gained more than 12 percentage points for the year over the firm's consumer index.
The gap has narrowed since last week, however, but has not closed.


Events: Flowers, Posters, Antiques
Scents and Sights
Macy's Herald Square; (212) 560-4495.
The annual store flower show takes place Sunday through April 17.
There will be floral displays, garden and tree scenes, specialty gardens, table settings by celebrities and talks.
The daily schedule is available by calling.
Folk Art Talk
Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
Tonight at 6 P.M., in conjunction with the current exhibition "Bob Bishop: A Life in American Folk Art," a talk will be offered on Mr.
Bishop as a collector of folk art.
A reception will follow.
Admission is $5.
Antiques Show
Pier 92, 12th Avenue at 55th Street; (212) 439-5909.
Furniture, jewelry, quilts, 1950's collectibles and folk art are among the items at a show on Saturday and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $9.
Movie Posters and More
St. Moritz Hotel, 50 Central Park South at Avenue of the Americas; (212) 206-0499.
The International Vintage Poster Fair, with more than 10,000 posters dating from the 1890's, will be on Saturday from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission, one day, $7.50; both days, $12.
Early buying session: Saturday from 9 to 11 A.M.; admission is $20.
Fanciful Settings
Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place (near Richmond Terrace), St.
George
, S.I.; (718) 727-1135.
"Pretty Tables, Perfect Settings," a benefit show of 15 tables decorated by artists and interior designers, starts tomorrow with a cocktail reception from 7 to 9 P.M.
Tickets are $35.
There will also be events on Saturday and Sunday.
Information and reservations are available by phone.


Suffolk Approves Extension Of 1¦ Increase in Sales Tax
A penny increase in the Suffolk County sales tax, adopted last year and scheduled to expire in December, would continue for two more years under a plan approved early this morning by county legislators.
The 10-to-7 vote was welcomed by County Executive Robert J. Gaffney, who boarded the 8:05 flight from Islip to Albany this morning to begin lobbying the State Legislature to approve the extension so the county can avoid a $120 million property-tax increase.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Weslia Whitfield
Algonquin Hotel  59 West 44th Street  Manhattan  Through April 24
If Weslia Whitfield, one of San Francisco's most revered cabaret performers, epitomizes a "Bay Area style" of singing, it may be because she exudes scarcely a trace of Broadway razzmatazz, even when singing well-known show tunes.


A Challenge to Cellular's Foothold
Those static-filled radios used to dispatch cab drivers may be on the verge of becoming a mode of communication for the masses -- and a potentially powerful competitor to the $9 billion cellular industry.
Fleet Call Inc. is at the forefront of a new industry trying to combine mobile radio and new digital technology to build a network nearly indistinguishable from that of the cellular industry, which serves more than 11 million customers.


Review/Music; The Sounds of Cybertronics
If Thursday's concert by Nicolas Collins, Joel Ryan, Ray Edgar and the Soldier String Quartet at the Kitchen had a collective message, it was similar to the one that music has been getting recently from the downtown school of electricity.
The traditional artistic process is upended: no more the stepwise progression from materials to technique to beautiful object; now the art is in the materials themselves.
How they are organized is anticlimax.
Midway through the evening, Mr.
Ryan unwound wire across the stage, plugged it into a terminal and strolled back and forth, manipulating its length and rubbing it with a bow.
Synthetically generated metaphors for human gesture and man-made sounds boomed and creaked from loudspeakers.
The process was repeated a little later through the proximity of hand-held objects to various microphones.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
IT is always worthwhile to inspect the outside of a house in early spring each year to check for winter damage, but after this year's unusually severe winter, a thorough spring inspection could be especially valuable.
An inspection need not be completed in a single session.
In fact, by making small repairs as you proceed, you can often avert catastrophes like roof and basement leaks, and can perform regular maintenance that otherwise might be neglected.


Nestle to Sell Its Stouffer Hotel Unit
Nestle S.A., the giant Swiss food manufacturer, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Stouffer Hotel Holdings Inc. for an undisclosed amount to a private Hong Kong company.
Stouffer, with headquarters in Solon, Ohio, owns or operates 39 hotels and resorts in North America and one in St.
Thomas, in the United States Virgin Islands.
Most of the properties are upscale and several, including resorts in California, Hawaii and Mexico, are in the luxury category.


CD's Big Cardboard Box Is History
Say goodbye to the long box, the 6-by-12-inch cardboard box that holds a compact disk.
As of today it officially becomes an artifact of a bygone decade.
After years of wrangling, environmental sentiments have prevailed in the recording business.
The hollow, throwaway long box had become a symbol of conspicuous waste, and it had to go.
In February, the Recording Industry Association of America announced that on April 1, 1993, its members, the major recording companies, would distribute their compact disks in a 5-by-5 1/2-inch package, the size of the so-called jewel box inside a long box.
Most CD's will continue to be sold in the clear plastic jewel boxes, but for truly environmentally sensitive performers, cardboard and other materials will be permitted.
With the new practice, the United States joins the rest of the world, where compact disks have long been marketed without the larger package.


Schools' Tracks and Democracy; Sorting Students by Performance: Efficiency or Elitism?
In this suburb accustomed to educational innovation, Montclair High School is examining a proposal to take the first step away from a public school practice as familiar as the flag salute: the method of sorting students called tracking.
The Montclair plan's proponents assert that change is long overdue in the practice of placing bright students in one class, slower ones in another.
Striking at ingrained assumptions about how America should teach its children, they contend that the status quo, whether called tracking, ability-grouping or choice, is not only educationally stifling but also racist, elitist and out of step with democratic notions of equity and fair play.


Stop Giving Money To Buy I.R.A. Bombs
To the Editor:
On the morning that 3-year-old Jonathan Ball is buried, victim of the Irish Republican Army, I make a deeply emotional plea -- as an American mother in London -- to my fellow Americans to stop giving money to the I.R.A. to buy bombs.


Oldham Again Journeys to Exotic Places
TODD OLDHAM is as much showman as designer.
Every season he packs a standing-room crowd of friends, fans and fashion professionals into a vast SoHo gallery and whips them into a frenzy with bewigged models that cavort down a block-long runway.
Last year, he transported his audience to mythical fairgrounds in Texas.
This week, he took them on a trip to Morocco and India, complete with a transvestite "guru" named Billy Beyond in a tousled blond wig.
The program listed the outfits by names like "comfy in the casbah" and "curry on downtown."


Time to Play Fair on School Aid
New York State's Legislature lurches toward its budget deadline with one of the most contentious items, the state's grossly unfair system of school financing, unresolved.
To their credit, Gov.
Mario Cuomo, the State Board of Regents and New York City officials are pushing for reform more aggressively than they have in years.
It's time for the state's legislators to join the fight for fairness.


6 Die as Muslims Flee Bosnian Town in U.N. Trucks
More than 2,000 Muslims crammed aboard 14 United Nations trucks and were evacuated from a besieged town in eastern Bosnia today.
But the tragedy of an earlier convoy was repeated when six people were killed in the crush to flee.
Witnesses said the pandemonium at Srebrenica, the assembly point for the convoy, was worse than the evacuation on Monday that claimed at least seven lives.


Russian Hurdler Is Hit With 4-Year Ban
Track's world body has confirmed a four-year ban on LYUDMILA NAROZHILENKO, the Russian world 100-meter hurdles champion, who tested positive for anabolic steroids at a meet in Lievin, France, in February.
An International Amateur Athletic Federation spokeswoman, JAYNE PEARCE, said yesterday that the ban has been imposed pending a hearing by the Russian federation in case the runner decides to appeal.


L. Arthur Larson Is Dead at 82; Top Eisenhower Aide and Writer
L.
Arthur Larson, a top aide to President Dwight D. Eisenhower and chief theoretician for moderate Republicanism in that era, died on Saturday at his home in Durham, N.C.
He was 82.
The presumed cause was heart failure, his family said.


Krupp Agrees to Contract
Uwe Krupp and the Islanders have agreed to a new contract that will pay the big defenseman about $700,000 a year for this season and next and for an option year, Krupp said yesterday.
Krupp had been playing out his option this season at a salary of $377,000.
The new contract will pay him retroactively for this season, and he will be able to reopen negotiations before his option year begins.


At Home at the Hair Salon
HE describes himself as a "New York boy at heart," and that feeling was a prime reason Peter Coppola recently opened Coppola, a hair salon at 673 Madison Avenue (61st Street).
About 12 years ago, Mr.
Coppola closed his first New York salon and moved to Florida.
Now back in town, he wanted a salon that looked like a home.
That may explain the natural oak cabinets, the comfy black leather seating, the Italian lamps.
"There's nothing Formica here," he said.


PEC Israel Economic Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mr. Clinton Heads for the Timber
A man of lofty aims, Bruce Babbitt began his tenure as Secretary of the Interior hoping to reverse a century of federally sponsored exploitation of public lands by striking a sensible balance between commerce and environmental stewardship.
He knew he would face obstacles, but probably the last thing he expected was that one of them would turn out to be the man who gave him the job, President Clinton.
Mr.
Babbitt wanted to raise the fees for grazing livestock on 280 million acres of public rangeland.
He also wanted to charge royalties on gold, silver and other metals now mined from Federal land at no cost.
The money would be used for a host of worthy purposes, like lowering the deficit, restoring damaged lands and improving the badly stressed national park system.


Xoma's Chairman Leaves To Head Biotech Start-Up
The Xoma Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Berkeley, Calif., said today that its chairman, Steven C. Mendell, had resigned to become president and chief executive of Prizm Pharmaceuticals Inc. in San Diego.
Mr.
Mendell will join Prizm, a privately held company, in mid-May.
At Xoma, Mr.
Mendell, 51, will be succeeded by John L. Castello, 57, who joined the company as president and chief executive last year.
Mr.
Mendell, who joined Xoma in 1984, previously held those titles.
The company's founder, Patrick J. Scannon, 45, continues as vice chairman of scientific and medical affairs.


Sports of The Times; The Coach Who Made A U-Turn
ALL over New York City, traffic signs forbid U-turns, but that has never deterred a New York driver.
If you find you're going in the wrong direction, you do what you have to do.
You make the U-turn.
As long as there's no cop around.
In the Bronx, you learn that at an early age.
Make the U-turn as soon as you can.
Don't waste any more time going in the wrong direction.
Get going in the right direction.


It's only on paper, but it's become an effective form of animation.
A TREND in advertising technique is a little like an angry bee -- as soon as it makes an impression, its life span can be drastically shortened.
With this in mind, let us reluctantly consider an intriguing device known as paper animation, which has been put to effective use by several advertisers, including Nike, Anheuser-Busch and, more recently, Nynex and Kool-Aid.


Accounts
*
Fortis Inc., New York, to Ciociola &amp; Co., New York, to handle the insurance and consumer financial services company's account in the United States.
Ciociola was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $4.5 million, without a review.


Robec Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. TO URGE ASIA TO BUILD SECURITY
In a reversal of the Bush Administration policy that opposed steps by Southeast Asian countries to solve their regional security problems, the Clinton Administration will both encourage and take part in such efforts, Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State-designate for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said today.
The new approach reflects a realization that as the United States reduces its military presence in the region, there is an increased need for the Asian countries to solve their diverse security problems on their own.


COMPANY NEWS
A.
T.
CROSS CO., Lincoln, R.I., best known as the maker of Cross pens, said it was negotiating with an undisclosed buyer to sell Mark Cross Inc., a subsidiary that markets luggage, leather goods and gifts.


2 Key Witnesses Identified by B.C.C.I. Prosecutors
The prosecution in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International bribery and fraud trial identified two of its key witnesses in court yesterday, one of whom it has said will directly incriminate Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman.
The defense lawyer for Mr.
Altman, the only one of the two defendants standing trial, immediately attacked the credibility of the witnesses, arguing they were "polished" front men "trained for deceit" by the defunct B.C.C.I. and they only agreed to testify against Mr.
Altman to save themselves.


Lauren conquers the old Russia: page c15


Danielson Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boulogne Journal; For Unhappy French Fishermen, the Seas Go Dry
The fish of the sea, it could be argued, have no particular nationality, but the 200 angry fishermen who stormed the Unipeche warehouse here on the night of March 14 had no doubt that their slippery foe was foreign.
Under the lights of a television crew that had been tipped off, they broke windows, knocked over desks, smashed computers and, finally making contact with their adversaries, they spilled tons of hake, cod, sole and haddock from boxes and splashed them with red, white and blue paint.


Standard Microsystems Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Pop and Jazz in Review
Gloria Trevi
Paramount
Gloria Trevi brought cross-cultural delirium to the Paramount on Sunday afternoon.
The Mexican pop singer was wearing ripped nylons, a short black skirt and a sequined bustier with dangling rhinestones, but she had a serious expression as she spoke about the injustice of capital punishment and said she was dedicating a song to Mexicans on death row in Texas jails.
Then she sang "El Rock de Carcel" ("Jailhouse Rock") in Spanish with the hoarse exuberance of Joan Jett, dancing an arm-swinging hully-gully and doing Elvis's own hip swivels.


Oscar Hijuelos's Unease, Worldly and Otherwise
This is a city that should make Oscar Hijuelos feel completely comfortable.
It has a large and literate Cuban-American population that has responded enthusiastically to the novels he has written about the lives of Cuban-Americans, including the Pulitzer Prize-winning "The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love" and his latest, "The 14 Sisters of Emilio Montez O'Brien."
The fried plantains and black beans his mother, Magdalena, prepared for him as a child are easily found in dozens of Cuban restaurants here.
And the sunlight on the ocean reminds him of the only time he visited Cuba, when he was 3.


Follow Canada's Health Example; Universal Access
To the Editor:
Dr.
John Sheldon, who writes, "I can assure you that no physician I know is enthusiastic about emulating Canada's example for health care -- or any variation of it," has apparently not met any of the more than 4,000 members of Physicians for a National Health Program.
Nor has he met any other physician who understands Canada's approach to guaranteeing universal access to one-class health care for all residents, while controlling costs more effectively than our "system."


Companies Issued Securities At Record Pace in Quarter
With interest rates at their lowest levels in 20 years and stock prices near record highs, corporations issued new securities at a record rate in the first three months of 1993, according to figures released yesterday.
The lower rates also caused homeowners to refinance mortgages, keeping Wall Street firms well supplied with new issues of mortgage-backed securities.


INSIDE
Cuomo and Legislators Announce Budget Pact
One minute after the start of the new fiscal year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders announced an agreement on the state budget.
They gave few details, but the pact includes a 17-cent increase in the cigarette tax, making it the nation's highest at 56 cents a pack.
Page B1.
High Cost of Insurance
New York's landmark health insurance law has driven up the average price of coverage for individuals by 18 percent.
Page B1. 2 Key B.C.C.I.
Witnesses
Prosecutors identified two key witnesses against Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman in the B.C.C.I. bribery and fraud case.
Page D1.


A Reminder, and a Warning, of Rain


Smith Adds a Chapter to His System for Success
Dean Smith has gotten soft.
Thirty-two seasons into his career as coach of the North Carolina Tar Heels, he has heard the claim from the people who should know -- players who grew to understand Smith's system, in Woollen Gymnasium or Carmichael Auditorium, only to come home to teach another generation and offer an apparently unanimous opinion.


Helionetics Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Castle &amp; Cooke Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Abatix Environmental reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Camden Yards Opener: Rainbow Protest Leaflets
When the Orioles open their season against the Texas Rangers Monday afternoon, Camden Yards will be the site of one of the oldest baseball traditions, and the newest.
President Clinton will throw out the first ball.


Books of The Times; Tales of Connections, Internal and External
Proofs
And Three Parables
By George Steiner
114 pages. Granta/Penguin. Paperback, $10.


Falling for Wicker: A Modernist Is Charmed
WHO cannot think of wicker as woven into the fabric of America's domestic history?
Wicker is the chameleon of furniture design, and in spite of being known for its intricacies, is the plain Jane of antiques.
Ornate or plain, painted or left natural, woven furniture was meant to be used, and used it was.
Once damaged, it was often repainted.
Just as often it was left weatherbeaten in the garden until it was thrown away.


Surging Celtics Win Their Ninth Straight
Celtics 109, 76ers 103
By The Associated Press
The National Basketball Associations's hottest team struggled against the coldest before Reggie Lewis and Kevin Gamble combined for 21 fourth-quarter points, lifting the Boston Celtics to a 109-103 victory at home over the Philadelphia 76ers last night.
Lewis scored 33 points and Gamble 26 as the Celtics won their ninth straight game, their longest winning streak since they won 14 in 1985-86, the last time they won the N.B.A. championship.


Decline in Corn Planting Of Nearly 3.5% Is Projected
The Department of Agriculture projected today that the nation's farmers would plant nearly 76.5 million acres of corn this year, down nearly 3.5 percent from last year, when they produced both record yields per acre and a record total crop on 79.3 million acres.
The projected decline is less than had been expected, given the size of corn stockpiles, current prices and uncertain export prospects.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Anthony Telford, pitcher, on waivers.
Sent Brad Pennington, pitcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Optioned Manny Alexander, shortstop; Rey Palacios, catcher; and Mark Leonard and Jack Voigt, outfielders, to Rochester of the International League.
Sent Jeffrey Hammonds, outfielder, to Bowie of the Eastern League.
Announced that Mike Flanagan, pitcher, has left camp.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Optioned Scott Taylor, Nate Minchey and Brian Conroy, pitchers, to Pawtucket of the International League.


So Poor Women Can Choose
Only three days after he became President of the United States, Bill Clinton kept an important campaign promise.
In discarding five restrictive Federal policies, he made clear his Administration's commitment to safeguarding American women's constitutional right to make their own decisions about their reproductive lives.
This week Mr.
Clinton also made clear his commitment to making sure that poor women have the same access to choice as the more affluent.
He plans to ask Congress to drop the 16-year-old Hyde amendment, which bans Federal financing for abortions under the Medicaid program unless the woman's life is in danger.


In Surprise, Officer Won't Testify in Beating Trial
The Federal civil rights trial of the four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King took a surprising turn today when the lawyer for the defendant who rained the most blows on Mr.
King concluded his case without calling that officer to testify.
The move stunned the trial's participants and observers, who had repeatedly been told that the officer, Laurence M. Powell, would be a witness in his own defense.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE death of the last surviving parent can trigger unexpected emotions, even for adults who are used to independence and responsibility, and who have dealt with the death of someone close to them before.
For many adults, that parent's death marks a transition to being part of the oldest living generation of their family.
It is a subtle shift in roles that carries profound implications.
Wally Warhol was 45 when his mother died last fall; his father had died 10 years before.
After the death of his first wife, 11 years earlier, he focused his attention on their four children.
When his mother became ill, he was emotionally wrapped up in her illness.
But after she died, his thoughts turned to himself.


Knicks Throw a Big Bash for Youths
The 5,000 or so high school freshmen who jammed the Paramount yesterday afternoon for the Starter "It's Up To You" Jamboree were probably more interested in the star rap performers who entertained than the Knick players who threw the party, but that did not matter to DOC RIVERS as long as his message got across.
"This is my party," said Rivers, who heads the program, which rewards successful public school students for academic excellence, attendance, and overall improvement.
"I'd like to congratulate everybody for being here. This is your day. Enjoy it."


Vance to Resign as U.N. Mediator on the Balkans
Cyrus R. Vance will step down in the next few days as the special United Nations mediator in the Balkan crisis.
His replacement is expected to be the Norwegian Foreign Minister, Thorvald Stoltenberg, who called on the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, this morning to discuss the appointment.
Mr.
Stoltenberg is now returning to Oslo to consult his Government about taking the post.
Mr.
Vance, a former Secretary of State, turned 76 last Saturday.
He told Mr.
Boutros-Ghali last December that he could not continue indefinitely as the United Nations mediator on the Balkans, and in recent weeks he has indicated he would probably give up his post at the end of the round of peace talks that began here in February.


Goody's Family Clothing(NMS) reports earnings for 14wks to Jan 30


ESPN Joins Pay-Per-View
ESPN is expanding into pay-per-view starting in September with college football in partnership with ABC, which inaugurated the effort last fall with Showtime Event Television as its distributor and marketer.
The modestly successful 11-week football series supplemented the regional game each market received on Saturday from its local ABC station with games from other areas produced by ABC that could be bought on their cable system.


CHRONICLE
Never let it be said that Representative GARY L. ACKERMAN, a Democrat, is insensitive to the economic interests of his constituents in Queens and on Long Island.
Yesterday afternoon in Washington, for example, he threw a horseradish-tasting party for his Congressional colleagues.
"The Gold family decided to move from Brooklyn, east to Long Island, where my district suddenly moved, so I decided to commemorate the occasion by letting everyone know what horseradish is," he said.
The horseradish is produced by the Gold Pure Food Products Company.


Talks Are Set On the Details Of Haiti Pact
With a settlement of this country's political crisis reported near, a United Nations special envoy left Haiti today to work out final details in talks with the country's exiled President and diplomats in Washington and New York.
Among the issues remaining are the naming of a new Prime Minister and the approval of a package of guarantees for opponents of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the ousted President, that they will be spared prosecution or revenge for their roles in the military coup that overthrew him in September 1991.


Broadcast International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Yanks and Mets, a Day to Wince at Pitching
One day after the Yankees finally settled on their starting rotation, it was cast into potential doubt today when Melido Perez injured his left leg running to first base against the Atlanta Braves.
The injury put Perez's opening day start against Cleveland on Monday in jeopardy.
With Pat Kelly on first base in the second inning, Perez bunted back to pitcher Greg Maddux and then suffered a moderately strained left hip flexor as he chugged to first base in an effort to prevent a double play.
Since Atlanta of the National League was the home team in the game at Municipal Stadium in West Palm Beach, the pitcher was in the batting order instead of a designated hitter.


Before Bombing, Inquiry Sought Inroads Into Enclave of Suspects
Five months before the World Trade Center bombing, about 20 members of the two mosques in Brooklyn and Jersey City where several trade center suspects worshipped were subpoenaed to appear before a Federal grand jury.
The subpoenas, issued to people who had visited El Sayyid A. Nosair in prison or attended his trial, indicates that Federal agents had been pressing harder than was previously known to make inroads into the small emigre world from which the trade center suspects came.
Mr.
Nosair was tried for the 1990 murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the self-declared Jewish militant.


Follow Canada's Health Example
To the Editor:
Dr.
John M. Sheldon assures us in "Interns Discouraged" (letter, March 21), that no physician he knows "is enthusiastic about emulating Canada's example." He may be right, but how many are enthusiastic about the current system?
Many of us are disturbed by a system that permits health insurers to set premiums at levels that don't reflect the goals of the insured, but the goals of the shareholders -- that is, profits.


To Reduce Number, Dinkins Offers Rules on Who's Homeless
The Dinkins administration is proposing stringent new rules that, for the first time, would help determine which families are legitimately homeless and entitled to temporary shelter from the city.
The rules were submitted last week to state officials for approval.
They are part of a broad effort by Mayor David N. Dinkins to reduce the number of families who enter the city's shelter system and to insure that families accepted into the system abide by the city's rules and by a new "social contract" requiring them to get help for everything from drug addiction to job training before receiving permanent housing.


Albany Has to Do Its Share in Voting Reform
To the Editor:
"The Real Voting Fraud" (editorial, March 19) faults Republican opposition in the Senate for attempting to water down what could be important reforms in this country's voter registration laws.
New York City, for example, will not reap the full benefits of the Senate's "motor voter" registration bill because only 51 percent of its voting-age residents hold driver's licenses (in the rest of the state the percentage jumps to 91 percent).


Bridge
A very unusual bridge game was being kibitzed by Dr.
Simon Klein of Melville, L.I.
It was, he decided, a battle between England and the United States, and three of the players were easily identifiable.
Sitting in a wheelchair in the West seat and waving his trademark cigarette holder was Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
His partner, wearing a superbly tailored general's uniform, was Dwight David Eisenhower, a man always ready to shuffle the cards.
In the South seat, puffing on a cigar, was Winston Spencer Churchill, a man whose judgment in bridge was decidedly inferior to his judgment in politics.


Interdigital Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exemption Is Under Scrutiny
While Bud Selig, the owner of the Milwaukee Brewers, was assuring people that major league baseball has not been knocked off course by the myriad problems it has faced in the last year, members of Congress called once again today for the repeal of the sport's 71-year exemption from Federal antitrust laws.
In the second round of Congressional hearings on baseball's unique privilege, it was the House of Representatives' turn to take the major leagues' 28 owners to task for alleged monopolistic behavior.


ABC Gains in Effort to Expand Upper West Side Studios
Capital Cities/ABC won unanimous approval yesterday from the New York City Planning Commission for a major expansion of its studio complex on West End Avenue, a project that would be accompanied by two 33-story apartment towers.
The ABC proposal is the third large-scale project to be approved by city planners for the former Penn Yards site along the Hudson River, from 59th to 72d Street.
The other two are Riverside South and Manhattan West.


Nobel Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
2.91
4.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.89
4.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.99
4.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.68
5.67
7.12
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.93
6.91
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.86
7.85
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.04
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Dance; From Romance to the Rain Forest
Spring arrived officially in the world of ballet on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, where the Ballet Concierto de Puerto Rico spread its usual warmth and the joy of its vital classicism.
The program covered many themes and styles.
But the three New York premieres had in common a refreshing directness and imagination.
"Jayanes (Strong, Supple Men)," a dance for four men that was choreographed by Alberto Mendez to music by Hindemith, would look just right in an Olympics performance.
Rooted to the center of the stage, the men move mostly over and around one another, using bodies as balances and levers, creating a human tangle of a jungle gym.
They're athletes, but "Jayanes" is as much an ode to the dignity of the human body as it is a celebration of youth, strength and virility.
The quartet was performed by Edwin Silfa, Carlos Raul Sierra, Armando Seda and Roberto Lopez.


Heels Put Bonilla on Ice
Bobby Bonilla was wearing ice packs on both ankles after today's game against the Dodgers.
Team officials said the right fielder has been suffering from bone spurs around his heels and did not indicate they were alarmed about the condition.
But they did say Bonilla would be seen by an orthopedist in New York soon.
Bonilla, who has worn sneakers during workouts this spring, did not shed any light on the situation.
"No comment" and "nobody's business" were the answers he gave reporters asking about the problem.


Atlantic Tele-Network (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Koor Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Dance; 'Swan Lake' Retold With a New Dimension
The continuing success story that is the San Francisco Ballet acquired another chapter on Tuesday night with the opening of the company's first season at the New York State Theater.
The local premiere was Helgi Tomasson's "Swan Lake," an altogether ingenious production, stunning in its surprising 18th-century French decor by the Danish designer Jens-Jacob Worsaae.
Above all, this staging by the San Francisco's troupe's artistic director is a showcase for the high style now representative of its classical dancing.
To say his young corps de ballet does a nifty job in the all-important second act is an understatement.
These 24 white swans did not merely frame the engaging principals, Elizabeth Loscavio and Anthony Randazzo, but also added a vital dimension to the telling of a familiar tale.


CSC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Advantage Health (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Acton Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


White Derby Update: Jets Sign Washington; Giants Out of Running
The Jets apparently ceded Reggie White to another team yesterday and instead matched the Seattle Seahawks' three-year, $3 million offer to Marvin Washington, thus keeping the four-year veteran defensive end.
The Jets had to decide by today whether to match Seattle's offer to Washington or lose him, and their decision reflects their uncertainty over their chances to land White.


Mercedes Close to Selecting U.S. Site for Assembly Plant
Mercedes-Benz A.G., the German luxury auto maker, appears close to making a decision on building an assembly plant in the United States, where it would produce a new four-wheel-drive family car.
Mercedes would become the latest German auto maker to try to cut costs and expand by assembling vehicles in this country.
Speculation had been strong in trade journals and among economic development officials in the Southeast that Mercedes has selected a site near Charlotte, N.C., but A. B. Shuman, a spokesman, said yesterday that "a decision hasn't been made yet."


Mother Knows Best, So Mason Vows to Forsake the Snarl
Tough guy Anthony Mason got knocked to the floor during the Knicks' victory over the Sacramento Kings Tuesday night by 6-foot-10-inch, 232-pound Pete Chilcutt.
He got right up and went about the business of professional basketball.
What was missing from this perfectly peaceful picture?
The lethal Mason glare, at the least.
And probably a verbal challenge for a midnight rendezvous on Eighth Avenue, issued chest to chest, followed by a double forearm shove and technical foul.


Home Video
Videos with gay themes often are not promoted outside a few large cities, but this month CBS/Fox is broadening that reach in a campaign for "The Lost Language of Cranes," about a father and son who each declare their homosexuality.
The tape, a BBC production shown on PBS last year, will be released in stores on June 2.


Economic Scene; The Pacific timber industry isn't really on the endangered list.
WILL the northern spotted owl drive Pacific timber cutters to ruin and housing prices into the stratosphere?
Give the bird a break.
Reports of the industry's imminent demise, Topic A at tomorrow's timber meeting in Portland, have been much exaggerated.
But the owl, immortalized by President Bush as the "little furry-feathery guy," has become a symbol of a conflict with no obvious middle ground.


Intellicall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Consumers Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Follow Canada's Health Example; Americans Wake Up To Toxic Pollution
To the Editor:
In my research on toxics for the Environmental Exchange, a national nonprofit group, I have discovered a "wave of environmentalism" different from the one you report in "New View Calls Environmental Policy Misguided" (front page, March 21).


Market Place; Canada's Big Board is booming and the outlook seems rosy.
THE last time Bay Street, Canada's equivalent of Wall Street, was this busy was in October 1987, when stocks were in a virtual free fall.
Now, however, investors are smiling.
The Toronto Stock Exchange, Canada's Big Board, is completing its best month ever, with volume and the value of the shares traded setting records in March.


Review/Film Festival; In Iceland, a Teen-Ager's Rebellion and Romances
The bleak, scrappy Icelandic film "Ingalo" centers on the sullen title character, a tough adolescent with an unhappy past.
First seen deflecting the catcalls of leering fisherman and fighting bitterly with her parents, Ingalo (Solveig Arnarsdottir) soon finds herself in difficulty.
After starting a brawl in a local dance hall, she is sent from her rural home to a clinic in Reykjavik for observation.
A doctor there, having considered the effects of Ingalo's childhood head injury and her penchant for physical attacks, pronounces the patient "a selfish bastard."
At the clinic, Ingalo meets a fellow patient (Thorlakur Kristinsson) and has a quick affair that is no less brutalizing than her other experiences.
Dismissed by the man who seduced her, she returns to her small town, only to run away from home.
Ingalo, along with her brother Sveinn (Haraldur Hallgrimsson), joins the crew of the very same fishing boat whose workers eyed her in the film's opening scene.
The presence of this comely strawberry-blond cook makes the boat's raucous atmosphere even rowdier, but the tough-as-nails Ingalo remains unfazed.


CHINA RAISES ANTE OVER HONG KONG
China raised the stakes today in the war of nerves over Hong Kong by having its National People's Congress approve the formation of a special advisory committee to prepare for the return of the British territory.
China had earlier stipulated that it would set up a preparatory committee only in 1996, a year before the Chinese flag replaces the British one over the territory.
So the panel authorized today will effectively be a preparatory committee for the preparatory committee.


New Agency Has A Surprise Partner
As expected, two executives at Doremus &amp; Company in New York have formed their own agency with a creative focus.
In a surprise, however, a third partner in the new shop, which will be part of the Omnicom Group, is coming from outside the agency.
Parry Merkley, president, and Stephen Harty, executive vice president and director of client services at Doremus, have teamed with Jane D. Newman, vice chairman worldwide and head of account planning at Chiat/Day in New York, to open the latest Omnicom unit, Merkley Newman Harty, effective Monday.


A Sunny Day Finds an Appreciative Audience


FEDERATED CONSOLIDATING FUNCTIONS OF RETAIL CHAINS
Federated Department Stores Inc. said this week that it would consolidate the accounting and accounts payable functions of its seven regional chains and trim the administrative structure of its distribution systems.
By consolidating, Federated is taking a page out of the operating manuals of its most cost-effective competitors.


U.S. Trade Survey Calls Japan Most Restrictive
In a survey of unfair trading practices, the Clinton Administration charged today that 44 countries had established significant tariffs and other barriers, and it identified Japan as the biggest offender.
The Administration said Tokyo ran a $49.4 billion trade surplus with the United States last year at a time its imports fell $362 million.


Minnesota Holds Off The Hoyas For Title
They grumbled when they weren't invited to the prime-time tournament, but who really cared about that last night?
Minnesota was ready to forgive and forget.
Spurned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, the Golden Gophers marched forward and won the next best thing: the National Invitation Tournament at Madison Square Garden.


Holyfield Plans to Return in a Flurry
If he only had a punch -- a real teeth-rattling knockout punch -- perhaps Evander Holyfield would have been standing in the ballroom of the Loews Hotel in Manhattan yesterday talking about his next heavyweight title defense.
Instead, he was there as part of an official announcement that he will come out of retirement and fight again, first in June against Alex Stewart and then in September against Riddick Bowe.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Is Eliminated  Top-seeded Ivan Lendl was quickly shown the exit in the Estoril Open yesterday at Estoril, Portugal, losing to unseeded Jonas Svensson of Sweden, 6-3, 6-4, in the second round.
Svensson is No. 67 in the ATP ranking.
In other second-round matches, fourth-seeded Karel Novacek of the Czech Republic beat Tomas Carbonell of Spain, 6-4, 6-4, while Magnus Larsson of Sweden struggled before defeating Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 1-6, 6-1, 7-6 (8-6). (AP) Ferreira Advances in Durban: Top-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa beat Germany's Markus Zoecke, 6-4, 7-6 (7-3), in the South African Open at Durban yesterday.
The No. 2-seeded player, Aleksandr Volkov of Russia, also advanced, trouncing the Czech David Rikl, 6-1, 6-4, but heat and humidity forced third-seeded Mark Woodforde of Australia to default because of the heat and humidity as he trailed an American, Alex Reichel, 6-7 (5-7) 1-3. (AP)


CLINTON SET BACK ON AN AIDS POST
President Clinton's drawn-out efforts to select a Federal AIDS coordinator suffered another setback today when his first choice, Health Commissioner Margaret A. Hamburg of New York City, told staff members that she would not take the post.
Dr.
Hamburg's decision was something of an embarrassment for White House officials, who for two days had been telling reporters that Mr.
Clinton had settled on her pending the outcome of background checks.


Supradur Cos. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  AID TO RUSSIA: HOW MUCH?
Almost since Boris N. Yeltsin climbed atop a tank in 1991 and hastened the end of the Soviet Union, Western nations have been talking about sending money to help him create a democratic Russia.
But in dollars and cents, the aid actually offered has never been as big as the talk.
And the amount actually delivered has been even smaller.
A1  PEACE AND TERROR IN ISRAEL  News analysis: Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has repeatedly said since he took office last July that talking peace with the Arabs is one thing and fighting Arabs who shoot and stab Israelis is something else entirely.
A month of violence, however, has brought the two issues into a closer relationship.
A3  U.S.
SEEKS AID ON ABORTIONS  Reversing nearly a decade of official Government antipathy toward some international family-planning programs, the Clinton Administration has decided to ask Congress to renew support for two groups that have raised the ire of those opposed to abortion.
The United Nations and the International Planned Parenthood Federation are involved.
A1  CHINA RAISES HONG KONG STAKES  China raised the stakes in its war of nerves over Hong Kong by having its National People's Congress approve the formation of a special advisory committee to prepare for the return of the British territory, a step taken three years early.
A7  U.S. shifting its policy on Asian security.
A8  U.N.
BACKS NATO ACTION IN BOSNIA  The United Nations Security Council stepped up its campaign to force Bosnia's isolated Serbs to end the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina by authorizing NATO to shoot down any planes violating its ban on flying over Bosnia.
A12  Six people die in another Bosnia evacuation.
A12  Vance to step down as Balkan mediator.
A13  U.N. envoy leaves Haiti, confident of settlement.
A3  Boulogne-sur-Mer Journal: French fishermen up in arms over imports.
A4  National A14-17, B9, D23  AIRLINES MAY RETRENCH  Air service could be altered substantially by a restructuring under way in the troubled airline industry.
Carriers hobbled by overcapacity and declining travel and fares are laying off workers, delaying plane orders and dismantling hub systems.
A1  THE TIES THAT BIND THE TROOPS  With unusual calm, experts and Senators debated whether allowing homosexuals in the military would damage the intangible essence that binds a fighting force.
A1  CLINTON'S UNSEEN GOVERNMENT  A tightly knit group of Clinton campaign veterans work at the White House without portfolio, without Government pay and without the legally binding inconvenience of being forced to abide by Government ethics rules.
A16  OFFICIAL TURNS DOWN AIDS POST  President Clinton's drawn-out efforts to select a Federal AIDS coordinator suffered a setback when Health Commissioner Margaret A. Hamburg of New York City told staff members she would not take the post.
A17  FRESHMEN SOFTEN THEIR REVOLT  The freshman class of House Democrats issued their reform package for Congress, calling for a 25 percent cut in the budget for the legislative branch but pulling back from some of the strongest proposals.
A16  A Congressional aide pleaded guilty in the House post office.
A15  The House gave final approval to the President's budget outline.
A16  SEXUAL DISEASE SPREADS IN U.S.
More than one in five Americans is infected with sexually transmitted viral disease, and millions more are likely to contract a venereal disease in their lifetime, a study found.
A1  DAZZLING THE HIGH COURT  In a tour de force before the Supreme Court, Laurence Tribe converted a damages case from a debate over broad principles into a fact-specific inquiry that the Court appeared likely to resolve in his client's favor.
A15  TEXANS AND THEIR GUNS  Lawmakers in Texas are debating two clashing gun measures that stand, like many contentious matters there, at the crossroads of myth and fact.
Typically, the debate is full of surprises.
A14  TWIN DRUGS YIELD SURPRISES  Two outwardly identical brands of blood pressure medicine have sharply different effects on men's quality of life, a study found.
D23  OFFICER POWELL DOESN'T TESTIFY  The Federal civil rights trial of four Los Angeles officers took a surprising turn today when the lawyer for the officer who rained the most baton blows on Rodney King rested without calling his client to testify.
B9  Perot said he wouldn't run for President in 1996.
D23  Bruce Lee's son was killed in an accident on a movie set.
A14  Metro Digest B1  WACHTLER SENTENCED TO PRISON  Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, pleaded guilty yesterday to threatening to kidnap the daughter of his former lover, ending a bizarre case of thwarted love and its aftershocks.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-15  Falling for wicker: a modernist is charmed.
C1  She may be decorating the White House.
Shh!
C1  Consumer's World: Child-care choices.
C2  Parent &amp; Child C12  Reviews/Fashion: Lauren's instinct points him to Russia.
C15  Arts/Entertainment C17-24  Dance: The San Francisco Ballet in "Swan Lake." C17  Word and Image: Pondering the future of two quirky TV series.
C17  Sports B10-17  Baseball: Yanks' Perez injures leg.
B11  Questions for Gooden.
B11  Column: Araton on Pro Basketball.
B11  Obituaries D24  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Mr.
Clinton heads for the timber.
So poor women can choose.
Time to play fair on school aid.
Letters  William Safire: Ghost at the summit.
Leslie H. Gelb: A new "Red menace" scam.
Patricia Greenfield and Paul Kibbey: Picture imperfect.
Landon Parvin: Can do at Big Blue.


Shake-Up in Underwriting Ranks
The results of the first-quarter underwriting sweepstakes are in: Merrill Lynch toppled Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company as the leading municipal bond underwriter, as its business jumped 49 percent from a year earlier, according to figures released yesterday.
Goldman fell to No. 2, although its volume increased by 11 percent.
The First Boston Corporation was third.
The battle for fourth place went down to the wire, as an aggressive bid by Lehman Brothers yesterday on a $780 million issue of California general obligation bonds moved it up from fifth place, edging out Smith Barney.


Review/Film Festival; In Small Quarters, 2 Views of a Large Issue
"A Night in Versailles" and "Another Girl, Another Planet" are both shortish comedies about the anxious relations between the sexes.
But in every other way they're as dissimilar as two films can be and still share the same host medium.
They form the engagingly offbeat program that will be shown at the Museum of Modern Art today at 6 P.M. and on Saturday at 9 P.M. as part of the New Directors/New Films series.
The French-made, 47-minute "Night in Versailles" was directed by Bruno Podalydes and written by him and his brother Denis, who also plays the hilariously hapless central character.
The film is a boisterous farce in the spirit of Feydeau, updated to the 1990's and scaled down to the dimensions of an especially small two-room flat.


Lone Star Steakhouse/ Saloon (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 23


Judge Gives Nassau a Year to Revise Property-Tax System
A State Supreme Court judge has given Nassau County one year to stop basing its residential property-tax assessments on construction values from 1938, when Long Island was largely potato fields and large estates, and raised ranch houses did not exist.
The order follows a decision in December and decisions in 1990 and 1989 that found the county's system to be illegal and irrational.
The county plans to appeal the order.
Nassau has the second highest total value of real property of any assessing unit in the state, behind New York City.


Amstar Crop. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Music; Persian Art Form in Revival
The Persian instrument known as the santur, the original form of the dulcimer, once inspired a rich musical art comparable in complexity to the Indian raga tradition.
In recent decades, that art has almost vanished; only through considerable research and effort did Majid Kiani, an Iranian master of the instrument, revive it fully.
Traditionally there are seven dastgahes, or scalar modes, in the Persian system; while there are a variety of microtonal tunings, some of these modes parallel the Western medieval system.
On Friday at Washington Square Church Mr.
Kiani played extended improvisations drawn from four of the seven dastgahes; in each, basic melodic patterns were elaborated by virtuosic trills and flourishes.
The first mode, called shur, expresses sadness; its scale is identical to the Western Aeolian mode, except that the second degree is lowered a quarter tone.
The last, mahur, expressing youthful joy, is essentially the bright C-major scale, although variations were introduced in the upper register.
At times Mr.
Kiani would impose an insistent rhythmic pulse, and also break into short song sequences.


Insurer Names Officer
The ITT Hartford Insurance Group has named Joseph H. Gareau executive vice president and chief investment officer with responsibility for more than $35 billion in invested assets.
Mr.
Gareau, 46, senior vice president and chief investment officer of ITT Hartford's property-casualty companies, succeeds Howard A. York, who resigned to pursue other interests.
Mr.
Gareau was also named to ITT Hartford's board and appointed chairman of the board's finance committee.


How to Make Work More Family-Friendly
To the Editor:
Your description of child care on the night shift (front page, March 14) is one more example of the lengths parents are forced to go to in order to support their families.


Russian Immigrants Get a Preview of Passover


Amvestors Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HURT IN EXPANSION, AIRLINES CUT BACK AND MAY SELL HUBS
Hobbled by overcapacity, a slowdown in travel and bruising fare wars, the nation's leading airlines are laying off workers, delaying plane orders and, in the most drastic measures to date, taking steps to dismantle the elaborate hub systems they spent the last decade building.
Industry experts say their actions could alter air service substantially, opening the door for low-cost carriers to thrive and perhaps bringing back the price competition and no-frills service that existed when People Express packed planes with low fares in the early 80's.


Circus Elephants March in Tribute to a Famed Predecessor


Got a Good Book? Pull Up a Chair
THERE is a Mackintosh, a Shaker, a Federal, a Newport, a Chippendale, a Thonet, even a Windsor -- and that one has a cat poised on it.
They are small and light, as well they should be.
They are bookmarks and include a panoply of chair designs that would sit ever so nicely on any chair-fancier's favorite book page.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Central Illinois Public Service Co., Springfield, Ill., a unit of Cipsco Inc., is offering $40 million of 6.375 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2003 at 99.540 to yield 6.438 percent and $25 million of 6 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 99.594 to yield 6.072 percent, both through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The issues are noncallable and are rated Aa-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Islamic Group Has Grown From Splinter to a Thorn
The Islamic Group was born two decades ago as the student wing of the Muslim Brotherhood.
It established a base in Asyut, where the blind cleric Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman -- the group's spiritual mentor -- taught theology.
By the mid-1970s the Islamic Group turned against the Brotherhood, which says it does not condone violence, maintaining that the Brotherhood had become corrupted by involvement in the political system.
The Islamic Group then joined forces with the militant organization Holy War, which preached the violent overthrow of the state.
When Holy War followers assassinated President Anwar Sadat in 1981 the Islamic Group simultaneously launched an uprising in Asyut.
The insurrection was crushed after two days of fighting that left 44 policemen dead.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about American policy toward Iraq misidentified the television program on which Secretary of State Warren Christopher appeared on Sunday.
It was the CBS News program "Face the Nation."


White Derby Update: Jets Sign Washington; Giants Out of Running -- It's Back to Court
The often-confusing ins and outs of free agency led yesterday to its first arbitration case when, the Buffalo Bills heard they would have to pay as much to keep their tackle, Will Wolford, as they pay Jim Kelly.
Wolford made $700,000 last year; Kelly makes $2.864 million a year.
Ralph Cindrich, Wolford's lawyer, negotiated a deal with the Colts over the weekend that included this clause tied to the team's record: He would be paid at least as much as the Colts' highest-paid offensive player.
Wolford then took that offer, which calls for Wolford to average $2.6 million a year over three years, and showed it to the Bills, who had seven days to match it.
But the Bills' highest-paid player on offense happens to be Kelly, the quarterback hauling down an average of $2.9 million a year.
Did this mean the Bills would, in order to match the Colts' deal, have to pay an offensive lineman as much as their star quarterback?
The league yesterday said no. Cindrich said yes.
The league's management council and the Players Association will fight it out before an arbitrator at a hearing tomorrow.
"If this is disallowed, it's discrimination against offensive linemen," Cindrich said.
But that wasn't the only flurry of N.F.L. activity yesterday.
In addition, the Cleveland Browns reunited those former University of Miami quarterback rivals, Bernie Kosar and Vinny Testaverde, by signing Testavarde as a backup for what the Browns described as a one-year deal plus an option year.
The 29-year-old Testaverde had wanted a $2 million-a-year deal.
He is believed to have signed with the Browns for a base salary of about $1.4 million this year.
The contract is heavily laced with options that could swell to more than $2 million.
Art Modell, the Browns' owner, said the team doesn't expect to move on Carl Banks, a linebacker who two years ago asked the Browns to make a deal for him with the Giants.
Banks still expects to leave the Giants, and Alan Herman, his agent, said he expects at least one club to make an offer early next week.
Since Banks is a transition player, the Giants would be entitled to match that offer and retain him.
Coach Dan Reeves says the Giants will compete with any offer he receives.


S&amp;K Famous Brands Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Reviews/Fashion; Lauren's Instinct Points Him to Russia
RALPH LAUREN re-established the validity of fashion shows yesterday with a presentation of fall clothes that had a point of view, that expressed it concisely and that suggested a fresh way of looking at clothes.
At a time when many designers are tossing masses of ill-defined clothes on runways, this is unusual.
But what makes it work, of course, is that the clothes are distinguished.
The theme is Russia, and Mr.
Lauren said he chose it "because it felt right." His instinct can be trusted.
He focused on several aspects of Russian culture, including the military with its strict shapes and frog closings, the revolutionaries with their bohemian mixtures of velvet and tweed, plus the gypsies and romantics.
Somehow, it all falls together coherently.
For the first time in more than 70 years, Russia can provide a style theme without chilling overtones.


People
*
Roy Bostock, chairman and chief executive at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York, has been nominated to serve as chairman of the American Association of Advertising Agencies for 1993-94.
He is now serving as the 1992-93 vice chairman of the Four A's.
Edward L. Wax, chairman and chief executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York and a current Four A's director-at-large, was nominated by the group's advisory council to succeed Mr.
Bostock as vice chairman.
The Four A's board will vote on the nominations on April 21. *
William J. Whitehead, 47, president and chief executive at Backer Spielvogel Bates Canada in Toronto, was promoted to chairman, succeeding Stan Buda, 56, who was named chairman emeritus.
And, William H. Maynard, 60, executive creative director at the Toronto office, was promoted to assume Mr.
Whitehead's responsibility as president and was named to the new position of chief creative officer.


Corrections
A dance review on Saturday about "Songs of Mahler," performed byDance Theater of Harlem at the New York State Theater, misidentified the choreographer in some copies.
A correction in this space yesterday repeated the error.
He is Michael Smuin, not John Taras.


Rogers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Rag Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Katherine Hynes de Groot, 88, English Theater and TV Actress
Katherine Hynes de Groot, an English-born theater and television actress, died on Saturday at the Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
Ms. de Groot, who was 88, had been a resident of the Actors Fund Retirement Home in Englewood for the last six months.
The cause of death was complications from a stroke, said her daughter, Fiona Rhodes of Laguna Beach, Calif.
Ms. de Groot was born in a suburb of London and studied acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London and appeared in British productions beside John Gielgud, Ralph Richardson and Tyrone Guthrie.


Grant Tensor Geophysical (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Oneok Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Precision Standard Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Communication Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


N.H.L. Redraws Map In Realignment Plan
Making dramatic changes of broad scope, the National Hockey League will realign its divisions, rename its conferences, revise its regular-season schedule and restructure its playoff format next season.
For the Rangers, the Islanders and the Devils, there will be fewer games among themselves.
But at least temporarily, the three metropolitan-area teams will play almost a quarter of their schedules against the five expansion teams of the 1990's, which could help them in the standing, but hurt them at the box office.


CHRONICLE
The name Rat Island may not conjure up images of a Caribbean paradise, but to DEREK WALCOTT, the 1992 Nobel laureate in literature, it is the ideal place to study the arts, literature or economics -- or to just cogitate.
Mr.
Walcott, who is also a professor of English at Boston University, announced yesterday that with the assistance of the government of St.
Lucia, his homeland, he was establishing an international arts center and retreat on the uninhabited three-acre island off the northwestern coast of St.
Lucia.


Clinton Seeks to Restore Aid For Family Planning Abroad
Reversing nearly a decade of American policy, the Clinton Administration has decided to ask Congress to renew funding for two international groups that either provide or pay for abortions and had lost their funds under the Reagan Administration.
The president of one group, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, said in an interview that she had received assurances from senior State Department officials that the Administration intended to ask Congress for at least $20 million, and perhaps as much as $40 million, for the agency in the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.


Blyleven Is Released by Twins
BERT BLYLEVEN, a member of Minnesota's 1987 World Series champions but a pitcher with a 6.27 earned run average this spring, was released yesterday by the Twins.
Blyleven, a 23-year veteran who is 13 victories short of 300, turns 42 next Tuesday and said he might be through.


Some Health Insurance Bills Are Rising Under New Law
New York State's landmark health insurance law, which ends the practice of setting higher rates for the elderly and less healthy, has had the expected result of driving up the average price of commercial insurance for individuals, by 18 percent, and for small groups, by 19 percent, according to the State Insurance Department.
While the law gives consumers more choice of coverage, several commercial insurers have simply pulled out of the small-group market in New York State altogether rather than comply with the law, which goes into effect April 1.


Reporter's Notebook; Heidi, About Those Boots . . .
ON the last leg of the London-Milan-Paris-New York fashion tour, Byron Lars finally gave fashion folks their rallying cry: "Heidi, where are you?"
It was on the soundtrack of Mr.
Lars's rousing presentation on Monday, as models in sharp and sexy outfits enacted a wacky version of the Alpine tale, and it became a plea for creativity elsewhere.
On the jammed benches of overheated showrooms and among the rows of chairs in the Celeste Bartos Forum at the Public Library, the new semiofficial showing space, restive members of the audience were calling for Heidi, too.


Dead Whale Found in New York Harbor


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bill Ware 3d  The Knitting Factory
The vibraphone, Bill Ware's instrument, isn't confined to melodies; it can also envelop a tune in a shimmering haze or turn a simple line into a bell-toned peal.
On Monday, playing pieces from his album "Long and Skinny" (Knitting Factory Works) with a sextet called the Club Bird All-Stars, he showed abundant skills not just as an improviser but also as an arranger who constructs changeable yet coherent performances.


Biosearch Medical reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Child-Care Choices: At Home in Someone Else's House
MILLIONS of working parents make a child-care decision each year.
But many say they feel they do not always make the best choice.
Half the mothers surveyed recently by Working Mother said they had been forced to change their child-care provider at least twice in 1992, a process the magazine called "living on luck."


Textron to Get Chrysler Unit
Textron Inc. said yesterday that it planned to buy the Chrysler Corporation's plastic-parts operations for $138 million.
Textron also said it would remain a supplier to the auto maker under a long-term contract that analysts say is worth $75 million a year.
The deal for the plastics segment of Chrysler's Acustar division further illustrates a trend among auto makers to leave the parts-making business and to rely on outside companies, which can often make the same goods more inexpensively.


Using Textiles to Tell Many Stories
TRADITIONAL handstitched quilts often depict roses in baskets, bold geometrics or beatific sunbonnet babies.
Faith Ringgold's do not.
Since 1973, the artist has used the quilt form to express and portray the experiences of black Americans, in urban or fantasy settings.
A girl picnics with her family on the tar roof of a Harlem apartment building; people crowd onto a New York subway train where graffiti cover the walls.


William Brennan, Former State Justice And Bank Chief, 72
William R. Brennan Jr., a former New York State Supreme Court Justice and former president and chief executive of the Apple Bank for Savings, died Tuesday in Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
A resident of Manhasset, he was 72 and formerly lived in Garden City.
His death came after a brief illness, his family said.


In Accord, Black and Hispanic Families Would Be Offered Westchester Homes
As many as 945 black and Hispanic families must be offered apartments in predominantly white towns and villages of Westchester County over the next five years under an impending court settlement involving a federally subsidized housing program.
The settlement, expected to be announced within days, concludes a class-action suit brought by 17 families in Yonkers whose rent is federally subsidized under a program known as Section 8.
The case is separate from the long-running desegregation battle that centers on where to build new public housing in Yonkers.
Limits on Minority Population
The 17 families contend that, since the program began in 1974, they and 1,500 other families were steered by county and municipal housing offices into a rundown black and Hispanic section of southwest Yonkers, violating anti-discrimination laws.


Foreign Affairs; A New 'Red Menace' Scam
With the cold war won and gone, you thought you had heard the last of pols and policy experts using the Moscow menace to justify excessive military spending.
Think again.
Many in Washington are now arguing that if Russian hard-liners topple President Yeltsin, they'll unearth their old military Frankenstein, quickly charge him up and dispatch him once again to terrorize the world.


Morrison Restaurants (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 6


Benton Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Arch Communications Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Press Corps Fails to Knock Clinton Down; Auditioning for Panels
To the Editor:
I watched President Clinton's news conference with the feeling that the purpose of the questions was to expose the reporters to the television cameras.
Most questions were confrontational and meant to show that the reporter knew more about the topic than the President.
An example from your March 24 transcript:


Despite Stars' Defections, Gorman Is Staying Put
Tom Gorman, captain of the controversy-rocked United States Davis Cup team, hasn't yet decided how to mend the fences with the superstars who deserted him and probably cost this nation a first-round Davis Cup victory last week in Australia.
But he said Tuesday from his home in California that he was not willing to give up the job he has held for the last eight years unless the players force the issue.
Top-ranked Jim Courier, second-ranked Pete Sampras and eighth-ranked Andre Agassi, all of whom withheld participation last week, are the issue.
Of those three, only Agassi has indicated an interest in helping the Davis Cup team in its relegation match next September against an opponent yet unknown.
To avoid being downgraded in 1994 from elite to zonal competition, an absurd plight for a team that has won two Davis Cup crowns in the last three years, the United States must prevail in that relegation match.
Aussies Unimpressed
"It's worse losing in the first round; that's the embarrassing part of it all," said Gorman, who didn't blame the loss on singles stand-ins Brad Gilbert (0-2 last week) and David Wheaton (1-1), or doubles newcomers Jim Grabb and Richey Reneberg (0-1).
"It wasn't theirs to lose; I only wish the Davis Cup would have been a higher priority at this match for the guys who won it last year."


Price Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 14


The First Families' Choices
PRESIDENTS and First Ladies are as prone to fashions in interior design as anyone, said William Seale, author of "The White House: The History of an American Idea" (American Institute of Architects Press, 1992).
The Red Room alone has gone from a lipstick red (the Trumans) to cerise (the Kennedys), to its current poinsettia (the Nixons).
Time will tell what the Clintons will do.
Kennedy Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER: Stephane Boudin of Paris, who had worked on Versailles, and Sister Parish from Manhattan.
DESIGN: Mr.
Boudin restored the public rooms to an elegant and theatrical style, covering some walls and swagging a ceiling with silk.
In the private quarters, Mrs.
Parish "draped some tables and rearranged furniture," Mr.
Seale said.
Johnson Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER: None.
DESIGN: The only major addition, in 1968, was a dinner service of 216 place settings.
Nixon Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER: Edward Vason Jones, from Albany, Ga.
DESIGN: Mr.
Jones, working with Clement Conger, the White House curator, brought back an eclectic design, mixing Louis XVI tables with French Empire chairs.
Ford Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER: None.
DESIGN: None. The emphasis was on collecting American artwork. Carter Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER:Wayne Dean, from Birmingham, Ala.
DESIGN: Mr.
Dean brought barn siding from Plains, Ga., for an upstairs room.
Reagan Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER: Ted Graber, who lives in Los Angeles.
DESIGN: More than $1,000,000 was spent to give the family quarters a grandeur that matched the public rooms.
The walls of the First Family Bedroom were covered in handpainted paper.
For each guest, there were bathrobes, towels, toothbrushes.
"Ted Graber made it as comfortable as a hotel," Mr.
Seale said.
Bush Administration
INTERIOR DESIGNER: Mark Hampton of Manhattan.
DESIGN: "He changed some curtains and rearranged some furniture in the private quarters, the West Wing and Camp David," Mr.
Seale said.


COMERICA CANCELS PLAN TO ACQUIRE BROKERAGE FIRM
Comerica Inc., a Detroit banking company, said yesterday that it had canceled an agreement to buy the First of Michigan Capital Corporation because four of the five employees in the brokerage firm's corporate finance department had left since the deal was struck.
The deal, valued at $45 million, would have been among the first acquisitions of a full-service brokerage firm by a bank.
The four executives, who left First of Michigan in February for Roney &amp; Company, another Detroit firm, provided mergers and acquisition advice, a business that brought in a fraction of the firm's total revenues of $60 million last year.
First of Michigan has sued the former executives for breach of contract, and said it intends to look for another bank partner.


SAKS SAYS HAWAIIAN TRUST ACQUIRED 5% OF ITS EQUITY
Saks Fifth Avenue said this week that the Kamehameha Schools/ Bishop Estate, a charitable trust that finances the Kamehameha School in Hawaii and its programs, had purchased about 5 percent of the retail company's equity.
The remaining 95 percent of the common stock is held by Investcorp International Inc., its investors and a group of Saks managers.
Investcorp, an investment bank that pools money from overseas investors for acquisitions, paid $1.6 billion for Saks in 1990.
In January, one of Investcorp's customers, Prince al-Walid of Saudi Arabia, and an investment group bought $100 million, or about 11 percent, of the capital package.
Saks recently announced that it would increase its stores to 110, from 63, in the next four years.


Devils Lose Tempers and Game as Well
The Devils lost their cool and the game tonight, suffering a 5-2 defeat to the Buffalo Sabres.
Unlike in the previous three games between the teams, the Devils not only played an undisciplined game, but they also failed to contain Pat LaFontaine and Aleksandr Mogilny, Buffalo's biggest offensive weapons.


Scout Troop, Unwilling to Protest Gay Ban, Drops Ties With Yale
A New Haven Boy Scout troop will end its affiliation with Yale University's community service organization rather than oppose the national Boy Scout policy of barring homosexuals.
Members of the Yale group, known as Dwight Hall, voted last month to withhold support from the Scouts unless the troop's leaders took steps to protest the national policy, such as sending a letter to the Boy Scouts of America.


Corrections
A headline yesterday with the continuation of the obituary of the artist Richard Diebenkorn misstated his age.
In some copies, his age was also misstated in the obituary itself and in the front-page headline.
He was 70.


Eye on Ball For Israel; Peace and Terror: Search for Balance
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has repeatedly said since he took office last July that talking peace with the Arabs is one thing and fighting Arabs who shoot and stab Israelis is something else entirely.
His slogan is "We shall fight terrorism as if there is no peace process, and pursue the peace process as if there is no terrorism."
To Mr.
Rabin, Israelis have to keep their eye on the ball, which means not letting bursts of Arab violence get them so hysterical that they lose sight of the bigger objective they have pursued for years: a peace treaty.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Clinton Administration's rejection of a plan for a new United Nations Security Council resolution on the Balkans misidentified the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He is Alija Izetbegovic.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


No Headline
"The problem of having homosexuals serve openly is the extent it becomes a divisive cleavage point in small units." -- WILLIAM D. HENDERSON, a retired Army colonel who wrote "Cohesion: The Human Element in Combat."  [ A1:2. ]
"Condoning prejudice is an appalling means to unit cohesion. Whatever name discrimination takes, it ought to be exposed and rooted out." -- SENATOR KENNEDY.  [ A17:1. ]


Man Fatally Shot After Standoff, Police Say
Police officers fatally shot a 20-year-old man who barricaded himself in his Brooklyn apartment for eight and a half hours after shooting his mother's friend and then firing shots at officers who tried to negotiate with him, officials said yesterday.
The man, Jeffery Daniels of 593 Rogers Avenue in Flatbush, died at 5:37 A.M. yesterday at Kings County Hospital, said Sgt.
Norris Holloman, a police spokesman.


New Grant for Arts Writers
A new $3.2 million academic program intended to raise the level of arts criticism and reporting was announced yesterday by the Pew Charitable Trusts, a Philadelphia-based philanthropy.
The program, financed for three years, will award 12 one-year fellowships of $30,000 each to promising critics, reporters and editors.
The annual awards are to begin in 1994.


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


ON TOUR WITH: Helen Gurley Brown; Go Ahead, Say It: Sex And the Senior Woman
HELEN GURLEY BROWN is a wreck.
Her flight from Atlanta is late and now, at 7 P.M., she is just arriving in Boca Raton, Fla., for the start of a full schedule at 7:30 P.M. to promote her new book, "The Late Show: A Semiwild but Practical Survival Plan for Women Over 50" (William Morrow, $23).
Actually, Mrs.
Brown is 71, and none too happy about it, thank you, having made her reputation as "that Cosmo girl," the sexy embodiment of Cosmopolitan magazine, which she has edited since 1965.
But alas, the Cosmo girl's new advertising agency recently promoted her to the Cosmo young woman.
Like it or not, the rest of the world is growing up, and books on subjects like menopause are hitting the best-seller list and staying.


Comptronix Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Press Corps Fails to Knock Clinton Down
To the Editor:
"Next Time, Prime Time" (editorial, March 24) reflects the egocentric mainstream news media view that has sent President Clinton to town hall meetings.
That view is that unless a President submits to the established press corps, he is somehow avoiding "tough" questions.


Reporter's Notebook; Perot Tells Top Editors He Will Not Run in '96
Ross Perot, who seemed determined to make news reporters -- and especially newspaper reporters -- largely irrelevant with his talk show and "infomercial" campaign for President last year, told a convention of the nation's leading newspaper editors here today that he was not running for President in 1996.
The question was posed to Mr.
Perot after he had given his standard political speech at the annual convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
Ed Jones, managing editor of The Free Lance-Star in Fredericksburg, Va., asked, "in the spirit of free talk," whether Mr.
Perot, who is still crisscrossing the country with a vengeance, had plans for another run.


Automatic Phones Being Tested in 3 Precincts
The New York Police Department will begin using automated voice answering machines Monday in three precincts in a 90-day trial of what could become a citywide practice.
Police officials said yesterday that the experiment in the 47th Precinct, which takes in Eastchester in the Bronx, the 83d Precinct, covering Bushwick in Brooklyn, and the 115th Precinct, including Jackson Heights in Queens, was intended to make it easier for the public to reach precinct workers while reducing the number of non-emergency 911 calls.
There were 9.3 million 911 calls last year.


Intolerance: Coleman Loses Cool And Cash
Derrick Coleman is one of the most tolerant basketball players in the National Basketball Association.
But don't push him too far.
If you do, duck.
That's what happened against Philadelphia on Tuesday night, and today the N.B.A. fined Coleman $5,000 and 76ers forward Armon Gilliam $2,000 for their actions in an altercation.


Rachel D. DuBois, 101, Educator Who Promoted Value of Diversity
Rachel Davis DuBois, an educator who 60 years ago developed multicultural programs promoting respect for ethnic heritage and harmony between groups, died Tuesday at a hospital near her home in Woodstown, N.J.
She was 101.
Counter to the philosophy of the time that promoted ethnic assimilation, Dr.
Dubois was among the few educators preaching that differences should be celebrated.
Her work drew on her own Quaker background and her discovery of children in southern New Jersey who felt inferior and ashamed of their Italian heritage.


American Holdings Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Egypt's War With Militants: Both Sides Harden Positions
Frustrated by its inability to stanch a rising tide of violence by Islamic militants, the Egyptian Government has unleashed its security forces in a blood-letting and a wave of detentions not seen in Egypt since the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981.
The campaign appears to be aimed not only at the militant Islamic Group, but also at the established, officially tolerated Muslim Brotherhood, which says it does not sanction the use of force.
But it was only under prodding by Interior Minister Abdel-Halim Moussa that the Muslim Brotherhood today condemned attacks against tourists and Government officials.
Police State or Civil Unrest?
The confrontation signals the administration's resolve to curtail or shut down any Muslim group that appears to be politically inclined.
Egyptian officials say that one mistake made by the Government in Algeria, currently battling a powerful Islamic militant movement, was in permitting politically motivated Islamic groups to exist at all, even in the guise of charities or labor unions.


Missing Suspect Charged In Trade Center Bombing
A missing sixth suspect, described by investigators as a 25-year-old taxi driver born in Iraq or the United Arab Emirates and apparently in the United States illegally, was charged yesterday in the World Trade Center bombing.
A new indictment, which includes three defendants already charged, named him as Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who the authorities said had shared a Jersey City address with Mohammed A. Salameh.
Mr.
Salameh, 25, a Palestinian, is accused of leasing the van that carried a bomb into an underground garage, where it exploded on Feb. 26, killing six people and injuring more than 1,000.


Cocktail Tables And Drugs
DRUGS and their social, historical, physiological and political impact in America from the 1600's to the present are the subjects of "Altered States: Alcohol and Other Drugs in America," at the Strong Museum in Rochester.
"The show traces the very predictable patterns of drug use in our country," said Patricia Tice, the curator of the exhibit, who got the idea for the show from looking at cocktail tables.
"They are also known as coffee tables," she said.
"But after Prohibition was lifted, manufacturers started making more and more elaborate tables to serve cocktails. Making a drink, with all the special serving items and spoons, was more like the traditional tea ceremony."


Gymboree's Stock Offering Finds an Excited Audience
Wall Street got a resoundingly clear message yesterday that the Baby Boomlet has financial muscle, as investors went wild over the Gymboree Corporation, a retailer of children's apparel that offered its stock to the public for the first time.
Led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, underwriters for the stock had tentatively priced the issue at between $13 and $15 a share.
But demand was so great that the target price was raised to $20, and the size of the offering was increased to 2.1 million shares from 1.9 million shares.


On Cubism And the Czechs
THIS might be the final stop on its international tour, but "Czech Cubism: Architecture and Design," an exhibit that includes 32 pieces of furniture, 20 pieces of ceramics and 10 examples of metalwork, is hardly world-weary.
The show, which opens on April 6 at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in New York, focuses on the originality and verve of the movement that flourished in Prague between 1910 and 1925.


As Usual, Bowman Glides Through Chaos
Christopher Bowman, puffing on a cigar, was very hungry.
But the hotel restaurant had no seating left in the smoking section.
His friend, Pamela Cunningham, trembled near tears over a diamond ring that he had given her and that she couldn't seem to find.
An hour earlier, both of them had been dressed in gaudy frontier outfits, skating to Wild West music in the Ice Capades at the Rosemont Horizon.
Cunningham was so upset about the missing ring that she bungled a cue and injured a knee.
Now, Bowman was in T-shirt and jeans, a tattoo of theatrical masks showing on his left arm, comforting Cunningham.


Female Self-Esteem
To The Home Section:
Thank you for your article on the "assertiveness difference" between girls and boys  [ "Parent and Child" March 11 ] .
A study released last year by the American Association of University Women provides extensive data supporting your writer's comments on the subtle -- and not-so-subtle -- discouragement that girls suffer in school during the transition to adolescence and young adulthood.
But current research shows that external social cues are only one of several important factors in the development of self-confidence in girls and women.
Carol Gilligan's studies of girls at the Emma Willard School, and Blythe Clinchy's work on the book, "Women's Ways of Knowing," among others, reveal that girls and women often differ from boys and men in their learning styles and approach to moral reasoning.
These differences may manifest themselves as reticence in classrooms where the reward system is based on aggressive responses rather than cooperative, connected learning.
For this reason, many more studies conclude that schools and colleges that are responsive to female learning styles are often far more effective in developing self-esteem, self-confidence and leadership ability in girls and women.


METRO-GOLDWYN-MAYER INC.
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc. yesterday reported a net loss for 1992, though the film studio said operating results improved because of lower legal bills and trims in its television production unit.
Instead of losing $1 million a day, as in 1991, losses were $800,000 a day last year and revenue increased nearly 2 percent.
M-G-M is 98.5 percent owned by the French bank Credit Lyonnais, which seized the studio from the Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti, who borrowed to acquire the company in 1990 and defaulted.
The studio still faces legal wrangles stemming from the sale and its near-collapse.


Senior Lehman Investment Banker Leaves
After almost four years as a senior investment banker with Lehman Brothers, Michael D. Madden is becoming a free agent again.
Mr.
Madden, one of the co-heads of investment banking at Lehman, had been rumored for months to be ready to leave the firm, and yesterday it announced that he indeed had resigned to consider other job possibilities.


Joy Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


BGS Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Essay; Ghost at the Summit
We are coming up to April 22, which I like to celebrate with a smear of caviar on a small potato, washed down by a shot of very cold vodka -- as the day Aleksandr Kerensky was born 112 years ago.
For four tempestuous months in 1917, between the overthrow of the Romanov Czar and the seizure of power by the Bolsheviks, Kerensky -- a fiery orator of mildly Socialist views -- headed the first republican experiment in Russia.
If he had been tougher on the Bolsheviks and had some outside help, the 20th century might have been far less bloody.


Richard H. Growald; Journalist, 61
Richard H. Growald, a columnist at The San Diego Union-Tribune and a former correspondent for United Press International, died Tuesday at his brother's home near Fort Worth.
He was 61.
The cause was lung cancer, his brother, Martin, said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Joshua Redman
Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Avenue, at Perry Street  Greenwich Village  Through Sunday
A few years ago, when the young tenor saxophonist Joshua Redman came to New York, it was easy to imagine that he would be overlooked.
Mr.
Redman was all moderation, a classicist whose improvisations maintained an orderly calm.
He had clearly assimilated be-bop and the styles of some of the older saxophonists, and his lines, which floated nicely, were relaxed, rarely ruffled or eruptive.


Peter Ripps, Marketing Executive, 80
Peter Ripps, a former marketing executive in cosmetics and advertising, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Critic's Notebook; Daring to Be Different On TV, a Medium Where Safety Thrives
Add some music and call it the Network Waffle.
Battered by audience erosions and increasingly angry viewers, the three major commercial networks have been caught in a bind between bottom lines and quality programming.
What to do, what to do?
CBS's "Brooklyn Bridge" is probably gone for good.
NBC's "I'll Fly Away" is just barely hanging on as talk circulates that PBS might be interested in the show.
ABC's "Homefront" is squirming noticeably.
Viewer groups organize letter campaigns.
Critics wax indignant in their columns.
But the network system itself seems to have shifted into terminal stall.
Reeling from NBC's disastrous decision of a couple of seasons ago to court primarily young audiences, using the kind of narrowcasting that's a cable specialty, all three networks now say they will concentrate on traditional broadcasting with programming that appeals to wide cross-sections of viewers.
Perhaps that means promising new series will be given a season or two in a fixed time period.
Audiences will know when and where to find a specific program.
That is a basic strategy and courtesy denied in recent years to what the networks consider more difficult shows like "I'll Fly Away."


Schott to Be a No-Show on Opening day
Cincinnati Reds owner MARGE SCHOTT, suspended from baseball for a year for her racial slurs, says she will not participate in Monday's annual parade for the Cincinnati Reds' traditional National League opener.
Schott told The Cincinnati Post yesterday that she thinks baseball's ruling executive council, which announced her suspension, would not want her there.


Budget Pact Is Announced In Albany
One minute after the start of the new fiscal year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders emerged from a closed-door meeting this morning to announce that they had settled their impasse over the state budget but would not provide any details about their agreement.
"This is not the time for details," Mr.
Cuomo said, capping one of the more bizarre scenes in the recent history of the state's fiscal politics.
Although he announced a deal and shook hands with Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin and the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, in his ceremonial office, as though the details had been hammered out, Mr.
Cuomo said there was still "an immense amount of work to be done."


She May Be Decorating The White House. Shh!
WEDGED among the coffee-table magazines in Kaki Hockersmith's decorating shop is a Newsweek cover story that asks, "Hillary's Role: How Much Clout?"
Ms.
Hockersmith should know.
Although it has yet to be announced and has been shrouded in a swag of secrecy here and in Washington, the identity of the Little Rock decorator's latest clients can be gleaned from a big cardboard box in the back of her office labeled "WHITE HOUSE."


Director Attacked for Mishandling His Job
A power struggle has erupted for control of American swimming.
The last eight head coaches of United States Olympic teams are unhappy with some of the ways Ray Essick is handling his job as executive director of U.S.
Swimming, the national governing body.
Four of the coaches -- Richard Quick, Eddie Reese, Jack Nelson and Mark Schubert -- are active and four -- Dr.
Jim Counsilman, Peter Daland, Don Gambril and George Haines -- have retired.
Most are here for the Phillips 66 national spring championships, which began today.


Rangers To Stick With Neil Smith
In a significant show of confidence at a most unstable moment, a representative of the Rangers' ownership group said yesterday that Neil Smith would return as the team's president and general manager next fall, regardless of the Rangers' fate this season.
"I can assure you that Neil will be leading this team when we break camp in September, no matter what we do this year," said Bob Gutkowski, president and chief executive officer of Madison Square Garden.
"We have great faith in Neil, great respect for his abilities and great respect for his knowledge. We know if he leaves this organization, he'll be snapped up by someone else in a New York minute."


CHRONICLE
BILL WYMAN, 56, the former Rolling Stones bass player, is 34 years older than his most recent wife, MANDY SMITH, now 22, whom he met when she was 13 and from whom he was divorced last year.
So it should not startle that his son from another marriage, STEPHEN WYMAN, who is 30, is planning to marry an older woman.
The surprise is that she is PATSY SMITH, 46, Mandy Smith's mother -- and Bill Wyman's former mother-in-law.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST
WACHTLER PLEADS GUILTY
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, pleaded guilty to threatening to kidnap the daughter of his former lover, in the denouement of a bizarre case of thwarted love and its painful aftershocks.
Although Mr.
Wachtler confessed to a single felony as part of an agreement reached with the Government, in a chilling statement he baldly admitted to carrying out a plot to terrify Joy Silverman, his former lover, and others.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
STUDIOS TO EXPAND  ON WEST SIDE


Peerless Tube Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Grease Monkey Holding Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Red Grooms Takes On Grand Central
IT'S the kind of exhibition where yes, you can take something home with you.
After touring "Red Grooms at Grand Central," which includes riding the artist's rollicking subway car or listening to his cab driver's monologue, you can stop and pick up a souvenir.
There are T-shirts with the Statue of Liberty, left, ($18 for adults, $15 for children) and a series of posters that can be cut out into three-dimensional Charlie Chaplins, Fats Dominos or checker cabs, left, ($18).


B.C.C.I. Trial Becomes A Vocal Free-for-All
The New York criminal trial of Robert A. Altman in the Bank of Commerce and Credit International scandal degenerated into a shouting match yesterday with the defense demanding a mistrial and the prosecution calling the judge intimidated by the defense.
After the jury had been excused until April 13 for Passover and Easter, an assistant district attorney, Richard Preiss, questioned in the courtroom whether the presiding judge, John A. K. Bradley, would stand up to what he called steamroller tactics by the defense intended to gut the prosecution's case.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  OVERWHELMING CHAOS IN SORTING HOMELESS
A new evaluation process, part of New York City's first attempt to assess whether homeless families need more than a place to stay, is being pioneered at a center in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
But the process is unfamiliar to both workers and the people they are trying to serve, and the center is overwhelmed by chaos.
A1.
HOMELESS-POLICY SHOWDOWNS AVOIDED


It's getting ugly on the court, but ads still find basketball attractive.
TO National Basketball Association executives, recent fisticuffs in the league are no cause for concern.
Basket-brawling is nowhere near its all-time high, and any appearances to the contrary are a result of the involvement of marquee players like Shaquille O'Neal, the all-star center of the Orlando Magic, who landed a costly punch in a game against the Detroit Pistons on Tuesday night.


The Voice of the Choir Shall Ring Out for Easter
This is a list of some musical presentations planned for the holiday season at churches and concert halls in the New York metropolitan area.
All are free unless otherwise noted.
This selection, compiled by Allan Kozinn, represents what caught this critic's eye and excited his expectations.


Maine to Play Lake Superior St. for Big Icicle
After six straight years of striving in the National Collegiate Athletic Association hockey tournament, the University of Maine reached the championship game for the first time today.
The Black Bears, who have lost only 1 of 44 games this season, beat Michigan, 4-3, in overtime before a sellout crowd of 17,403 at the Bradley Center this afternoon in one semifinal.


More Evidence of Slowing Growth
A strong rebound in manufacturing lost some of its momentum in March, a survey of corporate purchasing executives shows.
The survey, conducted by the National Association of Purchasing Managers and released yesterday, is one of many pieces of evidence that economic growth in the first quarter was significantly less robust than last fall's 5 percent pace.


As Trial Is Set In Explosion, Hunt Widens
With all but one of the suspects in the World Trade Center bombing under arrest just five weeks after the attack, Federal prosecutors moved yesterday to begin trying the men charged in the massive explosion that killed 6 people and injured more than 1,000.
Investigators meanwhile intensified an international search for Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the missing suspect who was first named on Wednesday in the bombing plot and who law-enforcement officials say played an important role.


Diplomat's Car Hijacked
Two men in a Mercedes-Benz robbed a German diplomat of his car at gunpoint yesterday afternoon in Queens, the police said.
The victim, who works at the German Mission to the United Nations, told the police that his 1992 Audi 100 was repeatedly bumped from behind by the Mercedes, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.
When the diplomat became stuck in traffic at 38th Avenue and Crescent Street, a man jumped from the Mercedes and, waving a handgun, forced the diplomat to get out and then drove off in the Audi.


Where to Hear The Music of Easter
COMPOSERS have always taken Psalm 150 -- which suggests praising God with blasts of the horn, with harp and lyre, timbrel and dance, lute, pipe and resounding cymbals -- as a kind of guild charter from on high.
Between now and Easter Sunday, music lovers will have an opportunity to sample the great variety of ways in which musicians have responded to that call.
One can hear the Passover story, for example, in Handel's remarkable but too rarely heard oratorio "Israel in Egypt." And churches all over New York City are presenting many of the works that tell the story of Easter, including Bach's "St. Matthew Passion," Stainer's "Crucifixion" and settings of the Seven Last Words of Christ, by Schutz, Haydn and Dubois.
Of equal interest, though, are the works that look beyond Easter.
Among this week's offerings, one can hear virtually the entire history of Mass settings, ranging from anonymous medieval English works to Masses by Josquin, Byrd, Haydn, Salieri, Gounod and Durufle, along with the Misa Flamenca by Paco Pena.
Interesting, too, are the many works by local composers and church-music directors, among them Kyler Brown, David Hurd, MacNeil Robinson and Calvin Hampton. (The seasonal-music listings are on page C4.)


CHRONICLE
MAYA ANGELOU believes that she has twice won the right to be compared with Horatio Alger -- first when she won the Horatio Alger Award last year and then when she was chosen to be chairman of the dinner at which this year's winners will be honored.
"I was dramatically and unanimously voted in as program chairman," Ms.
Angelou, the poet, novelist and Reynolds Professor of American Studies at Wake Forest University, said yesterday.
"They have never had a woman nor a black as program chairman before. It really is all the white boys who grew up to be white men, and these same men have seen fit to vote me in.


Lord Zuckerman, 88, a Scientist Of Scope Who Guided Churchill
Lord Zuckerman, the British scientist and counselor to Churchill and other prime ministers on issues ranging from World War II bombing strategy to industrial pollution to "Star Wars" space weapons, died yesterday in London.
He was 88.
He had a heart attack, his family said.


Art in Review
Beatrice Wood
Garth Clark Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
In her youth, Beatrice Wood had an affair with Marcel Duchamp and may have inspired the Jeanne Moreau character in the film "Jules and Jim," which was based on a book written by another paramour, Henri-Pierre Roche.
But for nearly a half-century, Ms.
Wood, who turned 100 recently, has been living in Ojai, Calif., and has become increasingly famous for her work in ceramics.


Review/Art; Misunderstood Painting From a Complex Era
Visitors to "Painters of the Great Ming: The Imperial Court and the Zhe School," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, should plan to stay a while.
The exhibition's dozens of scrolls and album leaves, with their contrasting images of dreamy mountainous vistas and caricatured figures, richly repay leisurely attention.
And the exhibition itself, organized by the Dallas Museum of Art and coordinated at the Met by Maxwell K. Hearn, is a model of the curator's craft.
This is the first major exhibition in the West devoted to painting from the Ming dynasty.
It not only presents unfamiliar material but also reflects an impressive range of fresh scholarly research.
Many Ming paintings so closely emulated the Song dynasty style of a century earlier that they were collected as Song works; "Painters of the Great Ming" provides the occasion for a revision of the confused dates and attributions that resulted.
Finally, the show's superb and exhaustive catalogue, by Richard Barnhart, brings vividly to life a complicated culture still much misunderstood.


The Art Market
Leaving 57th Street
The geography of Manhattan's decorative-arts galleries is changing.
For years, 57th Street has been a mecca not simply for fashion, but also for art and antiques.
Now it seems that high-end fashion designers like Chanel have the financial muscle to ease out the antiques shops.
Take 15 East 57th Street, where James Robinson's windows have attracted passers-by with striking displays of silver and jewelry for 14 years.
The building, filled with distinguished antiques dealers, has been something of an institution on 57th Street.
It is also home to Israel Sack, the American antiques dealer; Doris Leslie Blau, who specializes in antique rugs, and James II, a shop for small, predominantly English decorative objects.
But Malcolm Franklin, an English furniture dealer, moved out of the building in June, and last month so did Paul Vandekar, whose stock of antique ceramics at Earle D. Vandekar of Knightsbridge occupied the building's second floor for 13 years.


Corrections
A map in Science Times on Tuesday depicting the ways pre-Columbian societies changed the landscape of the Americas mislocated the ancient urban center Tenochtitlan.
It was situated where Mexico City now stands.


Cult Leader Is Not Thought to Be Near Death
Talks with the cult leader David Koresh have been hampered by his gunshot wounds, a lawyer said after meeting with him, but Federal agents said today that doctors thought the wounds were not life threatening.
The lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, was quoted by The Associated Press today as saying that he and another lawyer, Jack Zimmermann, who represents Mr.
Koresh's lieutenant, Steve Schneider, had no plans for further negotiations with the cult leader.
"We've done about all a lawyer can do now," Mr.
DeGuerin said.


Art in Review
Annette Lemieux
Brooke Alexander Editions  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through April tomorrow
This show of works in editions gives a good sense of the breadth and complexity of an artist whose effects are sometimes so understated as to look under-realized.


Assessing the Needs of New York's Homeless
A social worker with a clipboard waded through the crowded lobby of a Brooklyn center for homeless families, trying to accommodate the newcomers who were arriving faster than rooms could be prepared for them.
The center is part of New York City's first attempt to assess whether homeless families need more than a place to stay, a process that is still unfamiliar to both the workers and the people they are trying to serve.
The staff says the current chaos is the inevitable result of efforts to overhaul the family shelter system, efforts whose success cannot yet be judged.


Solid Quarter Led by Cyclical Stocks
The first quarter brought smiles to many investors who owned shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange, especially in industries like semiconductors, energy and utilities.
The first three months of the year were less kind to small-capitalization Nasdaq issues, which cooled a bit after a record-breaking advance that had begun in early autumn.


Palestinians Call Israeli Action Obstacle to Talks
Palestinian leaders accused the Israeli Government today of creating "a massive collective prison" in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip with its order this week prohibiting residents there from entering Israel for any reason.
Faisal al-Husseini, the Palestinian leader in East Jerusalem, warned that the closing of the territories in response to anti-Israel violence threw a new obstacle in the path of restarting the stalled Middle East peace talks.
Even before this week, the Palestinians were hesitant about returning to the talks because they want further concessions from Israel on its deportation of some 400 accused Islamic militants in mid-December.


Antiquarian Book Fair
The New York Antiquarian Book Fair opens today at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street in Manhattan.
More than 115 international booksellers will exhibit rare books, manuscripts, autographs, maps and first editions.
The fair is sponsored by the Antiquarian Booksellers Association of America.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $10; $20 for a three-day pass; children under 16 free.
Information: (212) 777-5218.


New Study Questions Use of AZT In Early Treatment of AIDS Virus
The standard early treatment given to people infected with the virus that causes AIDS was called into serious question today by a large European study.
The treatment, recommended by the United States Government and widely followed in many countries, is to prescribe the drug AZT to people infected with the virus, H.I.V., long before they develop the symptoms of full-fledged AIDS.


Juan de Borbon, 79, Who Ceded Spanish Throne
Juan de Borbon, who renounced his claim to the Spanish crown to settle a dispute over the accession of his son, Juan Carlos, died today at the University Hospital of Navarre in Pamplona.
He was 79.
He had been hospitalized since September with throat cancer and died of respiratory and cardiac collapse, a spokeswoman for the royal family said.
The King and his two sisters, Princess Pilar and Princess Margarita, were said to have been with their father when he died.


Corrections
A front-page article on Wednesday about the naming of candidates for the posts of United States Attorney in Manhattan and Brooklyn imprecisely described the record of a previous Federal prosecutor in Manhattan, Rudolph W. Giuliani, in prosecuting white-collar crime.
While several of his important Wall Street cases were overturned on appeal, Mr.
Giuliani won the convictions of such major figures as the financiers Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken.


Get Ready for Pitino And the Newharts
Viewers will find something sadly lacking in the Final Four that starts tomorrow at 5:30 P.M.
Three of the four coaches are tame men who think it unnecessary to vent unnecessarily during a game.
Steve Fisher of Michigan, Dean Smith of North Carolina and Roy Williams of Kansas are as exciting and bombastic as Bob Newhart.
Only Rick Pitino of Kentucky remains to maintain our faith in sideline histrionics.
Would Slick Rick be paid as much if he were less vituperative?
Yes, we will regret being without Cincinnati's Bob Huggins, whose Bearcats lost to North Carolina, and Indiana's Bob Knight, whose Hoosiers were downed by Kansas, and Temple's John Chaney, whose Owls lost to Michigan.
Add Huggins, Knight and Chaney to Pitino and we would have had a Heavy Metal Final Four.
What a grand spectacle of shouting, cussing and petulance we are missing.


Modernizing Meat Inspections
"Wholesome" isn't the word that leaps to mind to describe the tainted hamburgers that killed 3 children and caused 500 illnesses from bacterial infection in the Seattle area in January.
Yet the meat had passed a Federal inspection and so bore the Agriculture Department's reassuring stamp, "Inspected for Wholesomeness."
These events have now led Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy to confront one of his department's dirty secrets: The nation's outmoded meat inspection system isn't geared to combat the invisible hazard of bacterial contamination.
It relies primarily on the ability of inspectors to spot contaminated meat by sight or feel as carcasses move rapidly by on hooks.
They have no ability to routinely check for dangerous microorganisms inside the carcasses.
So Mr.
Espy wisely pledges to establish a new system that emphasizes advanced microbiology and monitoring devices.


Atomic Energy Agency Asks U.N. To Move Against North Koreans
The International Atomic Energy Agency declared today that North Korea had violated its obligations to open its suspected nuclear weapons sites to inspections.
For the first time, the agency asked the United Nations Security Council to enforce the provisions of international agreements intended to limit the spread of nuclear arms.
The action, at a special meeting of the agency's board of governors, came a day after North Korea defied the latest deadline to permit inspectors into two sites near Yongbyon, a heavily guarded nuclear installation that American intelligence satellites suggest would provide evidence of how close the Communist Government is to producing a bomb.
North Korea declared three weeks ago that it was withdrawing from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear arms, but the action does not take effect until June.


No Headline
"If he wants to climb into the ring -- anytime, anywhere." -- ROSS PEROT, referring to President Clinton.  [ A1:2. ]


When the Page Can't Be Turned
As the National Collegiate Athletic Association prepares to crown a new men's basketball champion this weekend, a drama is being played out at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas that in many ways defines big-time athletics: the persistent tension between athletes and academics, the need for coaches to recruit top players and the struggle to keep those players eligible.
A year after hiring Rollie Massimino and ostensibly casting out the villains associated with the former coach, Jerry Tarkanian, Nevada-Las Vegas, a school known for basketball and run-ins with the N.C.A.A., is faced with a case of alleged academic fraud involving J. R. Rider, one of the nation's best players, and a tutor who has admitted doing some of Rider's work.
In addition to the central characters, the case involves coaches, an academic adviser, an associate dean and the dean of a school who agreed to let Rider regain his eligibility by taking a big class load in summer school.


The Stage Art of Helen Hayes Could Have Been Preserved
To the Editor:
During the 1950's and into the 60's, a group of us who love live, Broadway theater -- two playwrights, a producer, an angel, a manager, a theater lawyer -- attempted to form a company to film Broadway productions.
Our sole purpose was to preserve for posterity the many brilliant performances -- "extraordinary performances," as you point out in "Helen Hayes, Everywhere" (Topics of The Times, March 19) -- that appear on Broadway stages each season.
Our plan was to film each production from beginning to end, opening curtain to final bows, without attempting to make it a movie.
Our living theater preservation project, as we called it, ran into obstacles and naysayers from the outset.


Defense Secretary Hears of Congressional Impatience Over Cuts


Abroad at Home; Fear Of the Truth
The Truth Commission on El Salvador reported two weeks ago that Government forces had carried out appalling atrocities through the 1980's.
The report was a direct challenge to the U.S. officials who saw to it that we armed and supported those forces.
What would they say?
The answer is now in.
The men responsible for policy toward El Salvador will admit nothing and regret nothing.
Their line is: We didn't know who committed the atrocities, and anyway our policy was right because it defeated Communism.


Queens Nightclub's Landlord Says He Wants No More Nudity
As community leaders and residents continued their nightly protests outside a nude dancing club in Forest Hills, Queens, the landlord made plans to meet with the club's operators today to try to persuade them to shut down the nightclub.
The landlord, Lawrence Silverstein, was not aware that the property's longtime tenant planned to open a club with nude dancers until it began in February, and he now wants the operation to stop, according to his associate, Anne Postyn.


Review/Film; Huck Finn And Jim, Drifting Together
Viewed as a cinematic property even if it never was intended as one, "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" is an either-or proposition.
Either the sweeping breadth and satirical tone of Mark Twain's classic novel are somehow approximated, in which case the material will elude most young viewers, or the story must be scaled down.
Choosing the latter route, Walt Disney Pictures has succeeded in turning "The Adventures of Huck Finn" into a simple, spirited escapade meant for older children, who will certainly grasp the essence of Twain's story if not the nuances.
For viewers of any age, this film is good fun and demonstrates a certain daring.
Disney's "Adventures of Huck Finn" serves as a sprightly, good-humored introduction to a book that would otherwise be seriously out of fashion.


New Hostilities Threaten Azerbaijan Peace Talks
Fresh fighting between Azerbaijan and Armenia over ethnic enclaves is imperiling international negotiations on a cease-fire, Administration officials said today.
The dispute began in 1988 when ethnic Armenians, complaining of persecution in the Azerbaijan enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, asserted the right to secede and to join their territory to Armenia.
Now the ethnic Armenians say they have created an independent republic in the territory, which is the size of Rhode Island.


For Children
Long Island isn't just the Hamptons, the Expressway, the Gold Coast or even Walt Whitman; it's also nature preserves, robber-baron estates and museums, including ones that specialize in the backbone of the region: fishing, boating and whaling.
These small museums are worth the drive (or train ride) for a visit during the spring school break.
Cold Spring Harbor Whaling Museum
Main Street, at Turkey Lane  Cold Spring Harbor  (516) 367-3418  Recommended for all ages  Tuesdays through Sundays
This museum is a testament to the years 1836-62, when Cold Spring Harbor was an important whaling port, supporting nine vessels in their seemingly endless search for blubber.
The four galleries offer interactive displays, games and exhibitions that entice children into the world of whales.
In one exhibit, you can push a button and hear the taped sounds of humpback whales.
In another, you can touch whale bones and study scrimshaw.
The history of whaling unfolds in dioramas and displays, and the facts are presented in ways that are meaningful to children: a killer whale, for example, is compared to a school bus in length (30 feet).
In the center of the museum is a 100-year-old whale boat with original equipment, part of a ship called the Daisy that sailed from New Bedford, Mass.
There is also a sea-blue activity room where children can work on art projects and puzzles.
The museum is open Tuesdays through Sundays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
After Memorial Day, it will be open Mondays as well.
Admission is $1; $2 for adults; $1.50 for the elderly.
Suffolk Marine Museum
Montauk Highway, at West Avenue  West Sayville  (516) 854-4974  Recommended for all ages  Wednesdays through Sundays
The front lawn of this museum, on the bucolic grounds of a former estate, ends at the Great South Bay, with a full view of Fire Island.
Its briny atmosphere is well suited to the museum's focus on Long Island maritime history, particularly as it evolved on the South Shore.
There are boat models, antique lifesaving equipment, paintings and photographs of shipwrecks and other memorabilia.
Children will be drawn to the model of the Sovereign of the Sea, a boat built by King Charles I of England in 1637.
The Sovereign carried 800 men and 104 guns (miniature cannons protrude from the model) and sailed for 60 years, until a burning candle set her afire.
Other models (all are in glass cases) are of the types of boats that sail local waters, like a yawl, small and large yachts, a sloop and a tugboat.
The real thing, a tugboat circa 1870, is moored right outside.
The museum is open Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Admission is free until June 1; from June 1 through Labor Day, adults are charged $2 (children under 12 are still admitted free).
Nassau County Police Museum
Police Headquarters  1490 Franklin Avenue, at 15th Street  Mineola  (516) 573-7000  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Mondays through Fridays
For children enamored of the good-guys-versus-bad-guys theme, this museum offers plenty of authentic police paraphernalia to contemplate.
At the entrance, there's a car grille with a license plate dated 1925, the year the Nassau County Police Department was established.
Adding extra seriousness is a cartridge-filled gun belt hanging on a coat rack; a fingerprint-taking machine (the Ryan dactyloplane, patented in 1916); a camera with a large flash, reminiscent of Sergeant Friday and the "Dragnet" series, and a black-and-white photograph of Bonnie Parker at 24, with guns dangling from her slim waist.
The museum, which is free, keeps erratic weekday hours, so it is best to call ahead.
Next week, it will be open Monday through Friday from 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.


Review/Film; Cinematic Magicians Reveal Their Tricks
Don't be put off by the title, which, though perfectly correct, would seem to promise a long snooze in an arid hall of academe.
"Visions of Light: The Art of Cinematography" is the vibrant, gloriously documented tale of the evolution of motion-picture photography, told in the words of the cinematographers themselves and in scenes from 125 films.
This 90-minute documentary is so energizing that when you leave the Film Forum, where "Visions of Light" opens today, you'll want to rush out to see, or see again, virtually every film that has just been recalled.
"Visions of Light" may not change your life, but it will certainly enrich your appreciation for the whole complex, collaborative process by which random ideas are somehow transformed into films that occasionally exalt.


Review/Music; The Brandenburg Ensemble
The Brandenburg Ensemble is Alexander Schneider's survivor and his legatee.
He founded the chamber orchestra 20 years ago, and its players, led by Jaime Laredo, remembered Mr.
Schneider on Sunday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall with music by Vivaldi, Haydn and Mozart.
These are first-class musicians.
The music was 18th-century but the instruments and style were, after Mr.
Schneider's own tastes, up-to-date.


Review/Film; DeVito As Pater And Mater Familias
"Jack the Bear" is the dark, peril-ridden story of a widowed father (Danny DeVito) trying to bring up his two young sons.
The place is Oakland, Calif., the year 1972, and the neighborhood so frightening that every house holds some new terror.
"I didn't know yet what I was going to learn that year: that monsters are real," says the title character, Jack Leary (Robert J. Steinmiller Jr.), an otherwise likable boy with the onerous job of delivering frequent doses of foreshadowing.
Presented as a grim coming-of-age drama, "Jack the Bear" was directed by Marshall Herskovitz, co-creator of television's "Thirtysomething." It's an instant reminder of that show's taste for navel-gazing, since it takes a potentially small, delicate story and overloads every bit of the tale.
Based on Dan McCall's novel and written with strained sensitivity by Steven Zaillian, "Jack the Bear" has a basic and insurmountable problem.
Though its characters are played appealingly, nothing that happens to them can be believed.


Sterling Software to Buy Systems Center
Sterling Software Inc. announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy Systems Center Inc., a systems software maker based in Reston, Va., in a stock swap valued at $185 million.
The proposed merger would make Sterling, based in Dallas, the nation's third-largest mainframe-systems software maker behind Computer Associates and the Legent Corporation, rivals that have also grown through acquisition in recent years.


Intel Raising Capacity of Chip Factory
The Intel Corporation said today that it planned a $1 billion expansion of its microchip factory in New Mexico.
Intel said it would be the largest single investment in any American computer-chip plant.
The expansion will add more than 1.3 million square feet to the facility in Rio Rancho, a suburb of Albuquerque, and create as many as 1,000 new jobs, the company said.
It added that that work on the expansion would begin immediately, with production scheduled to start in 1995.


Long-Term Bond Rates Jump to 6.96%
Long-term interest rates jumped to 6.96 percent yesterday and could move to 7 percent or higher if today's report on March employment is surprisingly strong and two key inflation reports due next week are disappointing.
In light trading yesterday, the price of the 30-year bond fell 16/32 point as the yield rose from 6.93 percent Wednesday.
The long bond's yield of 6.96 percent was the highest since the post-election bond market rally pushed it to a 16-year low of 6.72 percent March 8.


A Balancing Act for Haiti; Developing the Plan for Aristide's Return Is Proving a Delicate and Complex Puzzle
For months, diplomats who have negotiated here say, close supporters of Haiti's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, have focused on little beyond the legitimacy that comes from his having won 67 percent of the vote.
Whenever ready, mediators have often heard, Washington could restore their President with a simple phone call.
Father Aristide's foes in the military and economic elite convinced themselves long ago, however, that Haiti's first democratically elected President is a populist demon bent on avenging his violent overthrow by soldiers 18 months ago.
They had hoped that the outside world would come to accept their view and let them get on with their lives, unworried by the prospect of his return.


At the Bar; A modern form of tilting at windmills: Try filing a lawsuit against a lawyer.
Ten years ago, when a New York lawyer named Francis X. Morrissey Jr. requested nearly $1 million for his services in an insurance dispute, his client balked.
Mr.
Morrissey, the client contended, had done little of the legal heavy lifting in the case and could surely not have devoted to it anywhere near the 5,205 hours he claimed.
So Mr.
Morrissey took matters into his own hands.
In July 1983, a court later held, he simply withdrew the money from the client's escrow account without the client's consent.
From that he paid out $34,324.62 to another law firm, and kept $925,675.38 for himself.


Bronx Man, 29, Fatally Hit By Stray Bullet at Pay Phone
A 29-year-old elevator mechanic, apparently trying to call his boss because he was worried about being late to work, was fatally wounded by a stray bullet at a pay phone along White Plains Road in the Bronx, the police said yesterday.
The bullet was fired from a passing car by one of three men, who later told the police they didn't know they had hit anyone, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.
The men, who were chased down by the police after witnesses gave a description of their 1987 four-door Nissan, were charged with second-degree murder, he said.


Critic's Notebook; 'Nosferatu,' the Father Of All Horror Movies
THE contemporary vampire has a certain charm, a je ne sais quoi that comes only from being undead.
Think of the irresistible passion of Gary Oldman in Francis Ford Coppola's recent "Bram Stoker's 'Dracula,' " or the smooth-talking manner of Frank Langella in the stage and screen versions of "Dracula" from the late 1970's.
Even Bela Lugosi's classic count looked like nothing more than a 1930's Latin lover shipped to Transylvania.
They are suave seducers, able to steal a woman's soul and body with a neat prick to the neck. (Female vampires have not been so successful on screen; "Innocent Blood," with Anne Parillaud as the vampire who seduced Pittsburgh, and "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" were among last year's conspicuous flops.)
Vampires have not always been so appealing.
The first major movie Dracula, and still the one most capable of producing nightmares, appears in F. W. Murnau's 1922 silent film, "Nosferatu: A Symphony of Horror." As Nosferatu (or the Undead), Max Schreck looks positively ratlike.
He has a bald head, pointy ears, elongated hands with clawlike nails and two conspicuous fangs where his front teeth should be.
His pasty-white coffin pallor hints at too many days out of the sun, and he walks stiff-armed and hunched over, like an animal not quite used to standing on his hind legs.
This guy is no cutie face.


EASES RERUN RULE
In the Government's toughest single consumer-protection action in decades, the Federal Communications Commission today ordered sweeping cuts of cable television prices that could total well over $1 billion nationwide annually.
The lower prices could show up in customer bills by this summer.
The cuts, whose depth stunned some industry analysts, will force about two-thirds of the nation's cable systems to reduce their prices for most services by 10 percent.
In addition, the agency ordered cable companies to reverse any price increases they imposed since Congress passed a law last fall to regulate the industry.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the Clinton Administration's decision to renew funding for some international population groups incorrectly characterized the role of a United Nations organization in financing abortions.
The United Nations Population Fund neither provides abortions nor pays for them.
But the agency does train people who manage family planning programs in developing countries, and in some cases these managers later oversee programs that provide abortions.


German Labor Police Round Up Illegal Workers
Ante Kundid, a 43-year-old refugee from Croatia, thought he had landed a job as an electrician on a housing construction site in Fechenheim on a Monday morning.
But the German labor office and the police took it away from him less than 24 hours later in a raid of a kind that is fast becoming a daily occurrence here.


Yankees' Lineup Is Still Uncertain
Few conclusions could be drawn today as the Yankees ended the Florida portion of spring training.
It became more apparent that Jimmy Key would probably start on opening day Monday in place of the ailing Melido Perez.
And it was obvious that the club would not make its final roster cuts until hours before the players board a charter flight to Cleveland Sunday night.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Patents column in Business Day on Monday misstated a characteristic of some people suffering from genetically transmitted cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease.
Such patients are indeed able to produce an enzyme called superoxide dismutase, which helps neutralize oxygen radicals that can destroy DNA and other body cells, but their enzymes fail to function.


From Bosnian Children, Tales of Hunger and Horror
Nermin Osmanovic has seen the death of his father, the wounding of his mother, the dispersal of his family and the destruction of his home, and he is not yet 9 years old.
Now he shares a dank schoolhouse in this Bosnian Government-controlled town with 60 other Muslim children evacuated from Srebrenica, a town in eastern Bosnia that is under siege by Serbian forces.
As he waits for his mother to be released from a nearby hospital, he speaks of his experiences haltingly, but in a matter-of-fact way, with only a hint of sadness.


Art in Review
Walker Evans
Gallery 292  120 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through April 10
In the last years of his life, Walker Evans (1903-1975) turned from the kind of work for which he was best known, the black-and-white photographs made with a large-format camera, and began to work with a small Polaroid.
His pictures from this period, in bright color, are seldom shown, and as a result, this selection from 1973-74 has a special fascination.


Clinton May Not Meet Deadline on Health Plan
President Clinton probably cannot meet the deadline of May 3 that he set for sending Congress a detailed plan for reshaping the nation's health-care system, Administration officials said today.
The delay reduces the chance that the proposal will become law this year.
Health care remains a top priority of Mr.
Clinton, and he fully intends to send Congress a detailed legislative proposal to control health costs and guarantee insurance coverage for all Americans, the officials said.


To Our Readers
Starting on Monday, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays and Saturdays outside the New York metropolitan area will increase to 75 cents.


Reviews/Film; Violence Plays It Cute
The gimmick may be cute, but it is also somewhat unsettling to watch Norman D. Golden 2d, a child actor who suggests a pint-size Eddie Murphy, imitate a police officer in the action-comedy "Cop and a Half."
In the film, Norman plays Devon Butler, a sassy third grader who has his own handcuffs and wields his red-and-gold plastic water pistol as though it were a lethal weapon.
Stalking through the schoolyard with his toys, he earnestly re-enacts the cliches of police action films, grimly ordering people to "Freeze!" and warning, "You're dead meat now."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Sweeping cuts in cable television prices were ordered in the Government's toughest consumer-protection action in decades.
The move will force most cable companies to reduce prices by 10 percent, which could total $1 billion nationwide.
The lower prices could show up in customer bills by this summer.  [ Page A1. ]
The television networks were allowed to own the rerun rights to their prime-time shows.
In a victory for ABC, NBC and CBS and a defeat for Hollywood movie makers, the Government reversed a decision made two years ago.  [ A1. ]


TV Weekend; The Princess' Side of Life at the Palace
American television's long affair with Britain's royal family, in sickness and in health, rolls on this Sunday and Monday at 9 P.M. with NBC's four-hour presentation of "Diana: Her True Story." This version of life at Buckingham Palace is based on the Andrew Morton best seller, which was billed as exposing countless hidden secrets.
Now, Diana, the Princess of Wales, is right up there with Amy Fisher as a multiple-movies favorite in what has come to be known as television's Trashomon Effect.
This portrait of Diana is, on balance, sympathetic, if only as compared with how everyone around her is portrayed.
The opening scene shows an unhappy little girl wondering why her Mommy has left the family and dreaming of becoming a ballerina or princess one day.
Little more than 10 years later, a teen-age Diana (Serena Scott Thomas) will find herself being wooed by the 30-year-old Prince Charles (David Threlfall).
Charles is encouraged by his family, who refer to themselves as the Firm.
"Time you pulled your socks up and got married," says Dad (Donald Douglas).
"How long does it take to find a Protestant virgin?"


One Last Round as 'Cheers' Finale Is Taped
For all intents and purposes, that agreeable television mix of wry wit and barroom banter, set in a Boston tavern known as Cheers, ended on Wednesday night on a sound stage here.
With considerable emotion and fond remembrances of 11 years, the cast of NBC's "Cheers" shot the 274th and final episode of what has become a Thursday-night ritual in homes across America.
It was the ultimate last call for the longest-running comedy on television.


Sports of The Times; Some of Us Are Waiting For Preston
QUICK, now.
Who is the center fielder of the Mets?
All right then, who is the center fielder of the Yankees?
Here is a quick tip.
Neither of them is Willie, Mickey or the Duke, as in the Terry Cashman lyrics.


Review/Fashion; For Next Wave, Attitude Counts
When rap revolutionized radio, it bludgeoned elitism right out of pop music.
Here was compelling sound created without formal training or expensive instruments.
In fashion, a new wave of designers is now gently bringing the message that technique may not be the only thing that confers validity.
As with rap, much of the success of this fashion generation depends on attitude.
Cynthia Rowley is cute without being cloying.
In her show yesterday, she tempered the sweetness of flowered flapper and baby-doll dresses and swingy skirts with thigh-high socks and loose styling.
Some of her best ideas were a simple grey dress with long sleeves -- designed to be tied into a shawl -- that dragged on the floor behind the model, and petticoat pants and bloomers under Edwardian jackets.
For evening, chiffon with unfinished hems was layered over lace.
Some styles were wrapped at the wrists or waist with rope.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 623 retail money market mutual funds decreased $5.65 billion, to $387.69 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 388 taxable retail money market funds fell $4.96 billion, to $305.7 billion, while the assets of the 235 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $688.5 million, to $82.13 billion.


Giants Out of the White Sweepstakes?
The Giants may have been eliminated by the free agent REGGIE WHITE , but General Manager GEORGE YOUNG said yesterday that the team is still interested in signing the Eagles' pass-rushing star.
"I don't know that we have been cut out," said Young.
"We were told that when they got back from San Francisco, they'd call us."


Energy Tax Plan Modified
The Clinton Administration today modified its proposal to levy a B.T.U. tax on energy, pleasing the coal industry but doing little to meet the objections of groups representing other fuels.
The changes are generally of two types.
One involves moving the collection point of the tax a step closer to the consumer while continuing to obscure the tax, based on consumption of energy measured in British thermal units, from identification on monthly bills.
The other grants various tax exemptions for energy from specific sources or for specific uses.


Warren F. Stanion; Tiffany Executive, 87
Warren F. Stanion, who spent 58 years with Tiffany &amp; Company before retiring as vice president of operations in 1977, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 87.
The cause was pneumonia, a company spokeswoman said.


2 Held in Curbside Sales of Automatic Weapons
New York City police and Federal agents broke up a gun supermarket operating from a parked car in Washington Heights last night, arresting two of the sellers and confiscating 30 weapons including 10 machine pistols.
Police said an undercover investigation had identified two out-of-state gun dealers who had been selling weapons in the vicinity of 167th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Three Agencies
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said the undercover investigation was undertaken by a task force made up of investigators from the New York City Police Department, the Drug Enforcement Administration and the New York State Police.


Owls, Trees and Jobs: The Timber Conference
The effect of the owl's protection on the timber industry of the Pacific-Northwest will be debated at the timber conference led by President Clinton in Portland, Ore., this week.
Environmentalists and timber-industry supporters will present their views on how far protection for the owl should go.
The volume of timber harvested in Washington and Oregon has been slashed by more than half since the first court-ordered injunction to protect the owl was issued in 1989.
The northern spotted owl was eventually listed as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 on June 26, 1990.
Unlike most other species protected by the Endangered Species Act, the owl covers a much larger geographic range, strectching from southern British Columbia, Canada, to Marin County, Calif.
Under the terms of protection, more than five million acres of forests were designated as conservation areas, which are generally mixed conifer forests with trees over 200 years old.
Logging is still allowed within the conservation areas as long as it does not threaten the spotted owl.
The U.S Fish and Wildlife Service determines if a logging operation is a threat to the owl.


A Broad-Stroke Budget
Even for a place where the symbols of the trade are the press release and the closed door, the scene in the Capitol early this morning set new standards for both secrecy and spin.
It became clear in the dreary light after sunrise -- not that there was much question even in the darkness of midnight -- that the $32 billion budget deal that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proclaimed as a great "cause for celebration" at 12:01 A.M. was a deal in broad outline, with many details outstanding.


Legislature Is Proposed For Nassau
Nassau County would scrap its 95-year-old system of government and create a county legislature to replace the Board of Supervisors under a proposal made today by County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta.
The shift would mirror one in New York City, which in 1990 began replacing the Board of Estimate with a revamped and enlarged City Council, and it would allow for greater representation for minority voters.


Review/Theater; Julie Andrews Sings in a Sondheim Revue
IF you have the great good fortune to lure Julie Andrews back to a New York theater for the first time in over 30 years, it might make sense to put her to work.
But for most of the two hours of "Putting It Together," the discombobulated new revue of Stephen Sondheim songs at the Manhattan Theater Club, Ms.
Andrews is so underemployed that a sinking feeling sets in.
Has she lost her voice?
Her confidence?
Are the show's creators afraid to trust her with more than the safest possible material, doled out in tiny portions?


Review/Film; The Sly Side Of Sex Lines Of the 50's
Rock Hudson's cinematic pillow talk went unexamined during the 1950's, but it now comes under the caustic gaze of Mark Rappaport, whose hourlong documentary "Rock Hudson's Home Movies" locates the latent content of many a Hudson mannerism.
It is Mr.
Rappaport's not very debatable assertion that the star's hidden homosexuality was in fact an open secret and that his performances as a romantic leading man had their sly side.
Maintaining that the actor displayed a split personality on screen ("Dr. Macho Jekyll and Mr. Homo Hyde"), Mr.
Rappaport avidly assembles evidence to support his claims.
Certainly this engrossing documentary finds a lot to work with, particularly when it comes to Hudson's movie romances.
"I haven't any wife," he is heard explaining to Elizabeth Taylor.
"I live with my sister." When Doris Day asks why he can't marry, he replies that "it's the kind of thing a man doesn't discuss with a nice woman." And Dorothy Malone eyes him knowingly as she says, "There's only so much a woman can do, and no more."


European Auto Makers Assail Japan Pact
European car manufacturers today sharply criticized a Japanese agreement to cut car exports to the European Community, arguing that it underestimated a likely drop in auto sales in the region this year.
The agreement, concluded in Tokyo earlier today, used an estimate that the car market in the 12-nation community would shrink by 6.5 percent because of a deepening recession.
Based on this estimate, Japan forecast exports of 1,089,000 cars in 1993, a drop of 9.4 percent from the 1992 level of 1,202,000 vehicles.


Romance of the Rails Palls on Village's Residents
The overgrown tracks behind their houses may have seemed a romantic reminder of a bygone era to residents of this rural village, but that was before freight trains began rumbling by almost nightly, blaring air horns at 3 A.M.
If it were just the clickety-clack of wheels on the track, that would be one thing, residents say, but the loud and some think overzealous horn-blowing is just too much.


Defense Rests Abruptly In Officers' Beating Trial
Catching the prosecution by surprise, the lawyers for the four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King rested their case today without calling three of the four defendants to the stand.
The quick end to two weeks of defense testimony, with only one minor witness called on behalf of two of the officers, meant that the trial was likely to go to the jury next week.


Rolf Bjoerling, a Tenor And a Tenor's Son, 64
Rolf Bjoerling, a tenor and the son of the legendary Swedish tenor Jussi Bjoerling, died late Wednesday, the Associated Press reported.
He was 64.
The Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet said the cause of death was heart failure, at his home in Stockholm, the wire service said.


Reviews/Film Festival; Staying Hot on the Trail Of a Cooled Friendship
Amir Naderi's "Manhattan by Numbers" is a quite beautiful if uninvolving exercise in urban alienation, prettily shot against a variety of photogenic New York locations.
The film will be shown at the Museum of Modern Art today and Sunday at 6 P.M. as part of the New Directors/New Films series.
In the course of a single day, George Murphy (John Wojda), a youngish out-of-work newspaper reporter, desperately crisscrosses Manhattan in a futile hunt for the $1,200 needed to pay the back rent on his apartment.
George is about to be evicted, and his life is collapsing.
His wife has left him, taking their child.
He's out of touch with former colleagues.


On My Mind; Clinton's Bank Account
Presidents have a kind of political bank account in American minds.
When a President takes an important step, or ducks one, each of us makes a mental deposit or withdrawal according to our political tastes.
The accounts never get down to zero except in the minds of ideologues or out-party careerists.
But most of us do not let a President get so rich that he can afford to forget we are keeping accounts.


NEWSPAPERS TOLD: SIMPLIFY, SIMPLIFY
American newspapers are dull and difficult to read.
But different ways of writing news articles could help newspapers attract some of the readers they have lost.
That was the conclusion of a major study made public here this week at the annual convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
The study suggests that newspapers must challenge many of the rules that have governed journalism for generations.


Five New Works
The Stony Brook Contemporary Chamber Players are to present the world premieres of five commissioned works tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
The program comprises Wayne Peterson's "Janus," David Dzubay's "Trio," Osvaldo Golijov's "Silent Screen," David Soley's "Tapestries (. . . of a Court Theater)," and "A Little Night Music" by David Stock.
Tickets are $5.
Information: (212) 854-7799.


Stop New York's Shady Borrowing
The proud State of New York has a rotten credit rating, the worst among the 50 states, according to one rating agency.
This dubious distinction is rooted in a scheme devised to finance Gov.
Nelson Rockefeller's ambitious building projects in the 1960's.
Now Gov.
Mario Cuomo and lawmakers, properly embarrassed by the state's sunken standing after 11 years of his stewardship, have endorsed a plan to restore some respect and save some money.
It's overdue, by years and billions of dollars.


Names Fly Like Jabs At Boxing Hearing
Al Certo, Secaucus tailor and manager of the welterweight Buddy McGirt, sat in a Senate hearing room today listening to Salvatore (Sammy the Bull) Gravano tie him and co-manager Stuart Weiner to the Gambino crime family and describe how the family owned a piece of the welterweight.
The white-haired Certo chuckled, shook his head and once made a crude gesture at Gravano, whose words helped put John Gotti in prison and who has admitted to 19 murders.
McGirt, a trademark Homburg atop his shaved head and wearing a purple, black and yellow leather jacket, green shirt and turquoise pants, remained impassive except for a disbelieving smile and occasional shake of the head.


For Timber Conference Today, a Lobbying Blitz


Melvin Belli: Court Lion Fighting in His Own Lair
The color-coded floor plan for Melvin Belli's law office bears a striking resemblance to the United Nations partition plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In various red circles, Mr.
Belli practices law with his son and several others.
Five of his sworn enemies occupy all areas in blue.
Yellow denotes those common spaces -- bathrooms, conference rooms, corridors -- where the belligerents grudgingly coexist.
At 85 years old, Mr.
Belli is still battling away.
He continues to represent dozens of clients, for whom he works every day of the year but his birthday, July 29, and from whom he collected $2.9 million last year.
His most highly publicized skirmishes these days, however, are no longer against the usual rapacious manufacturers or careless civil servants, but his erstwhile partners and his latest former wife.


Bronfman in Recital
The pianist Yefim Bronfman is to give his first Avery Fisher Hall recital as part of the Great Performers at Lincoln Center series, Sunday at 3 P.M.
The program is Prokofiev's Sonata No. 5, Beethoven's Sonata No. 18 and Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition." Tickets are $11 to $20.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


April Showers Raise Water Levels in Metropolitan Area


Aguascalientes Journal; Mexico's Political 'Dinosaurs' Aren't Fossils Yet
Dead in the dry center of Mexico, in a modern-looking auditorium appropriately surrounded by high-tech industrial plants, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari was talking about his favorite subject, the future.
A good part of the crowd -- certainly all the men in European-cut suits with tiny cellular phones bulging from the pockets -- sat transfixed.
"Without doubt, it will take time to consolidate these changes," Mr.
Salinas was telling the 16th National Assembly of the Institutional Revolutionary Party.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about the sculptor Peter Agostini referred to his wife incorrectly in some copies.
Marina Agostini did not survive him; she died in 1962.


Mets' Schourek Is Not a Pitcher to Rest on Apologies
The envelope was thick, and so Pete Schourek's smile while opening it was wide.
The return address of Charleston, S.C., was familiar, the handwriting that of his grandfather, a retired college professor.
The contents included graphs and charts, and a note that capsulized all the numbers: "You pitched better than your record."


Review/Dance; Visitors Arrive, Bringing A Sampler
The San Francisco Ballet has come to town with a full plate, crammed with local premieres on three mixed bills as well as its new "Swan Lake." The first program of one-act ballets on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater offered some high-toned variety with three choreographers, George Balanchine, Helgi Tomasson and William Forsythe.
Mr.
Tomasson, the troupe's artistic director, took a well-calculated risk by bringing the Balanchine-Stravinsky "Rubies" to the theater in which it is performed regularly by the New York City Ballet.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE FREE ZONE," Ubu Repertory, 15 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
A drama about a Jewish family seeking refuge in unoccupied France during World War II, by Jean-Claude Grumberg; directed by Francoise Kourilsky.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18; $10 for students.
Information: (212) 679-7562.
"LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST," Theater for a New Audience, St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
Shakespeare's comedy, directed by Michael Langham.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


4 PRIESTS LINKED TO SEX MISDEEDS
In the last four weeks, four priests in one small Roman Catholic diocese in southern Illinois have been removed as pastors after accusations of sexual misconduct that stretch back to the 1960's.
The allegations involve separate incidents in four separate communities.
But they have stunned Catholics in the Belleville Diocese, which reaches across southern Illinois from the Mississippi River to the Ohio.
With 119,000 Catholics, it is the smallest of Illinois's six dioceses, and it has just 140 priests.


PARENTS EXEMPTED FROM KIDNAP LAW
A Federal appellate court has dismissed kidnapping charges against a woman accused of taking her children at gunpoint from their foster parents in South Carolina, saying that Federal kidnapping laws do not apply to natural parents.
A state court may end a parent's right to custody, "but it may not alter the identity of a biological parent," wrote Federal District Judge Henry C. Morgan.
He sat as part of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which decided the case by a 2-1 majority on Wednesday.


Israelis Mount Attack In Northern Lebanon
Six Israeli gunboats and two helicopter gunships blasted two Palestinian guerrilla bases in northern Lebanon near Tripoli today, wounding three people, security sources said.
Hours later, unidentified gunmen assassinated the top security official of Yasir Arafat's mainstream Fatah group on a main street in Beirut.


Mitchell Parish, 92, the Lyricist Of 'Star Dust' and 'Volare,' Dies
Mitchell Parish, who wrote the lyrics for "Star Dust," one of the most beloved of all American popular songs, died late Wednesday evening at the New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 92 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications of a stroke, a hospital spokesman said.


Books of The Times; Turning the Tables on Freud
The Boy Will Come to Nothing!
Freud's Ego Ideal and Freud as Ego Ideal By Leonard Shengold 184 pages.
Yale University Press. $27.50.
The theory put forth in Leonard Shengold's stimulating new book, "The Boy Will Come to Nothing!," is this: although parents provide us with our earliest models of behavior, we gradually find other people -- drawn from history, fiction and myth as well as the contemporary world -- with whom we can identify.
As these ego ideals are internalized, they become part of our psychic picture of ourselves, providing models of behavior and achievement that we can sympathize with and emulate.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Ramon Garcia and Brian Drahman, pitchers, to Nashville of the American Association.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Bob Ojeda, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Placed Bill Gullickson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to March 31.
Optioned Rich Rowland, catcher, and Shawn Hare, outfielder, to Toledo of the International League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Teddy Higuera and Angel Miranda, pitchers; Bill Doran, infielder, and Dave Nilsson, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Kevin Brown, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to March 27.
National League
NL -- Named Wally Bell, Brian Gorman, Angel Hernandez, Jeff Kellogg, Larry Poncino and Larry Vanover to the umpiring staff.
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Released Wally Backman, infielder, from a minor-league contract.
Sent Jerry Willard, catcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Waived Keith Mitchell, outfielder.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Purchased the contract of Jose Bautista, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
Announced that Dave Smith, pitcher, will remain in Mesa, Ariz., for extended spring training.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Sent Brian Dorsett, catcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Sent Geronimo Berroa, outfielder; Bob Natal, catcher; Chuck Jackson and Gus Polidor, infielders; and Jerry Don Gleaton, pitcher, to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
Placed Jim Corsi, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Stan Spencer, pitcher, outright to High Desert of the California League.
NEW YORK METS -- Released Scott Bradley, catcher, from a minor-league contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Placed Jose DeJesus, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Pat Combs and Paul Fletcher, pitchers; Doug Lindsey, catcher; and Ruben Amaro, outfielder, to Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Sent Jeff Manto and Vic Rodriguez, infielders, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
Announced that Scott Terry, pitcher, will remain in Clearwater, Fla., for extended spring training.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Zane Smith, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Sounds Around Town
Miller Writ Loud
The Loud Family, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J.  (201) 798-4064.
Back in the mid-80's, alternative rock was a marginal enterprise with little room for artistes like Scott Miller of Game Theory, a hyperintellectual singer and songwriter who liked to tinker with pop the way a born mathematician tinkers with numbers.
Of the few who heard his 1987 double-album opus "Lolita Nation," fewer still understood it.
These days, geekiness is a bit more fashionable, and Mr.
Miller has returned with a new band, the Loud Family, that similarly indulges his love of the mechanics of sound.
On the new album "Plants and Birds and Rocks and Things" (Alias), he layers psychedelic effects and speech fragments over a shimmery-sweet pop sensibility, in the tradition of Brian Wilson and Alex Chilton.
Songs like "Inverness" definitely hit above the belt, but they're beautiful head trips nonetheless.
With Wake Ooloo, a new band that includes members of the Feelies, tomorrow at 10 P.M.
Admission is $6.


Thunder of Debate on Owls and Jobs Rings in Forests as Opponents Face Off
A propaganda frenzy, a lobbying blitz in the forest mist, has prevailed for days in anticipation of President Clinton's timber conference here on Friday.
On the ground and in the air, people in catalogue-fresh khaki pants and stiff boots have been hustled around the forests of the Northwest.
They hop from chainsaw-ravaged ridge to shaggy-topped forest, escorted by timber representatives or environmentalists trying to show off the trees and stumps that make their political points.


Diner's Journal
Contemporary American
On a lonely, shadowy stretch of Lafayette Street in SoHo, two-month-old Cascabel is the kind of restaurant that needs exuberant word-of-mouth propulsion to get off the ground.
It doesn't hurt that the principals are John Zaccaro Sr., the husband of Geraldine Ferraro, and their son, John Zaccaro Jr.
The father is more actively involved in the operation than the son, who was described as a consultant by a restaurant spokesman.
Cascabel is a big, hollow SoHo type of place, with high walls covered with rough brush strokes of sanguineous red, beveled mirrors and au courant suspended-on-the-high-wire little lights.
High-backed banquettes are roomy, but ours were so far from the table that we had to sit at an awkward 70-degree angle to reach the food.


In Air, as at Bank, Deregulation Ends in Bailout
To the Editor:
"Clinton Considers Measures to Help Troubled Airlines" (front-page, March 22) reports that the American taxpayer will be called upon to bail out the airline industry, in the same way as this long-suffering beast of burden has been called upon to bail out the savings and loan industry.
It is important to note that in both instances the initial damage was done by deregulating an industry that is structurally not suited to unregulated competition.


Economy Stressed Over Trade
The Treasury Secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, said today that while the Clinton Administration was determined to win Congressional approval of the free-trade pact with Mexico this year, Congress should wait to act until it has completed work on the President's economic program in the fall.
In one of the first interviews he has granted since he took office, Mr.
Bentsen said he did not want Congressional opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement to spill over onto the economic package.
Mr.
Bentsen is not only President Clinton's main spokesman on economic matters but also one of the Administration's chief political and legislative strategists. 'One Thing at a Time'
"We must not be too diffuse in our effort," he said.
"We really have to concentrate on one thing at a time in terms of legislative effort."


Birth Control 'for All People'
It was a Republican President, Dwight Eisenhower, who made an especially cogent case for the importance of international family planning.
"Governments must act and private citizens cooperate urgently through voluntary means to secure this right for all people," he said.
"Failure would limit the expectation of future generations to abject poverty and suffering and bring down upon us history's condemnation."
A subsequent Republican President, Ronald Reagan, didn't share Eisenhower's concern and denied funding for International Planned Parenthood and the United Nations Population Fund.
The result was to inhibit certain invaluable population control programs for nearly a decade.
Now President Clinton's Democratic Administration proposes to restore Eisenhower's compassionate approach to an issue that ought to be above partisan politics.


Drug Companies Warn Administration Against Vaccine Program
Fearing a prospect of lower prices, drug company executives said today that they might slow or stop development of new vaccines if the Clinton Administration goes ahead with its plan to have the Government buy vaccines for all children.
The comments came as President Clinton submitted his proposed vaccine legislation to Congress.
Mr.
Clinton called the program an urgent measure that would seek out all those who are not immunized.


4 U.S. Palestinians Are Indicted In Plot Linked to Terrorist Group
Four Palestinians living in the United States were indicted on charges of plotting to kill Jews and blow up the Israeli Embassy in Washington as part of the Abu Nidal terrorist organization, the Justice Department announced today.
Department officials said there was no evidence that the accused members of the terrorist group actually tried to carry out any of the plots, and they noted that there was no connection between the four suspects and the bombing of the World Trade Center in Manhattan on Feb. 26.





Joseph J. Jova, 75; Ex-Envoy to Mexico Headed Foundation
Joseph John Jova, a retired foundation executive and former Ambassador to Mexico and representative at the Organization of American States, died on Wednesday at Washington Hospital Center.
He was 75.
The cause was complications after surgery for a thoracic aneurysm, according to the death certificate.


Corrections
A television review on Wednesday about the Oscar telecast incorrectly described what Elizabeth Taylor wore.
She did wear an AIDS ribbon.


An All-Rorem Program
Two chamber operas by Ned Rorem -- "A Childhood Miracle," based on Nathaniel Hawthorne's short story "A Snow Image," with a libretto by Elliott Stein, and "Hearing," a setting of poetry by Kenneth Koch in a scenario created by James Holmes -- and his "Four Dialogues," based upon the poetry of Frank O'Hara, are to be performed tonight at 8 by the Magic Circle Opera Repertory Ensemble at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
The evening is a tribute to Mr.
Rorem in his 70th-birthday year.
Tickets are $30.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Wipe Draft Off Books In U.S., and the World
To the Editor:
Military conscription is a coercive act of government.
It is an infringement of one's personal liberty, the taking away of the right to run one's own life.
The tolerance of military conscription by the people of the United States since the conclusion of World War II is beyond my comprehension.
In high-technology modern warfare, there can be no possible need for conscription in the United States.


A Summit With an Ocean View, 3-Star Dining and Even a Woods to Walk In
Dr.
David W. Strangway and his wife, Alice, had to give up their rambling, 7,000-square-foot Mediterranean-style home on a magnificent promontory above the sea in western Vancouver this week.
But they have no hard feelings.
"We're actually thrilled," said Dr.
Strangway, an Ontario-born geophysicist who studied moon rocks for NASA and is now the president of the University of British Columbia.
"What a privilege to be able to say it happened here."


COMPANY NEWS: An Alarm That Demands Attention; Anti-Theft Device Talks, Squeals and Stops Car
So, you want to be a carjacker.
Probably not a good idea for many reasons, but here's one more.


Jose Lemus Lopez, 81, Salvador Ex-President
Lieut.
Col.
Jose Maria Lemus Lopez, who was president of El Salvador from 1956 until he was ousted by a military coup in 1960, died here Wednesday of Hodgkin's disease.
He was 81.
Colonel Lemus, who used his Salvadoran title of military rank until his death, had lived here in exile with his family since the coup.
He lived a mostly quiet life until last Sept. 23, when his two pit bull terriers fatally attacked an elderly man, Neftali Villegas, and wounded two others.


To Hear Stars, Pay $50 or Take Their Bus
THE gentleman on the bus could be seriously disturbed.
Warped, maybe.
To be sure, he looks familiar enough, with his curly gray locks and moustache.
It's a big, friendly face: avuncular, lovable.
But he is muttering to himself.
Gesticulating wildly, alone by the window.
He's sitting toward the back of a half-full No. 66 bus that is booming through Clifton on its way toward Route 3, the concrete alley to the Lincoln Tunnel and the Big Apple.
Wait now.
Isn't that a script in the man's hand?
That face -- isn't it Louis Zorich, the actor, who starred as Jules Berger, the grandpa in "Brooklyn Bridge," the television series?


G.O.P. Filibuster Stalls Passage Of Clinton's $16 Billion Jobs Bill
Capping a week of cable-televised harangues and threats, the Senate's 43 Republicans got serious today and decided to block passage of President Clinton's $16.3 billion jobs program with a filibuster.
The Senate's 57 Democrats met privately, and then pledged to keep the Senate in session until the Republican hammerlock was broken, even if that meant delaying a two-week vacation and fund-raising opportunity set to begin Friday.


CHRONICLE
ROGER AILES has made a name for himself as a mastermind of Presidential campaigns for George Bush, Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon, defining in many ways how their messages were conveyed.
This evening, he goes on the radio, speaking for himself this time, as guest host of "The Barry Farber Show," broadcast on 118 stations around the country.


Group to Copy French Abortion Pill in Bid to Speed Its Sale in U.S.
A copy of the abortion pill RU-486 is being manufactured in the United States by an abortion-rights group that hopes to put pressure on Roussel Uclaf, the French company that holds the patent to the drug, to market it here.
Members of the group, Abortion Rights Mobilization, said at a news conference in New York today that they had recruited a team of scientists at "a New York laboratory" to make about 100 doses of the abortion pill to begin early tests if Roussel does not market it in the United States soon.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  CLINTON ON RUSSIA'S NEEDS  Declaring that the United States "cannot stop investing in the peace now that we have obtained it," President Clinton began the arduous task of convincing Americans preoccupied with domestic woes that it was also necessary to help restore the economy of Russia.
A1  Azerbaijan-Armenia fighting slowed peace talks.
A7


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Ford Motor Credit Co., Dearborn, Mich., is offering $500 million of 6 3/8 percent notes due in 2000 at 99.741 to yield 6.421 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's, A by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Hertz Corp. is offering $100 million of 6 1/2 percent notes due in 2000 at 99.559 to yield 6.58 percent through J. P. Morgan.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's, BBB+ by S.&amp; P. and A- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Coca Output Stayed Level in '92 For the 3d Year, State Dept. Says
Last year, for the third year in a row, there was no significant increase in the cultivation of coca, the plant from which cocaine is derived, the State Department said today.
But it said the fight against narcotics trafficking was hampered by political instability, particularly in the Middle East, Asia, Peru and the republics of the former Soviet Union.


Art in Review
George McNeil
New York Studio School  8 West Eighth Street  Greenwich Village  Through May 2
To say that George McNeil's art is spectacularly gaudy is genuinely to praise it, although the aggressiveness that he has long cultivated no doubt partly accounts for his limited public reputation.
A steady figure on the New York scene for more than half a century, and a beloved teacher for more than three decades at the Pratt Institute and the New York Studio School, the 85-year-old Mr.
McNeil has justifiably earned respect and admiration in serious art circles.
But his work has never been easy to love.


Review/Theater; A Pianist Caught in a Family Rhythm
In "Another Time," an internationally acclaimed concert pianist emerges from a highly discordant family background.
The playwright Ronald Harwood raises the question of how much the artist's success is a result of his painful upbringing, and also ponders the emotional loss suffered in a single-minded pursuit of a career.
The play (at the American Jewish Theater) never probes deeply into these issues, and by rerunning parallel scenes it takes too long to arrive at its tentative conclusion.
"Another Time" needs tightening, but it is written with the theatricality and the humor that one expects from the author of "The Dresser." Under the direction of Stanley Brechner, an exceptional cast headed by Malcolm McDowell, Joan Copeland and Marian Seldes offers a finely tuned production.
The actors bring to life a family defined by its differences and by a commitment to uplift through education.


Eliza Is the Fair Lady at the Santa Anita Derby
The road to Louisville was buzzing yesterday as the country's leading 3-year-old thoroughbreds preened for tomorrow's prep races on both coasts, only four weeks from the 119th Kentucky Derby.
In New York, nine colts were entered in the $200,000 Gotham Stakes, with Ogden Phipps's Strolling Along ranked by the Aqueduct oddsmaker as the favorite at 2-1.
He was stalked in the early line (at 7-2) by the Loblolly Stable's Ozan, the stablemate to the stars of last weekend's major races, Dalhart, who won the Rebel Stakes at Oaklawn, and Prairie Bayou, who won the Jim Beam Stakes at Turfway Park.


Officer Held In Sex Abuse Of 5 Youths In Subways
A New York City transit police officer was charged yesterday with sexually abusing five male teen-agers after stopping and accusing them of fare beating and handcuffing them in toilets or other remote areas of Brooklyn subway stations, the authorities said.
Transit police officials said the separate incidents took place from December 1991 to last June, and came to light after the victim in the last encounter complained to the authorities shortly after he was reportedly abused.


Gays and Israel
To the Editor:
You report March 23 on the efforts by Congregation Beth Simchat Torah, New York's lesbian and gay synagogue, to participate in the Salute to Israel parade in May.
Why would lesbian and gay Jews want to salute Israel?
Unlike the United States, Israel does not exclude lesbians and gay men from the military.
Unlike the United States, it has a national law forbidding employment discrimination based on sexual orientation.
Unlike half our states, Israel repealed laws forbidding consensual sex by lesbian and gay adults.


Ron Smith and the Night Terrors
Ron Smith is already having dreams about April 16. Or should they be called nightmares?
Thanks to last month's blizzard, the Rangers now play their final game of the season on Friday night April 16 in Washington.
And Smith, the Rangers' coach, has had visions of how nerve-racking that evening could be.


Knicks Send Cavaliers a Little Playoff Message
Put Charles Oakley or Anthony Mason on the Cleveland Cavaliers last night, and maybe their game against the Knicks does not have an unmistakable air of inevitability.
As it was, the Cavaliers hung around but seemed destined to lose almost every loose ball or big rebound and doomed to lose, by 91-83.
In a Knick-style game such as this one, as fluid as traffic outside Madison Square Garden at the corner of Seventh Avenue and 34th Street, the Cavaliers are in desperate need of the wide body (with vacuum cleaner hands) they simply don't have.
It's not that their front line isn't willing.
At this level, tall and skinny simply doesn't make it against muscular and angry.


Japan, Still in Slump, Plans 2d Public Works Program
Facing a stagnant economy and heavy pressure from the Clinton Administration to reduce Japan's yawning trade surplus, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa has pledged to push for a huge new public works program to get the economy rolling again and to rescue a battered financial system.
Mr.
Miyazawa said at a news conference Thursday that the new plan, which will include heavy spending on telecommunications "superhighways" and computers for schools, will be larger than last year's supplementary budget of 10.7 trillion yen, currently the equivalent of $93 billion.
There has been speculation it will run as high as $130 billion.


Braves Jettison Backman for Cabrera
The Atlanta Braves made their first difficult roster decision of the spring yesterday, releasing the former Mets infielder WALLY BACKMAN and keeping their 1992 playoff hero, FRANCISCO CABRERA .


Review/Art; The South As Material For Myths
In his quietly expressive black-and-white photographs, Keith Carter relies on a kind of evocative description that photography is especially good at, but that these days seems almost old-fashioned.
Mr.
Carter, who lives in Beaumont, Tex., presents details of Southern life in pictures that imply as much as they say.
The rural South that Mr.
Carter records in his current show at the Witkin Gallery in SoHo is not a specific place; his captions give no indication of where the pictures were made.
Instead, it is mythic territory, familiar from literature, earlier photographs, popular music and movies, but transformed by Mr.
Carter into a freshly exotic land.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.83
4.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.89
4.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.99
4.10
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.70
5.68
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.96
6.93
7.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.89
7.86
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.03
6.04
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Vancouver Awaits
A Yeltsin harbor cruise and a Clinton jog are among the events that Vancouver is ready for this weekend. (Also, a summit meeting.) Page A6.


Rachel D. DuBois, 101, Educator Who Promoted Value of Diversity
Rachel Davis DuBois, an educator who 60 years ago developed multicultural programs promoting respect for ethnic heritage and harmony between groups, died on Tuesday at a hospital near her home in Woodstown, N.J.
She was 101.
Counter to the philosophy of the time that promoted ethnic assimilation, Dr.
Dubois was among the few educators preaching that differences should be celebrated.
Her work drew on her own Quaker background and her discovery of children in southern New Jersey who felt inferior and ashamed of their Italian heritage.


Anthony to Return Tonight
After a five-game suspension for his role in the team's March 23 brawl at Phoenix, Greg Anthony will return to the Knicks tonight when they play the Heat in Miami.
In a meeting at the National Basketball Association office yesterday, the second-year point guard was cleared to return, although Knicks Coach Pat Riley indicated that Anthony, who has also been nursing a sprained right ankle, most likely not play.


Tolls Not Taken
Amtech, which was cruising toward a major contract for automated toll systems, now has to wait for another round of testing by three states in July, according to Bloomberg Business News.
New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania are comparing systems that can read windshield tags as drivers pass, automatically debiting prepaid accounts.


COMPANY BRIEFS
TRANS WORLD AIRLINES, Mount Kisco, N.Y., said it wants to take over a route from Chicago's O'Hare International Airport to Stansted Airport near London that American Airlines plans to abandon at the end of May.
RIBI IMMUNOCHEM RESEARCH INC.,Hamilton, Mont., has withdrawn its proposal to issue three million shares of common stock, citing a weak market for biotechnology issues.


In Air, as at Bank, Deregulation Ends in Bailout; New Trans-Atlantic Era
To the Editor:
In an editorial only last July, you called the cooperative marketing agreements between USAir and British Airways "great news for travelers everywhere." Now, in "A Bad Retreat, in the Air" (editorial, March 16), you describe these arrangements as "relatively small" gains for United States airline passengers.
The Department of Transportation, in approving code-share and leasing agreements, took positive steps to increase accessibility of international air service to travelers in many United States cities.
Our action will also strengthen competition by insuring that USAir remains a vigorous participant in domestic airline markets.


Stocks Ease in Anticipation of Jobless Data
Investors took cover yesterday ahead of the employment report due out today, with stocks slipping a bit on moderate volume.
The challenge is to figure out what sort of numbers might help or hurt today.
Too weak an employment gain and stocks might fall on fears that corporate earnings due out in the coming days will be disappointing.
Too strong and the bond market would crumble, also possibly denting stocks.


Durenberger Is Warned That Indictment Is Close
The Justice Department, after a two-year investigation, warned Senator Dave Durenberger of Minnesota today that it might move to indict him soon unless he agrees to plead guilty to lesser charges, Administration officials said.
In October, the Republican lawmaker disclosed the possibility that he might be charged with abusing his Senate expense account.


U.S. Says 15 Reactors Need Testing
The staff of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has identified 15 nuclear reactors around the country whose reactor vessels have become so weakened by radiation that they will require careful analysis to determine if they are still safe.
The staff's report, affecting one in seven of the nation's dwindling fleet of reactors, is a sign that they are aging faster than their builders had anticipated and will take more effort to keep running.


EQUITABLE SEEKS $600 MILLION THROUGH SECURITIES
The Equitable Companies announced yesterday that it planned to raise about $600 million by issuing securities that would be convertible into common stock in July 1994.
The move would continue to raise capital for the life insurance and financial services company, which raised $1.45 billion last July when it went public.
Equitable said it planned to sell 49 percent of the new convertible securities to AXA, the French insurance company that is its principal shareholder, and the rest to institutional investors in a private placement.


Troubles For Timber
The object of today's "timber summit" in Portland, Ore. is to resolve the standoff between environmental groups, who are using the National Forest Management Act of 1976 to block the sale of old growth timber from the Northwest's national forests, and the timber companies and loggers, who want to harvest those trees.
Politicians are crying that the environmentalists should be less intransigent, more willing to compromise.
I say to those courageous souls: stand fast.
As chairman of the House Forests Subcommittee from 1977 to 1982, I spent countless hours flying over America's forests.
The desolation was stark.
I saw vast barren deserts in southern Oregon that once were the magnificent timber holdings of the most prominent names in the wood industry; bleached yellow earth that stretched for miles along the coastal mountains of northern California where giant redwoods once stood; contoured road-scars and checkerboard squares of clear-cuts in the national forests.


Republicans Call for Resignation of Insurance Superintendent
Republican legislators called today for the resignation of the state's Insurance Superintendent, saying he had failed to address mismanagement at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
Even though many of their accusations focused on practices at Empire itself, the legislators clearly laid the blame for the company's financial difficulties, as well as rate increases and accusations of waste, at the feet of the Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale.


Florida Feels New Push For Protection of Clinics
Galvanized by the slaying of a doctor outside an abortion clinic in Pensacola last month, abortion-rights advocates in Florida are pressing in the State Legislature and in the courts for new measures to strengthen protection for such clinics and stiffen the penalties meted out to people who obstruct their work.
Under the provisions of a bill before the State Legislature, anti-abortion protesters would not be allowed within 15 feet of the property line of an abortion clinic and would be barred from attempting to "prevent any other person from entering or exiting a medical treatment facility." An initial offense would be a misdemeanor, but any subsequent violation of the proposed statute would be treated as a felony.


Restaurants
Restaurant 222
A sophisticated yet neighborly restaurant with enticing food and moderate prices on the Upper West Side?
Sure, and guilt-racked movie theaters are lowering their prices to $4 next week.
Incredulity and possessiveness are the reactions among Upper West Siders who have discovered the six-month-old Restaurant 222, at 222 West 79th Street.
And there are enough of them to make the handsome-but-echoey dining room sound like a high school cafeteria, so if you want easy conversation, go early or late.


Reviews/Film Festival; Galleries and Greed In an Art-World Satire
Few subjects are riper for satire than the New York art world, with its hyperinflated egos and exalted prices for gimmicky trash.
And in their goofy 16-millimeter feature, "The Genius," the directing team of Joe Gibbons and Emily Breer has created a ramshackle art-world farce whose charm lies in its not taking itself too seriously.
"The Genius," which the New Directors/New Films series is showing at the Museum of Modern Art tonight at 9 and tomorrow at 3 P.M., is part science-fiction spoof, part SoHo-style home movie.
Set in the near future, it imagines a time when Manhattan's downtown galleries have been taken over by the ultra-conservative American Family League.
They now bear the names of Wall Street brokerage houses and promote what is called "the new formalism."


No Anti-Defamation League Information Sales
To the Editor:
The Anti-Defamation League is a civil rights and Jewish defense agency, which has fought to protect all minorities from discrimination for 80 years.
We work to expose and counteract racists, anti-Semites and other bigots, and to educate the public about the threat of these groups.
Our publications have documented the violence of neo-Nazi and white supremacist groups and the racist rhetoric of Ku Klux Klan leaders.


Court Bars Housing Lists Favoring Local Residents
The State Supreme Court ruled today that it was a violation of New Jersey's Fair Housing Act for communities to set aside half their low-cost housing for their own residents or municipal workers.
The unanimous ruling came in a five-year-old lawsuit brought by the State Public Advocate against six mostly white towns -- Bloomingdale, Denville, Hillsborough, Holmdel, Roseland and Warren.
But the judgment will affect scores of other municipalities that have similarly favored their own residents over outsiders in assigning low-cost housing.


Frenetic Kentucky Will Not Let Up, Not for a Minute
Rick Pitino remembers playing point guard for St.
Dominic's High School in Oyster Bay, L.I., in the late 1960's in a different style of game in a different time.
Pitino recalled today that players there did not ask their coaches why; they simply did as they were told.
And Pitino described that style of methodical basketball in two words: frustrating, boring.


The Spoken Word
LITERARY COLLOQUIUM, Columbia University, department of French and Romance philology, Maison Francaise, Buell Hall, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
"Terror and Literature," a two-day colloquium on literature and political intimidation.
Today, 8:30 A.M. to 6 P.M., and tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Admission: $25; $10 for students.
Information: (212) 854-4482.
LECTURE ON FILM DIRECTING, Long Island University, Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Spike Lee and Robert De Niro will speak about film directing, as part of the Spike Lee 40 Acres Institute lecture series.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Registration: $35; $25 for students.
Information: (718) 858-9620.


U.S. Order Bars 3 Small Airlines For Safety Flaws
Officials of the Federal Aviation Administration said today that they had barred three small foreign airlines from American airports and that they believed this was the first time the Government had excluded any foreign carriers for safety reasons.
The ban was imposed on Air Belize, Regal Air of Antigua and Central America Air Lines of Nicaragua during the last year but was not made public then.


Given a License for Foolishness, They Run With It (Backward)


Coleman and Bench Equal Satisfaction
Drazen Petrovic came to New Jersey's game against Miami tonight in a handsome sport coat and flower print silk shirt.
"Best dressed European," someone quipped.
Kenny Anderson was here, too, wearing a sweater estimated at the value of a Toyota Tercel.
What's wrong with this picture?
Along with Derrick Coleman, Anderson and Petrovic are the future of the Nets.
The Big Three.
So with Anderson sitting because of a broken wrist and Petrovic watching with torn cartilage in his knee, why haven't the Nets drowned?


Art in Review
Donna Moylan
Grand Salon  83 Grand Street  SoHo  Through April 17
Donna Moylan, who was born in Boston and lived in Rome for 20 years before moving to New York recently, paints in a distinctive if familiar manner, combining silk-screen imagery with casually hand-painted designs and loose geometries, and letting the viewer take things from there.
Her light touch and inclination toward hybridism brings to mind aspects of work by Sigmar Polke, Annette Lemieux and Peter Schyuff.


Abortion-Rights Supporters Are Split on U.S. Measure
Supporters of abortion rights are fighting among themselves over what a proposed Freedom of Choice Act should include, dimming the legislation's already difficult prospects.
The disagreements on Capitol Hill over the effort to ban most state restrictions on abortion reflect divisions among abortion-rights supporters nationally, but the disputes may limit grass-roots support for enacting any such measure.


On Stage, and Off
'Summer House' Revival
The stage at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center, empty since January, will be busy again beginning July 16, with the seasonably titled play "In the Summer House," by Jane Bowles.
A 14-character drama about obsessive relationships between mothers and daughters, the play was first produced on Broadway 40 years ago.


Review/Art; Richard Serra's Temporal Monument
There's nothing quite like an emphatically successful work of art to clear the air.
In a season when overt political content has the art world, most notably the Whitney Biennial, by the tail, Richard Serra is exhibiting one of the greatest works of abstract sculpture that New York City has seen in some time.
It's hard to say whether "Intersection II," a deceptively simple arrangement of four monumental curves of hot-rolled steel, is political or not.
The piece certainly doesn't tackle any specific social problems.
But looking at these soaring planes as they curve from the front to the back of the Gagosian Gallery in SoHo can make a viewer feel empowered and ready for just about anything life might bring.
In some ways this effect seems almost old-fashioned, as if Mr.
Serra has created a contemporary version of a Greek temple or a Gothic cathedral.
Indeed, as installed in this high-ceilinged former garage, sometimes known as Gogo SoHo, the piece has the rightness and the charged atmosphere of a permanent monument, even though it will be dismantled in two weeks.


Wistfully, Fernandez Urges Budget
In his final budget request to Mayor David N. Dinkins, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday asked for an extra $584 million for the school system, and said he wished he could be around next year to help spend it.
"Things are starting to turn around in terms of the budget," Mr.
Fernandez said at a briefing for reporters that, in contrast to past years, was marked by optimism about the budget.
"Quite honestly, I wish I were here next year."


Review/Fashion; From Anna Sui, Dandies and Dolls
Anna Sui's show was 45 minutes late getting started on Wednesday evening, but there was plenty to look at while waiting.
Steven Meisel, the photographer who is Ms.
Sui's mentor, was there in his omnipresent hat.
Blaine Trump was in a dandified black suit and white shirt.
Selina Blow, the British designer, was in one of her trademark Edwardian frock coats.
And Kyle MacLachlan was wearing glasses, the better to watch his girlfriend, Linda Evangelista, on the runway.
Lady Miss Kier of Deee-lite and Suzanne Bartsch made entrances but were upstaged by Ru Paul, the 6-foot-4-inch (plus heels) platinum-blond drag performer, in silver hot pants. ("What size pantyhose do I wear?" he shouted. "Queen size!")


Accounts
*
RAM Mobile Data, New York, to Jerry Inc., New York, to handle its Wireless E-mail communications system's account, previously at Graf Bertel, New York.
The newly formed Jerry Inc. was awarded its second account, with billings estimated at $3 million, without a review.
A print campaign, which began running yesterday, carries the theme "Wireless E-mail. The next 'How did I ever do without it.' "


Big Blue Foresees a Rosy Horizon
I.B.M.'s much-maligned personal computer business is far more healthy than rivals and most industry analysts think, according to Robert Corrigan, president of the IBM Personal Computer Company.
Last year, the business was a financial albatross for the International Business Machines Corporation, losing as much as $1 billion.
But in the first three months of this year, I.B.M.'s personal computer business hovered around the break-even level and may well have been profitable, Mr.
Corrigan said yesterday in an interview.
The final figures, he said, will be tallied in a few weeks.
Profitable This Year
"I think people will be surprised at how quickly we're bringing this business back," he said, adding that it should be solidly profitable later this year.


Networks Gain Program Rights; Producers Lose
The Federal Communications Commission reversed itself today and said the television networks should be allowed to own the rerun rights to the prime-time shows they carry.
The decision, which infuriated Hollywood producers, was a victory for ABC, NBC and CBS.
Putting aside its ruling of two years ago, the commission said the networks should not be restricted from owning a financial stake in programs they broadcast.


Bowman and Zayak Seek Reinstatement
As the deadline for amateur reinstatement passed yesterday, the United States Figure Skating Association received an application from Christopher Bowman, who finished fourth at the 1992 Olympics at Albertville, France, and a surprise from the past.


Reviews/ Film; A Boy Who Prefers Fantasy to Reality
"Leolo" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Mas
lin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 29, 1992.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, 63d Street and Broadway,
and the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, SoHo.
To watch Jean-Claude Lauzon's daring, bracingly original "Leolo" is to descend into a carnal nightmare, the dream of a clever and desperate French Canadian boy.
His name is Leo Lauzon, but he has determined through sheer force of will to become someone else.
Renaming himself Leolo Lozone, he imagines a new life as an exultant young Sicilian in an effort to escape the misery he faces at home in Montreal.
Leolo's theory of his own genesis -- involving his corpulent mother (Ginette Reno), a Sicilian peasant and a sperm-laden tomato -- is typical of the bizarre lengths to which this boy will go to escape his fate.


HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL: At Elizabeth High School
The story began for Ben Candelino, he says, with a frenzied call from the since departed principal of Elizabeth High School, who was almost incoherent.
The only words the basketball coach could make out were, "Come quick" and "Sooo big."
When Candelino rushed into the principal's office, Luther Wright was standing in the middle of the room.
Ben Candelino's first thought was "Oh, thank you, God. Benny is a lucky man."


INSIDE
4 Face Terrorist Charges
Four Palestinians living in Missouri were charged with plotting terrorist acts in the United States as part of the Abu Nidal organization.
Page A14.
Surprise in Beating Case
The defense for the four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney King rested without having three of the four testify.
Page A14.
U.S.
Bars 3 Foreign Airlines
For the first time, Federal officials have barred three small foreign airlines from American airports for safety reasons.
Page A14.
Slowdown on a Trade Accord
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen wants Congress to deal with the economy before considering a free-trade pact with Mexico.
Page D1.
Drug Makers Warn Clinton
Citing lower prices, drug companies said they might slow vaccine development if the Government buys up vaccines for all children.
Page A20.


Clinton and Perot Call Off Truce; Both Say, No More Mr. Nice Guy
President Clinton and Ross Perot abruptly dropped all pretense of diplomacy today in a fit of cross-country name-calling that noisily shattered their uneasy peace.
In a speech at the United States Naval Academy here, Mr.
Clinton said in response to a question that Mr.
Perot had engaged in "rumor mongering" by repeating unflattering stories about the Administration's relations with the military.


Review/Fashion; Beene, Fleeing Noise, Shows Fluid Serenity
Defying logic, Geoffrey Beene made his clothes look buoyant, mysterious and inventive within the confines of a static display.
For the second consecutive season, he chose an alternative to the standard runway as a method of presenting his clothes.
"I miss the movement," Beene said yesterday as he guided some of the 750 visitors to the exhibition he set up early in the morning at the Asia Society -- and took down a little after noon.
"I don't miss the loud music and the loud models."


Tyson's Name Is Still Mike Tyson
Former heavyweight champion Malik Abdul Aziz?
Not yet, say associates of MIKE TYSON .
They emphatically denied a newspaper report yesterday that Tyson is about to convert to Islam and change his name.
Yes, Tyson is attending classes on Islam -- mixed with math instruction and other subjects -- but he's still Mike Tyson, his lawyer said.


Trout Opening Day: A Deluge Runs Through It
"There's a reason I don't go fishing on April 1," my companion, Richard Franklin, observed as we crossed the last of the hugely swollen tributaries of the Esopus Creek in Ulster County.
The nor'easter of March 13 had deposited more than two feet of snow on the Catskills watershed.
The thaw that followed the equinox had done the rest.
The snow melted.
The creeks rose.
Clay banks washed into the torrents, muddying the rivers, Wednesday night and we found ourselves debating our strategy for opening day around a platter of Wienerschnitzel with red cabbage and spaetzle prepared by our hotelkeeper, Karl Schwarznegger, of Lexington, N.Y.


No Charges Are Filed In Deaths of 2 Boys
The Queens District Attorney's office said yesterday that no charges would be filed against a Hollis woman who ran an unlicensed day-care center in her home where two children died during a fire in February.
The District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, noting that the cause of the blaze was ruled accidental by the New York City Fire Department, said that the actions of the woman, Eleta Brown, did not warrant criminal prosecution.


Sounds Around Town
The Ellington Decades
"Rockin' in Rhythm," the Duke Ellington Orchestra, conducted by Mercer Ellington, Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Lenox Avenue, at 135th Street, Harlem, (212) 491-2259.
A retrospective of Duke Ellington's compositions covering six decades, from the 1920's through the 70's, and extended into the 90's with works by the Duke's son, Mercer.
The program includes "East St. Louis Toodle-O," from the 20's, "Caravan" from the 30's, "C Jam Blues" from the 40's, "Satin Doll" from the 50's, "Woman" from the 60's and "Queenie Pie" from the 70's.
Show time is Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets may can be purchased at the Shop in the Schomberg Center or by calling (212) 491-2206 between 11 A.M. and 6 P.M. today and tomorrow.
Grey Plus 6
Al Grey and His Sextet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
Still glowing from his appearance at President Clinton's inaugural festivities, the trombonist Al Grey is now celebrating his association with jazz legends like Benny Carter, Jimmie Lunceford, Lionel Hampton, Dizzy Gillespie and Count Basie.
He has been a featured soloist with all of them, and this weekend his group -- with Mike Grey, his son, playing marching trombone; Joe Cohn, son of the tenor saxophonist Al Cohn, on guitar and trumpet; Jesse Davis on alto saxophone; Steve Novosel on bass; Big Black on percussion, and Cindy Blackman on drums -- will play arrangements of the hits of legendary bands that reflect their style.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 8, 10 and midnight; there is no third show on Sunday.
There is a $20 cover charge and $10 minimum.


Executive Changes
BLUE PLUS, St.
Paul, the health maintenance organization affiliate of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota, named Dr.
Mark W. Banks president and chief executive.
GLOBEX CORP., Chicago, a 24-hour trading system for futures and options that is a joint venture of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board of Trade with Reuters P.L.C., said Leo Melamed was stepping down as chairman, effective May 31, to spend more time at his own futures firm, Dellsher Investment Co., Chicago.
A successor has not been named.


Funeral for a Young Victim of Bombing in England


Recourse for Americans Abused Abroad
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court determined in a March 23 ruling that Americans who are mistreated or tortured in foreign countries may not sue the foreign government in United States courts, "however monstrous such abuses undoubtedly may be," because police action is "peculiarly sovereign in nature" (news article, March 24).
The Court, ruling in the case of Saudi Arabia v.
Nelson, adopted a very restrictive interpretation of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976, one of the few laws that could provide redress for victims of abuse occurring abroad.
Too often in many countries, victims of abuse have no recourse against security forces, even in cases of torture and murder.
It is now especially important that Congress expedite passage of a bill adopted last year by the House Judiciary Committee to provide some protection for victims of human rights abuse.
In its current form, the bill amends the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act to make it easier to obtain redress for personal injury or death of a United States citizen caused by foreign security forces.


Out of Africa: A Luminous World of Film
THE hut is simple, with mud-brick walls and a thatched roof.
Surrounded by a small courtyard, it is home to a farmer, his wife, their son and a few goats.
This homestead once stood in a deserted rural area, but suddenly it is flanked by a brand-new house with telephone, electricity, Coca-Cola and a family of people with European names.
Sometimes these newcomers peer down from their terrace and complain that when the farmer's wife cooks her most delicious specialty, she draws flies.
Roger and Simone, the new neighbors, badly want a swimming pool and will apparently stop at nothing to get one.
As symbols of a heedless urban tide, these two are truly baffled when the farmer, Tinga, refuses to sell them the place where his ancestors lived and died.
"It's a shame," one of them grouses bitterly.
"He can't understand how much we want that land."


Homeless Policy Showdown Is Avoided, for Now
The Dinkins administration yesterday avoided showdowns with the City Council on two major components of its homeless policy, winning an extension on the use of welfare hotels while agreeing to suspend another initiative that had infuriated Council members.
The administration faced a deadline of next Thursday to stop using the hotels to shelter families, but sought a two-year postponement, saying it did not have enough temporary or permanent housing for the 1,150 families now in hotels or motels.
In return for the extension, Council leaders had asked for a commitment from the administration to vacate the worst hotels within six months. 60-Day Grace Period
Yesterday, the Council voted to give the administration a 60-day grace period, during which the two sides will try to come to terms on a timetable regarding the hotels, as well as on the city's overall homeless policy.


BUDGET IN ALBANY IS POLITICAL PACT, NOT DETAILED PLAN
New York State's multi-billion dollar budget agreement, hammered out early this morning, would increase aid to New York City schools, scale back proposed cuts in medical care for the poor, raise cigarette taxes and keep the city's bus, subway and commuter railroad fares intact until 1995.
The deal, announced just after the midnight deadline and described by everyone involved as a "handshake" agreement, leaves many details unresolved, including the total spending for the next fiscal year, which began today.
But for political reasons, it was critically important, particularly for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, to declare that at least the broad outline was in place by April 1.  [ News analysis, page B4. ]


PRESIDENT URGES AMERICA TO BACK HELP FOR MOSCOW
Declaring that the United States "cannot stop investing in the peace now that we have obtained it," President Clinton today began the arduous task of convincing Americans preoccupied with domestic woes that it is also necessary to help restore the economy of Russia.
Mr.
Clinton, in a speech to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, laid the groundwork for the summit meeting he will hold with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia this weekend by signaling that he does not intend to neglect concerns at home.


Psychologist Testifies About Visitation Rights for Allen
A clinical psychologist who treated the biological son of Woody Allen and Mia Farrow testified yesterday that Mr.
Allen should be allowed regular, unsupervised visits with the boy.
But the psychologist was less certain about the conditions under which Mr.
Allen should be permitted to see his adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow, who Ms.
Farrow contends was molested by her father.
Concluding three days on the witness stand, the psychologist, Dr.
Susan Coates, said she could find no reason to continue to require that Mr.
Allen's visits with his 5-year-old son, Satchel Farrow, be supervised.
Mr.
Allen is allowed to see Satchel twice a week in the presence of a social worker, but he has been barred from seeing Dylan, 7, since the allegations against him were brought to the attention of the authorities in Connecticut and New York last August.


Market Place; Calgene gets the regulations it wants, but takes a hit anyway.
INVESTOR confusion may be the best explanation for the pounding taken Wednesday by shares of Calgene Inc., the leading agricultural biotechnology company, after the Clinton Administration published new regulations that were, in fact, exactly what the company had been seeking.
Calgene fell $1.125 Wednesday, to $10.75, or roughly half its 52-week high, in Nasdaq trading.
Most other agricultural biotech stocks were essentially flat, but they have nearly all been depressed for some time.
Calgene recovered a bit yesterday, gaining 37.5 cents, to $11.125.


Patriots Trade Fryar to Dolphins; Brooks Leaves Colts for the Bills
Two veteran wide receivers touched down in new cities yesterday, one by trade and the other by free agency.
The Miami Dolphins, who are trying to bolster their passing attack with a big-play receiver and fearful of losing free agent MARK CLAYTON , acquired IRVING FRYAR from the New England Patriots for draft choices.


Albania's Independence
To the Editor:
In "From Paranoia to Peril" (Op-Ed, March 20), Flora Lewis states, "Albanians remember they owe their independence to President Woodrow Wilson." Not so.
Albania, a province of the Ottoman Empire, was proclaimed an independent state in 1912 at the insistence of Austria, which was eager to deny Serbia an outlet to the Adriatic Sea.
RADOJKA CUIC New York, March 22, 1993


Defense Strategy Threatened in Beating Trial
An 11th-hour prosecution tactic is threatening to undo the carefully forged alliance among the four officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King.
In their trial in Federal District Court on charges of violating Mr.
King's civil rights, three of the officers have rallied around their sergeant, who was the only defendant to testify and who took full responsibility for the beating.
But on Thursday prosecutors persuaded Judge John G. Davies to let them show jurors an edited videotape of testimony that one of the four officers, Theodore J. Briseno, gave at their previous trial, on state charges, a year ago.


Rangers Stay in Fifth, Getting Ready to Say Fore!
If the Rangers pack up and go home on April 17, the day after the regular season ends, this will be the game that haunts them.
They will be on the golf course, or in the backyard in a lawn chair, or passing pucks to little kids at some hockey camp, and they will think about last night.
They will think about the Islanders, and they will grit their teeth and close their eyes and probably feel just a little bit sick.
And if, on April 18, the Islanders find themselves facing the Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round of the playoffs, they can look back to last night with satisfaction, knowing that this was the night that they staked their claim to the fourth and final Patrick Division playoff berth.


Chance to Move Up, and Move In
To attract the hundreds of college graduates who tether themselves to headsets, at starting pay in the low to mid-20's, T. Rowe Price boasts of two other incentives.
First, the chance to move up.
Mark Weigman, who worked the phones for three years, is now an investment counselor managing several portfolios for the T. Rowe Price Trust Company.
He earned an M.B.A. on evenings and weekends, at company expense.


Review/Dance; Evening Of Angst, And Some Romance
You may need the Rosetta stone to decipher the San Francisco Ballet's local premiere about death in ancient Egypt, and a psychiatrist might be of use in explaining the dark recesses of the soul that James Kudelka probes in a new ballet with the definitive-sounding title "The End."
Add the New York premiere of a duet by a company veteran, Val Caniparoli, that shows Hamlet driving Ophelia crazy and you might possibly think that the San Francisco Ballet's second mixed bill at the New York State Theater on Thursday night was on the gloomy side.


How New York's Insurance Law Benefits Small Businesses
To the Editor:
As an insurance broker serving small corporate clients, I understand Jeffrey Heath's alarm in "Small Businesses Need More Time for New Insurance Law" (letter, March 24) at having his health insurance canceled and his concern over spiraling costs.
However, the New York State Health Reform Act, effective April 1, is neither the culprit nor the cause of high insurance rates.


Hedging Earlier Defense, Agency Chief Admits Waco Raid May Have Been Flawed
The head of the Federal agency that conducted a raid on a cult near Waco, Tex., on Feb. 28 today revised his earlier descriptions of the operation in which four agents were killed and conceded it might have been flawed.
"We probably will find things we did right and things we did wrong and we will respond accordingly," the director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Stephen E. Higgins, told a Senate subcommittee.


Freshman Is Lead Again In 'A Star Is Born' Sequel
Katie Smith is busy being discovered, again, this weekend in Atlanta at the N.C.A.A. women's Final Four.
The freshman forward thought these revelations were finished when she was playing high school basketball in Logan, Ohio (population 6,725).
Scouts came regularly to the Chieftains' cozy gym then, watched Smith average 29.2 points a game and dubbed her the Larry Bird of women's basketball.
By the time she was a senior, Smith was so popular, the school built a 2,200-seat gym, where the scouts and fans could be more comfortable.


To Our Readers
Starting on Monday, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays and Saturdays outside the New York metropolitan area will increase to 75 cents.


Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight time starts and ends.
The day this spring is tomorrow.


Jerusalem Journal; It's Almost Enough to Make the Sun Stand Still
In this riven town, even the time of day is a political statement.
A notice this week from the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks announced a news conference at 12:30 P.M., then added in parentheses: "Palestine Summer Time."


EQK Realty Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Smith International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Collins &amp; Aikman Group Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 30


Continental Health reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Questa Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BOSNIAN SERBS' PARLIAMENT RULES OUT MEDIATORS' PLAN AS BASIS FOR PEACE ACCORD
Shunning appeals for moderation from their leader and the Yugoslav Government in Belgrade, the parliament of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists tonight rejected even a conditional acceptance of a peace plan already approved by the country's two other warring factions.
The decision, made at a meeting of the self-styled parliament in the southern Bosnian town of Bileca, appeared to make it probable that tougher United Nations sanctions would be imposed on Yugoslavia.
It also seemed likely to undermine a fragile cease-fire in Bosnia that has held for the past week and to complicate, perhaps irretrievably, international efforts to find a political settlement to end the war.
Leader's Plan Turned Down
The 81 representatives rejected a resolution proposed by the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, that said that the peace plan advanced by Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations' mediator, and Lord Owen, the European Community's mediator, was "a good basis for agreement," and that between 70 percent and 80 percent of the territorial division of Bosnia proposed in the plan was acceptable.
The Karadzic resolution called for direct negotiations between Serbs, Croats and Muslims to resolve outstanding differences.


Bad Reception on Wall Street
Cable television stocks were pummeled yesterday in the wake of the Federal Communications Commission's ruling on Thursday that imposed stringent rate controls on cable operators.
The class A shares of Tele-Communications, the largest cable service, dropped $2.375, to $18.125.
The issue's volume of 28.8 million shares was the highest ever on one day by a single Nasdaq stock.


Nagle Has One Word For Esiason: Welcome
Browning Nagle's life has not been consumed by sorrow since he found out that the Jets traded for Cincinnati quarterback Boomer Esiason to replace Nagle as the starter for the 1993 season.
As far as Nagle is concerned, he and Esiason will be competing for the starting job.
"I've been traveling for the last three weeks," Nagle said by telephone from his home in Tampa, Fla., yesterday.
"I've been in Austin, Tex., Memphis and in Naples, Fla., so I really haven't thought about it much."


Senator Indicted In Billing Fraud But Vows Fight
Senator David F. Durenberger, once a powerful figure in Republican circles and one of Minnesota's most popular politicians, was indicted today on two criminal charges of submitting false expense claims to the Senate.
After a two-year investigation, a Federal grand jury here accused Mr.
Durenberger of conspiring with two other men in 1987 and 1988 to illegally bill the Government for $3,825 in lodging expenses at a condominium he owned in Minneapolis.


Stride Rite Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  SERBS SAY NO TO PEACE PROPOSAL
In a vote that could imperil months of peace talks, Bosnia's Serbian nationalists refused even a conditional acceptance of a proposal that the country's two other warring factions have accepted, deciding instead to draft a tougher resolution.  1  NATO ACCEPTS BOSNIA FLIGHT PLAN
American, British, French and Dutch warplanes will be in the sky over Bosnia by the middle of the month after NATO approved a plan for enforcing the no-flight zone the United Nations established.  5  JAPAN'S SCHOOLYARD VIOLENCE
In Shinjo, the killing of a student brought to light the level of violence in Japanese schools, where youngsters don't carry guns, but bullying can be a deadly weapon to a student who doesn't fit in.  1  RUSSIA AS A DOMESTIC ISSUE
A stable, democratic Russia that does not pose a threat to the United States is a domestic issue as well as a foreign policy goal, because President Clinton's economic plan hinges on a free market there and defense cuts at home.  4  MOSCOW DEBT RESCHEDULED
The Paris Club of Western creditors gave Russia 10 more years to pay a portion of its debts due this year, offered hope for further concessions in 1994 and laced its message with strong words of support for Russian economic reform.  4  YELTSIN: EVER AN ENIGMA
The summit with Moscow this weekend is less likely to chisel a foreign policy profile for President Clinton than it is to highlight the odd angles and mysterious shadows of President Yeltsin.  4  NICARAGUA AID RELEASED
In a nod to President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro of Nicaragua and her efforts to improve human rights and settle property claims, the Clinton Administration released $50 million in economic aid for Nicaragua that had been held up since June.  3  Jerusalem Journal: Living on Palestine time.  2  National 6-10  LIKELY F.C.C.
NOMINEE
A Senate aide who helped create tough new cable legislation is expected to be nominated to head the Federal Communications Commission.
The choice of Antoinette D. Cook, who would be the first black and the first woman to lead the agency, is a further sign that the commision is likely to take a more confrontational stance toward industry.  1  A CHEAPER MARLBORO MAN
Philip Morris cut the price of Marlboro, the world's best-selling cigarette, in an acknowledgement that its flagship product was threatened by discount brands and the changing habits of smokers.
The announcement sent tobacco stocks reeling.  1  DURENBERGER IS INDICTED
Senator Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, once a powerful Republican, was indicted on two criminal charges of submitting false expense claims to the Senate.  1  ONE FIGHT AT A TIME FOR CLINTON
News analysis: The recent retreats and delays by the President on various issues show he is only strong enough in Congress for one fight at a time.  1  CLINTON STEPS INTO TIMBER FIGHT
At the end of his one-day forest conference in Oregon, the President left an impression that the public forests of the Pacific Northwest will not be reopened to large-scale logging.  6
The Senate was frozen in filibuster just 42 days into its session.  10  RENO SELECTS HER TOP AIDES
Attorney General Reno announced the selection of several top aides, including two Carter Administration officials and a close friend of Hillary Rodham Clinton.  6  OFFICIAL ALTERS STANCE ON RAID
The head of the Federal agency that conducted a raid on the Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex., conceded it might have been flawed.  6  JACKSON AND N.A.A.C.P.
POST
Jesse Jackson has been considering withdrawing from consideration for executive director of the N.A.A.C.P., several associates said.  6  MORE VIDEOTAPE IN BEATING TRIAL
The defense alliance of four officers charged in the beating of Rodney King has been threatened by prosecutors' intent to show videotaped testimony from the trial last year.  8  UNEMPLOYMENT HOLDS STEADY
In a report subject to widely differing interpretations, the Labor Department said that the number of payroll jobs fell slightly in March and that the nation's unemployment rate remained at 7 percent.  7  The unemployment rate for New York City fell below 10 percent.7  THE RARE SHOW OF FAITH
Beliefs: Twice-a-year Christians.
Jews who shun synagogues.
Pastors and rabbis may scold, yet people like Frederick Johnson and Richard Shapiro say they are faithful year round, in their own particular way.  8  The High Court cleared the way for North Dakota limits on abortion.  8  Metro Digest 25  TRANSIT MONEY AND ITS IMPACT
The budget agreement in Albany giving the Metropolitan Transportation Authority virtually all of the $9.6 billion it requested for a rebuilding program means that mass-transit riders in the New York metropolitan area will see some dramatic changes in the next five years.  1  Fashion 12  For Calvin Klein, the barest essentials.
Shades of Napoleon by way of California.
New sensibilities, bold design.
Eugenie Leontovich, an actress and a director.
Arts/Entertainment 13-19, 55  The circus settles in.  19  Peabody Awards in journalism.  55  Theater: "Bobos" 13  Film: "Sunday's Children." 13  "The Crush." 17  Music: In Review 16  Bach's B-minor Mass.  18  Dance: San Francisco Ballet.  13  James Earl Ray's trial.  55  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Aid -- and trade -- for Russia.
New York's budget, dimly seen.
The message of the trees.
Yes, study dumping.
Letters  Russell Baker: Serving humble pie.
Herbert Gold: Haiti's new and old rich.
Bruce A. Ackerman: 1787 and 1993.
Judith Shotwell: Need a doctor?
Shop around.


Thorn Apple Valley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 5


Sports of The Times; Changing The Pictures On the Wall
NORMALLY, the walk from hotel to Superdome takes 10 minutes. Yesterday it took 30.
Along the walkway, the Final Four tournament committee had set up an exhibition that tells a multilayered story about the national champions it has produced in six decades.


Fresenius USA reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Plenum Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; The Schubertian Affinity For the Key of C Major
If, as Schoenberg said, there is still good music to be written in C major, Schubert is not to blame.
Seemingly bent on exhausting the possibilities, Schubert wrote some of his most distinctive, most grandly scaled works in that commonplace key, as a listener was reminded by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, which gave a fine performance of the String Quintet on March 26 at Alice Tully Hall.
"C major is in classical music the most obvious key," the pianist Andras Schiff said recently, "but nobody to my knowledge wrote such mysterious pieces in C major as Schubert: the unfinished Piano Sonata or the 'Great C-major' Symphony or the wonderful String Quintet. How different they are. His use of the key has nothing to do with the C major that we know, for example, from Beethoven's First Piano Concerto or Mozart's jubilant C-major works."


Tremont Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Circus; Three Rings' Worth of Thrills, Spills, Frills
That glorious gallimaufry the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus is back in Madison Square Garden with a spectacle that celebrates the 200th anniversary of circuses in America.
The country's first circus was a one-ring presentation in Philadelphia in April 1793.
The show that continues through May 2 at the Garden is a three-ring event, a heartwarming hodgepodge that justifies the traditional billing of "The Greatest Show on Earth."
A performance on the morning of March 26 revealed it to be a bold production filled with parades, pageantry, pachyderms and ponies.
Lions roared, acrobats soared and clowns and chimpanzees made mischief.


Unemployment Dips Below 10% in New York City
Mainly as a result of fewer people seeking jobs, the unemployment rate for New York City fell to 9.6 percent in March from 11.3 percent in February, according to Government data released yesterday.
It was the first month since last April that the rate has been below 10 percent.
For New York State, a brightening employment picture -- mainly outside New York City -- helped the rate fall to 7.3 percent, from 8 percent in February.
It was the lowest rate since October 1991.


Battles Loom for Control Of TV's Portal to Cable
The unobtrusive cable control box that sits atop many television sets is about to become a new battleground for the nation's computer, telephone and cable television companies.
The ultimate prize: control of the access to all the video entertainment and new types of electronic information that enter and leave the home.
The struggle will move to a higher plateau, perhaps as early as next week, when three companies each dominant in their fields -- Microsoft, Intel and General Instruments -- are expected to announce that they are jointly developing a set-top device that combines the functions of a cable converter box and a personal computer, according to industry executives.
The three companies are still working out final details of their agreement.


Arista Investors Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


NICARAGUA TO GET BLOCKED U.S. AID
Citing continued progress on human rights issues and lingering property claims, the Clinton Administration released $50 million in economic aid for Nicaragua today that had been held up since last June.
Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, told reporters today that the Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro had taken a number of steps that the United States had been urging.


Osborn Communications Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patrick Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American National Petroleum Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Lancer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Express Cash International (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Coach Suspended
Central Michigan Coach KEITH DAMBROT was given a four-day suspension without pay for using a racial slur in front of his players.
His alleged statements, made late in the season, came to light last week after a flier was distributed anonymously to minority students.
Dambrot is white.


Depleted Nets Are No Match for Bulls
At one point during New Jersey's game with the Bulls tonight, Doug Lee, fresh out of the Continental Basketball Association, where he played with those ferocious La Crosse Catbirds, had the responsibility of guarding Michael Jordan.
Might as well give Jordan a police escort to the basket.
Several dunks and jump shots later, Lee was left shaking his head and the injury-plagued Nets were left in the dust, losers by 118-105.
Most of the responsibility of guarding Jordan fell to Rafael Addison (21 points), who worked hard, but this is Jordan.


Relief From State Helps Calm A Community's Fiscal Nerves
For nine months, this century-old mill town in eastern Connecticut has operated without a budget.
It recently lost a $3 million grant for capital improvements after defaulting on a loan, and on Tuesday, town employees were not sure they would be getting paychecks next week.
Last week, residents were so fed up that more than half the town's registered voters signed a petition asking the state to step in and take charge.


Spring Brings Transport of a Different Sort


Business Digest
Companies  Philip Morris cut the price of its cigarettes in an acknowledgment of the threat by discount brands and the changing habits of smokers.
The announcement sent tobacco stocks reeling and pushed the entire stock market into a tailspin.  [ Page 1. ]


Aid -- and Trade -- for Russia
President Clinton, in a speech this week to newspaper editors, laid out sound reasons for America to aid Russia.
Aid, especially if targeted to benefit ordinary Russians, could help move reform forward.
And an economically prosperous and democratic Russia would open an era of international cooperation, generate trade opportunities and, by paving the way for steep defense cuts, free billions for civilian investment.
Think of aid, Mr.
Clinton urged, not as charity but as an investment in peace and economic growth.
He will carry this message to Boris Yeltsin today when they begin a two-day summit meeting in Vancouver.
He will pledge about $1 billion in U.S. aid next year, and the prospect of a much larger package -- perhaps $30 billion -- from the Western allies after they meet later this month in Tokyo.


At Impasse on Jobs Bill, Senate Quarrels Instead
Frozen in filibuster just 42 days into its legislative year, the Senate dropped all pretense of debating President Clinton's jobs bill today and instead fell to squabbling over whose foot is dragging most.
Democrats and Republicans alike have jumped into the fray with such gusto that it seemed questionable whether they would quit any time soon, even though their two-week vacation was supposed to begin this evening.


School That Hikers Come From Is Hardly Elite
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the Michigan high school students marooned by blizzard in the North Carolina mountains (March 16-17) exhibits a tendency that seems to afflict much of what you publish about private secondary schools and universities.
An informal data-base search of your recent articles about such institutions as Harvard, Phillips Exeter, Dalton and Brearley shows that the epithet "elite" is applied to them with almost Homeric inevitability.
In the articles about the hikers from the Cranbrook Kingswood Upper Schools in Bloomfield Hills, outside Detroit, Cranbrook was twice identified as an elite prep school and once as an exclusive boarding school.
It was almost impossible not to take "elite" and "exclusive" as shorthand for rich, white and bigoted.


CHRONICLE
Wellesley College announced yesterday that LUELLA GROSS GOLDBERG, the current chairwoman of its board, will become the school's acting president on July 1.
That is when the current president, NANNERL OVERHOLSER KEOHANE, becomes president of Duke University.
A committee has begun searching for candidates to fill the Wellesley board seat.
Ms.
Goldberg, who lives in Minneapolis, is a 1958 Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Wellesley.
She has been on the boards of numerous educational and philanthropic organizations and corporations, from the Minnesota Orchestral Association to the Northwestern National Life Insurance Company.


For a Real Challenge, Try Picking Newsletters
THE last time Mark Hulbert looked, 45 investment newsletters devoted themselves exclusively to mutual funds.
More are sure to join the fray, which is good news for Mr.
Hulbert, who publishes The Hulbert Financial Digest out of Alexandria, Va., and is in the business of evaluating how well investors would do if they followed the advice of the people who sell newsletters.
In 1984, only 3 of the 41 letters he tracked -- 7 percent -- were exclusively giving advice about buying and selling funds.
Today, 45 of the 140 investment newsletters monitored by Hulbert specialize in mutual funds -- 32 percent of the total.


Two Insurers Deny Charge Of Sales Bias
California's two largest auto insurers today denied charges by the state's insurance commissioner that they were deliberately selling fewer policies in low-income Los Angeles neighborhoods than in higher-income areas.
The State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company and the Farmers Insurance Group accused the commissioner, John Garamendi, of distorting the findings of a study in his testimony in Washington on Thursday before a House subcommittee considering insurance reform.


Democrats Question Plan to Reshape the Nassau Government
For decades, Nassau County Democrats have been calling for the county to scrap its Board of Supervisors system in favor of a legislature that most people believe would be more representative of the population.
But when County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, announced on Thursday that he would pursue such a change, the Democratic reaction was far from enthusiastic.


Science or Art Form? The Top Managers Talk About Their Tactics
Most investors in stock mutual funds choose diversified funds, asking the manager to decide which areas of the market are most promising at a particular time.
So while single-industry funds offer the possibility of better -- and far worse -- performance in any given period, perhaps the most pertinent information for most people is the performance of general stock funds.
Here are three funds that did best over the last quarter, year and five years.
Vista Growth and Income Best Over 5 Years Manager: Mark A. Tincher


Cheaney On Verge Of a Sweep
Calbert Cheaney, the Indiana senior forward, took another step today toward becoming the consensus national player of the year.
Cheaney was named The Associated Press player of the year, gaining 53 first-place votes to 25 for the second-place finisher, Duke guard Bobby Hurley.
Cheaney was also voted the Naismith Award as player of the year by the Atlanta Tipoff Club.
He has already won the Eastman Award, voted by the nation's coaches.
He is a finalist for the United States Basketball Writers Association award, which will be announced Sunday.


Tele-Communications Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Baker Award Is in His Pocket. Title Game Is on the Docket.
Paul Kariya, the freshman from the University of Maine who has swept across college hockey like a meteor, was named the winner of the Hobey Baker Award today as player of the year during a ceremony attended by hundreds of Black Bears fans.
Those fans will be at the Bradley Center here Saturday night when Kariya and his 19 teammates play one more game, this one for the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship against Lake Superior State.


INSIDE
Mutual Funds
How they did in the first quarter of 1993.
How the top managers invested.
Today in YOUR MONEY, pages 35-42. Beneath Summit Meeting, Economic Underpinnings
On the eve of the Vancouver summit meeting, Western creditor nations gave Russia an extra 10 years to repay $15 billion in debt.
Page 4.
Washington is depicting aid to Moscow as an investment in a free market and insurance against military spending.
News analysis, page 4.
The Rare Show of Faith
Many twice-a-year churchgoers and Jews who shun synagogues say they are nonetheless faithful year-round, in their own ways.
Beliefs, page 8.
Loggers, Owls and Clinton
President Clinton had no ready solutions at the Oregon forest conference, but he suggested that the age of big timber was ending.
Page 6.
Reno Selects Senior Aides
Attorney General Reno named her top aides, including two Carter Administration officials.
Page 6.


Creative Technologies Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rocking Horse Child Care Centers of America reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Student's Killing Displays Dark Side of Japan Schools
This much is known about the last few hours of Yuhei Kodama's life at his junior high school in this small farming town in northern Japan: Once again, he was being bullied by a jeering crowd of his classmates, this time shoved around the giant school gym as dozens of other students watched.
Apart from his tormentors, and perhaps some witnesses who appear to have been scared into silence, no one yet knows for certain what happened in the ensuing hours.
But around 8 P.M. a teacher found the 13-year-old boy suffocated in a closet, where he had been stuffed upside down into the center of a rolled-up gym mat.
Days later three of his classmates were arrested and four others taken into "protective custody," but without charges.


Allen's Sister Says Farrow Sows Hatred In Children
Describing Woody Allen as a nurturing, devoted father who rearranged his movie shooting schedules to spend more time with his children, the director's sister testified yesterday that she believed Mia Farrow was doing everything she could to persuade the children to hate him.
In brief but spirited testimony in the trial to determine custody of the couple's children, Letty Aronson said Mr.
Allen's 5-year-old son, Satchel Farrow, once said to Mr.
Allen upon greeting him: "My mommy says I can't love you. My mommy says you're bad." Whenever Mr.
Allen kissed the boy, Satchel would say, "Mommy says I have to wipe these kisses off," Ms.
Aronson testified.


Call It a Rainout for Teams and a Delay for Perez
There was supposed to be an exhibition baseball game here today, but the outfield grass at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium was wet, the crowd was small, and the skies were threatening.
So the Yankees and Mets called it off and flew home to New York.
In fact, the only business conducted was by the Yankees, who said that Melido Perez's injured left hip would keep him from pitching the season opener on Monday in Cleveland.


Big Selloffs in Stock and Bond Markets; 30-Year Treasury At 7.05% as Rally Appears Capped
Interest rates surged yesterday, pushing the yield on the 30-year bond above 7 percent, as new employment figures intensified the market's concerns about inflation.
The price of the long bond fell 13/32, sending the yield to 7.05 percent, from 6.96 percent Thursday, its highest close since Feb. 17.
The bond market's selloff also seemed to cap the post-election rally that sent the yield down to 6.72 percent less than a month ago.


Equitable Real Estate reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Theater; A Musical Asks: What Price a Pair of Sneakers?
It's hard to imagine a more well-intentioned project than "Bobos," the latest production by the American Music Theater Festival.
The "jazz, pop, rap musical," which opened Wednesday night and runs through April 11 at the Plays and Players Theater here, is about the brutal choices facing inner-city teen-agers, and it updates theater music with the riffs and beats of hip-hop.
The combination of relevance and contemporary rhythm seems intended to draw a younger audience than most musicals do, while reminding the regular theatergoing crowd that there are people struggling just a neighborhood or two away.
"Bobos" aims to cut back on escapism while providing the satisfactions of an old-fashioned musical, from love songs to celebratory dance sequences.
The program says "Time: The Present" and "Place: The City," and with props including knives, guns and a crack pipe, "Bobos" flaunts a certain grittiness.
"This is the real deal," the opening number insists.


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Intermagnetics General reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Slimmer, More Serious And Very Determined
The last time Jennifer Capriati saw Rome, an unsung South African named Amanda Coetzer had just ousted her in the third round of the 1992 Italian Open and, adding insult to injury, the local tennis critics attributed the loss to an excess of weight on her own naturally unpetite frame.
Capriati took the defeat, and the criticism, to heart; in fact, she cried over both, but she avenged herself on both fronts today in the quarterfinals of the Family Circle Magazine Cup.


Finish Line Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


The Spotlight, Again, Falls on Yeltsin
In principle, it is President Clinton who should be under scrutiny at this summit meeting, the newcomer making his first appearance in the Big Game.
In fact, the world will probably once again be trying to figure out his partner, the big, puffy-eyed Russian just in from another brawl.
From the time he first clambered into the Kremlin over the rubble of the Soviet state that he helped to destroy, Boris N. Yeltsin always seems to be dashing from one barricade to another, usually portrayed by his lieutenants as the only viable obstacle to the return of the Bolsheviks.


Single-Minded President; White House Lacks Strength in Congress To Push More Than One Issue at a Time
The retreats and delays that are coming to exemplify the Clinton Administration's pursuit of its legislative agenda are rooted in one underlying fact: the White House is only strong enough to fight one battle at a time in Congress.
For the moment, that battle is over President Clinton's economic plan.
Everything else -- even promises made dozens of times in the Presidential campaign and afterward -- is tied for second.


19 Western Nations Give Russia An Extra 10 Years to Repay Debt
In an important boost for President Boris N. Yeltsin just one day before he meets President Clinton, 19 Western creditor nations today gave Russia an extra 10 years to make $15 billion worth of debt payments that are coming due this year.
The so-called Paris Club of creditors, which include the United States, also went out of their way to stress "their continuing support for the Russian reform process launched and guided by President Yeltsin" and held out the possibility of further debt relief in 1994.


Reviews/Fashion; New Sensibilities, Bold Design
There was a lot of fashion heresy on Lafayette Street on Thursday night.
In one alley, Seth Shapiro was showing a crowd of 100 his Martin Margiela-inspired designs out of a U-haul.
Shortly thereafter, Mr.
Margiela's deconstructionist spirit cast itself across Liza Bruce's show in the nearby Puck Building.
And Kenneth Richard also chose the Puck to completely dismember Edwardian classics.
The only designer showing on Lafayette Street that night who failed to pick up on the mood -- apart from Isaac Mizrahi, of course -- was Maria Snyder, who entertained the glitterati with clothes that felt too "fashiony" for the time and place.


U.N.L.V. Regent Seeks Maxson's Resignation
A university regent has called for the resignation of ROBERT MAXSON, president of the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, saying his ability to lead "has been irretrievably lost" because of recent problems.
"For the sake of U.N.L.V. and its ability to go forward into a brighter future, for the sake of our community, which must begin to heal, Bob Maxson must acknowledge his responsibility, take the honorable course and step aside," said Regent SHELLEY BERKLEY in letters published by The Las Vegas Review-Journal and The Las Vegas Sun.


I.C.H. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How Do Your Garden Vegetables Taste?
To the Editor:
Re: "Stand Up for Hybrids" (Op-Ed, March 21) by George Ball Jr., chairman of W. Atlee Burpee &amp; Company, which breeds produces and sells mostly hybrid seeds:
Mr.
Ball generously admits that so-called heirloom seeds "may have value as a novelty, such as an unusual shape, color or fragrance," but adds that they are often inferior "in the areas most important to many home gardeners: yield, resistance to disease and size of fruit or flower."


CHRONICLE
TERRY ANDERSON, the journalist who endured nearly seven years as a hostage in Beirut, Lebanon, and MADELEINE BASSIL have announced that they will be married on April 18.
"It's been a long time coming and we are very happy about it," Mr.
Anderson said yesterday in a telephone interview from San Francisco.
"It will be a quiet wedding, just family and friends." The couple met in Beirut in 1984, and their daughter, Sulome, who is 7, was born shortly after Mr.
Anderson was taken captive.
"She will carry the rings or flowers or something like that," Mr.
Anderson said of her part in the wedding.


West Point-Pepperell Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


From Calvin Klein, the Barest Essentials
Here are a few scenarios.
The world has ended, but Calvin Klein has remained to clothe the survivors.


Hotel Investors Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York's Budget, Too Dimly Seen
Unpublished budget agreements sealed by a figurative handshake leave a lot to be desired.
While Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the leaders of New York's State Senate and Assembly claim tentative agreement on a budget for the fiscal year that started Thursday, the public knows only the partial, partisan details that the negotiators choose to reveal.
Yet quick approval by the Legislature is virtually certain.
It's a shabby process.
On the sparse evidence, it appears the package includes some positive accomplishments -- another slight increase in the share of state aid earmarked for urban schools, and a five-year plan for transit improvements in New York City and its suburbs with a two-year freeze on bus and subway fares.


Olajuwon Is U.S. Citizen
Rockets star HAKEEM OLAJUWON stopped off at Federal court in Houston on his way to the basketball court yesterday morning and was sworn in as a new United States citizen.


Frederick Nicklaus, Poet, 55
Frederick Nicklaus, a poet, died on March 23 at a nursing home in Columbus, Ohio.
He was 55 and had lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


JUSTICES PAVE WAY FOR ABORTION LAW
The Supreme Court today cleared the way for North Dakota to begin enforcing an abortion law that requires women to wait 24 hours after a counseling session before they can have an abortion.
The action today was not an expression of the Court's view of the merits of the law, as Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and David H. Souter emphasized in a brief concurring opinion.
Rather, the two Justices said, the Court's action reflected the unusual procedural nature of the case as it reached the Supreme Court.


Friends Say Jackson May Withdraw From N.A.A.C.P. Campaign
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson has been discussing with associates whether he should withdraw from the race for executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, several associates said today.
Mr.
Jackson is one of four contenders for the post as the head of the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization.
But associates said he was uncertain whether he should remain in the running for a post he might not get.
Some N.A.A.C.P. members have objected to his candidacy, saying his highly personalized style would hurt the organization; others say he would bring new luster to the N.A.A.C.P.


Classical Music in Review
Newband  Alternative Museum
The extraordinary group of instruments invented by Harry Partch earlier in this century are now the property of Newband, a chamber group led by Dean Drummond.
The Partch instruments are renowned not only for their fascinating tone colors but also for their exploitation of alternative or extended tunings.
Mr.
Drummond has augmented the ensemble with several new instruments, notably the zoomoozophone, a huge array of horizontal aluminum tubes that produce 31 tones in each octave.


Fame's Fleeting Nature Is on Display in This Hall
THREE days after some 76 million Americans watched the Academy Awards, a muscular man wearing a T-shirt that said "Sex, Drugs and Rock 'n Roll" wrestled a bust of Franklin D. Roosevelt into its place of honor at the Hall of Fame for Great Americans, which is in the Bronx.
Nobody came by to mark the moment, though a student couple necking a few niches down between Daniel Webster and John Quincy Adams occasionally looked up.
Actually, Roosevelt was voted into the hall in 1973, four years before the last elections for membership into what was established in 1901 as America's Pantheon.
For 60 years it was taken seriously, drawing tourists like an urban Mount Rushmore, and generating national news coverage and debate for its elections.
Now, like Ozymandias, it has outlived its glory; its proverbial 15 minutes.
An unattended shrine, it is less visited and much less known than the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown or similar parochial temples of homage.


American Real Estate Partners reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Arden Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Graff Pay-Per-View reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Westchester's Executive Faces New Accusations
Questions about the ethics of County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke multiplied today when he acknowledged that he sought a job for his son-in-law and an admission interview for his daughter at New York Medical College, which has a $14.6 million contract to furnish doctors to the county hospital.
The disclosures followed earlier ones that Mr.
O'Rourke successfully recommended the woman he lives with for a job with the county medical insurer and that his daughter was hired by a law firm that does the county's medical malpractice work.
Impression That Could Hurt
Cumulatively, the charges could create an impression that Mr.
O'Rourke has been using the county government as a family employment agency, an impression that could harm him as he seeks re-election this fall to the job he has held for 11 years.


Theater Wing Seminars
Stephen Rea, Martin Short, Bill Irwin, David Shiner, Robert Klein, Jeff Daniels and Christopher Durang are among the actors scheduled to participate April 27 in a seminar on performance sponsored by the American Theater Wing.
Isabelle Stevenson, president of the Theater Wing, will be chairwoman of the discussion, which will take place at 11 A.M. at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, 33 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
The author and critic Brendan Gill and the producer Jean Dalrymple will be co-moderators.
The Theater Wing will also hold a seminar on playwrights and directors on April 28 and one on production on April 29.
Admission to all will be free.
The seminars will be broadcast six times each week on CUNY-TV cable channel 75 in the five boroughs.
Information: (212) 765-0609.


Q and A
Switching From Bonds
Q.
My wife and I are retired.
Two years ago we bought three-month Treasury bills when they were paying 6 percent.
Currently they are paying 3 percent or less, and as they start to come due for reinvestment in the next two months we are considering switching to no-load fixed-income mutual funds that pay monthly dividends that average 6 percent.
What are the risks?
BEN NEELAND, Bergenfield, N.J.


Gitano Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Frisch's Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 7


Conner Says First-Quarter Profit Will Be Weak
Conner Peripherals Inc. said today that poor demand and price declines for disk drives, as well as weak orders from its European distributor, would cause first-quarter earnings to fall substantially below current analysts' expectations.
Conner shares fell $1.125, to $13.50 in New York Stock Exchange trading today, and some analysts were surprised they did not fall further.


Review/Film Festival; A Bergman Memoir By Son and Father
Having begun in celebratory fashion with Sally Potter's extravagant and witty adaptation of Virginia Woolf's "Orlando," the 1993 New Directors/New Films series ends this weekend with a new Swedish film of equally high and exciting caliber: "Sunday's Children," another gorgeous, richly poignant memoir written by Ingmar Bergman but directed by his son Daniel as his first feature.
The film will be shown at the Museum of Modern Art today at 6 P.M. and tomorrow at 9 P.M.
"Sunday's Children" is smaller in scale than both "Fanny and Alexander" (1982), Mr.
Bergman's fantastical epic about his maternal grandparents' family, and "The Best Intentions" (1992), which examines the troubled relationship of his parents just before his own birth in 1918.
Bille August directed that film from Mr.
Bergman's screenplay.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.31
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.90
3.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.99
4.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.78
5.70
7.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.05
6.96
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.95
7.89
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.17
6.03
6.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mutual Fund Reporting Can Get Complicated
ALTHOUGH mutual funds are intended to make investors' lives easy by turning financial decision-making over to professional managers, matters can become complicated when investors wear a different hat -- taxpayer.
Some people wind up unwittingly paying the same tax twice, while others fail to realize they have made a taxable sale and run afoul of the Internal Revenue Service's efficient computers.


Senior Officials Named At Justice Department
After two months in which the Justice Department has drifted without a senior management team, Attorney General Janet Reno today announced the selection of several top aides, including two Carter Administration officials and a close friend of Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Ms.
Reno selected Philip B. Heymann, a Harvard law professor and a former Carter official, as Deputy Attorney General, the department's No. 2 official, who generally serves as its day-to-day manager and principal supervisor of criminal matters.


The Message of the Trees
It happens every time scientists take a really close look at a patch of tropical forest.
They find an extraordinary abundance of life forms -- including species that no one even realized existed.
The latest such findings were announced recently by a team of American and Brazilian botanists who studied a 2 1/2-acre plot in the rapidly disappearing Atlantic Coastal Forest of Brazil.
The team, led by Dr.
W.
Wayt Thomas of the New York Botanical Garden, identified an astonishing 450 different species of trees in that one small plot, the greatest diversity of trees yet found anywhere in the world.
A similar plot in a forest in the continental United States might contain no more than 10 different species.


MedChem Products reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Beliefs
On Easter Sunday, Frederick Johnson, a writer for the television soap opera "The Young and the Restless," will go to All Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena, Calif.
He will be one of the millions of people who swell church attendance by almost 20 percent on Easter and Christmas but are not seen much the rest of the year.
On Monday and Tuesday evenings, Richard Shapiro and Susan Braudy will observe Passover by joining family and friends at seders.
But this married Connecticut couple are also among the 75 percent of American Jews who attend synagogue no more than several times a year or not at all, and who do not light Sabbath candles or keep kosher dietary practices either.


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


After a Dismal Year, A Strong First Quarter
GOLDBUGS, rejoice!
Lexington Strategic Investments, a gold fund, topped the charts among all mutual funds in the first quarter of 1993, rising an eye-popping 72.7 percent.
But envious investors should remember that Lexington was the worst performer of the 3,000-plus mutual funds in 1992: the value of its shares plummeted 61 percent.
All gold funds -- there are 32 others that invest in a mix of gold mining stocks and bullion -- are famous for their roller-coaster rides.
Share prices swing violently up and down, but mostly down; gold funds are notable as the only stock fund category to lose value in the last decade.


Vivid New Court Statements Detail Crown Heights Clash
In graphic accounts given in court papers, Hasidic residents and civic leaders from Crown Heights, Brooklyn, described what some called a terrifying "pogrom" in which several said they were attacked by bands of young black men in four days of racial violence in 1991.
The accounts, given in 13 affidavits filed last night in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, are intended to support a suit that Hasidic residents brought last year charging that Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Police Commissioner at the time deliberately withheld police protection while the Hasidim were attacked.


We Can't Replace Lab Animals With People; A Moral Question Too
To the Editor:
"Many Say Lab-Animal Tests Fail to Measure Human Risk" speaks of "scientists" testing for carcinogens by feeding thousands of animals "larger and larger quantities of a substance until they find the level that actually poisons the animals."
And in one test, "Almost every animal exposed to the substance was riddled with tumors in 'several different organs.' "


Kelley Oil (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Faina Lushtak  Pianist  Alice Tully Hall
There was a puzzling inconsistency in Faina Lushtak's piano playing on Saturday evening.
In the Haydn Sonata in E flat, with which she opened her program, Ms.
Lushtak played the outer fast movements at daring speeds yet with precision and transparency.
Yet the slow middle movement plodded along heavy-handedly.
Other readings hit similar extremes: In Debussy's "Pour le Piano," Ms.
Lushtak's tense account of the Prelude fell flat, but the Sarabande was a picture of gracefulness and the Toccata was clean textured and full of energy.
A Schubert sonata had so heavy a Russian accent that its opening movement could have passed for Mussorgsky.
Yet four Granados Spanish Dances came through with just the right Mediterranean delicacy.


Mesa and Morris Fined
Cleveland Indians pitcher JOSE MESA and Cincinnati Reds first baseman HAL MORRIS were each suspended for three games and fined undisclosed amounts yesterday for their parts in a fight during an exhibition game last Tuesday.
It is the first time in eight years that penalties imposed in spring training have carried over into the regular season.
LONNIE SMITH, with St.
Louis in 1985, was suspended for three days after swearing at an umpire during an exhibition game.


Martech USA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Time to Get Ready for Baseball


Pacific International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Lawsuits Seek to Ban Smoking in Fast-Food Restaurants
In what legal experts say is the first case of its kind, three mothers of children with asthma have filed lawsuits here to try to ban smoking in the nation's fast-food restaurants, arguing that smoke in the air violates their children's civil rights under the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act.
The suits say the restaurants, by allowing smoking in their public areas, are effectively barring access to people with respiratory disabilities.
The fourth plaintiff is a woman with lupus who claims in the suits that she cannot take her two small children into smoky restaurants because of her disability.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Discounted Theater Tickets
More than 75 Off and Off Off Broadway theaters are offering discounts of up to 50 percent throughout the month as part of the Alliance of Resident Theaters/New York Third Annual Passports to Off Broadway program.
For information on participating productions: (212) 768-1818.


Key Figure in Cable Law Called White House's Choice for F.C.C.
The day after the Federal Communications Commission used a new law to hammer the cable industry over its rates, Congressional and industry sources said today that the White House planned to nominate a senior Senate aide, who helped push through the legislation, to be the commission's next head.
The choice of Antoinette D. Cook, who would be the first black and the first woman to lead the F.C.C., is a further sign that the commission is likely to take a more confrontational stance toward industry.
Stricter Regulation Expected
As staff counsel to the Senate Commerce subcommittee on communications, Ms.
Cook has developed a reputation as a Democratic insider skilled at maneuvering through the thicket of competing interest groups that tug at communications policy.


Suffolk Cuts Foster Care By 10 Percent
Strapped by a New York State initiative to cap foster-care costs and a drop in local revenues, Suffolk County has cut the number of children in foster care by about 10 percent, despite a steady increase in child abuse and rising criticism of the county's measures to protect vulnerable children.
The spending limit on foster care, believed to be the first in the nation, was introduced last year to limit the total the state will pay for foster care to $406 million.
It is being praised as an innovative approach to containing costs by the Cuomo administration, which has proposed extending the cap on costs to the State Division for Youth, whose clients are emotionally troubled and delinquent youngsters.
Questions About Quality of Care
Suffolk County officials say that the savings are a sign of success, but child-welfare advocates say that limiting state financing for foster care can discourage counties from removing children from dangerous or neglectful homes.
Of the $6 million in incentives the Cuomo administration will pay counties for containing costs last year, $2 million will go to Suffolk County, where the county's treatment of 10-year-old Katie Beers has prompted questions about the quality of child protective services.


For the Giants, Sherrard, and for The Jets, Charade
The Giants got the player they wanted yesterday.
O.K., it was seven years later and it wasn't Reggie White.
But it was Mike Sherrard, a clever, good-hands wide receiver from the San Francisco 49ers, and they made the free agent the fourth-highest-paid pass-catcher in pro football with a three-year deal worth more than $4.7 million.


Unilab Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Buttes Gas &amp; Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Delius Premiere
"Sea Drift," an early work by Frederick Delius, is to be given its New York premiere at 8 tonight at Carnegie Hall by the New York Choral Society.
Composed in 1903, the piece is a setting of a poem from Walt Whitman's "Leaves of Grass." The actor Carl Lumbly is to read excerpts from the poem before the musical work is played.
The major work of the evening is Carl Orff's "Carmina Burana," for which soloists and a children's chorus are to join the 150-member choral group.
Tickets are $13 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Trans World Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G-I Holdings reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Executive Changes
PRECISION SYSTEMS INC., St.
Petersburg, Fla., a producer of call-processing systems, named Wayne English chief financial officer.
RESTAURANT ASSOCIATES CORP., New York, a unit of Kyotaru Co., named Nick Valenti executive vice president and chief operating officer.


Showdown Time Is Answer Time for Fab Five and Critics
The four teams represent universities that have each celebrated a national championship in the last 15 years and have been ranked at the top of the polls at some point this season.
Kansas, North Carolina, Kentucky and Michigan, four teams in blue, established each school's basketball credentials long before the success in the national collegiate basketball tournament brought them together to form a highly awaited Final Four.


INSIDE
HOW GOOD'S THE ADVICE?: Dozens of newsletter recommend funds.
Of those at least six years old, only three have outperformed the S&amp;P 500.
ON GUARD: Many mutual fund companies use gimmicks to attract investors, even changing their names to be included in groups where they will rank higher.
DON'T PAY TWICE: When selling a mutual fund holding, make sure you haven't already paid taxes on the gain and dividends in a previous year.
GOLDBUG ALERT!: After a dreary decade, funds that invest in gold had a wonderful quarter.
But beware.
THE PHONE RINGS MORE THAN TWICE: The handling of customers' inquiries can be as important to a fund's success as its investing performance.
And inside the telephone room, the pressure is intense.


PHILIP MORRIS CUTS CIGARETTE PRICES, STUNNING MARKET
The Philip Morris Companies yesterday cut the price of its Marlboro cigarettes, the world's best-selling brand, in an acknowledgment that its flagship product was threatened by competition from discount brands and the changing habits of smokers.
The reduction of some 40 cents a pack will lower the price to a national retail average of $1.80, including excise taxes.
The move startled investors, who knocked $14.75 off the price of Philip Morris shares, to $49.375.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Topps Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


When Water Is Warmer On Other Side of Fence
In July, Raimundas Mazuolis carried the flag of newly independent Lithuania into the Olympic stadium in Barcelona, Spain.
Then he finished 10th in the 50-meter freestyle and 10th in the 100.
Then he stopped swimming.


Sulcus Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
A week ago Tom Sanders of Nashville was en route to his third victory in the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Kansas City, Mo.
He is the only Vanderbilt winner to have graduated from Vanderbilt University, which, like the game, owes much to Harold Vanderbilt.
As previously reported, Sanders was so angry with himself for a bidding misjudgment that he threw a board against the wall.
At the other extreme was the diagramed deal, which gave him so much pleasure that he would have unthrown the earlier board if that had been possible.


Alan Kulwicki, 38, Racer And Stock-Car Champion
Alan Kulwicki, the Wisconsin-born racing driver who won the 1992 Nascar championship, was killed Thursday night along with three other men aboard a private plane that crashed while attempting to land at the Tri-County Airport near Bristol, Tenn.
He was 38 and had been scheduled to compete in the Food City 500 in Bristol tomorrow.
There was no immediate explanation for the crash, which also claimed the lives of three employees of Hooters of America, the regional restaurant chain that sponsored Kulwicki's campaign.
They were identified by the Atlanta-based company as Mark Brooks, 26, the company's sports marketing manager and the son of its chairman, Robert H. Brooks; Dan Duncan, 44, the director of sports management, and Charlie Campbell, 48, the corporate pilot.


Check Express Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


DF&amp;R Restaurants Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Salem Sportswear (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about President Clinton's proposal to buy vaccines for all American children described vaccination patterns of American children incompletely.
By the time they enter school, at age 5 or 6, 95 percent of children have had the recommended immunizations.
But among 2-year-olds, 40 percent have not had all the shots recommended for that age.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY IMPROVED SUBWAYS IN THE OFFING
The budget agreement in Albany granting the Metropolitan Transportation Authority virtually all of the $9.6 billion it requested for a re-building program means that New York City subway riders will see some dramatic changes in the next five years.
Page 1.
MUBARAK SAYS BLAST SUSPECT TOLD MUCH
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said one of the men charged in the bombing of the World Trade Center, Mahmud Abouhalima, had given Egyptian authorities "a great deal of information" about the bombing.
Page 27.
CITY SUED OVER CROWN HEIGHTS VIOLENCE
In graphic accounts filed as part of a Federal suit against the city, Jewish residents of Crown Heights, Brooklyn, described terrifying attacks against them in 1991 disturbances.
Page 27.
WOODY ALLEN'S SISTER TESTIFIES
Describing Woody Allen as a nurturing, devoted father who rearranged his movie shooting schedules to spend more time with his children, the director's sister testified that she believed Mia Farrow was turning the the children against him.
Page 27.
Rupert Murdoch says the straits of The New York Post were worse than he thought.
Page 27.
REGION NEW QUESTIONS ABOUT O'ROURKE
Questions about the ethics of Westchester County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke multiplied when he acknowledged that he sought a job for his son-in-law and an interview for his daughter at New York Medical College, which furnishes doctors to the county hospital.
Page 28.
NASSAU DEMOCRATS WARY OF NEW ALLY
When the Nassau County Executive, a Republican, announced he would pursue a change the county's Democrats have long wanted -- replacing the Board of Supervisors with a legislature -- the Democrats were cynical.
Page 28.
TOWN'S NERVES CALMED BY REPRIEVE
In a reprieve similar to those given to Bridgeport and West Haven, Governor Weicker has signed a bill giving a century-old mill town, Jewett City, state assistance.
Page 28.
BURGERS, FRIES, BUT PLEASE, NO SMOKE
In what legal experts say is the first case of its kind, three mothers of children with asthma have filed lawsuits in Hartford to try to ban smoking in McDonald's, Burger King and Wendy's franchises, arguing that smoke in the air violates their children's civil rights under the Americans With Disabilities Act.
Page 28.
A woman was found fatally dead in the living room of her home in Elmont, L.I. Page 28.
Unemployment in New York City and New York State fell in March, while New Jersey's rose slightly.
Page 7.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


Accugraph Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bus Terminal Is Closed by a Bomb Scare
More than 1,000 commuters were forced to evacuate the Port Authority Bus Terminal last night after a bomb scare, a spokesman for the authority said.
A caller telephoned a bomb threat to 911 at about 5 P.M., said the spokesman, Allen Morrison.
But the evacuation began only after a an abandoned thermos was found in the main lobby at about 6:45 P.M.
The thermos was checked by bomb squad officers and found to be merely what it appeared to be, Mr.
Morrison said.


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 6


Mubarak Says a Suspect In Blast Revealed Details
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt says that one of the men charged in the bombing of the World Trade Center, Mahmud Abouhalima, has given Egyptian authorities "a great deal of information" about the bombing, telling Egyptian investigators "how the operation was carried out and who participated in it."
Although he declined to discuss specifics, Mr.
Mubarak suggested that the bombing may have been carried out with the help of the Islamic Group, a terrorist network that has been tied to a series of attacks on tourists in Egypt.


Corrections
A chart accompanying an article in Business Day on March 18, about the price pressures faced by small makers of personal computers, misidentified a company and misstated the loss in its first fiscal quarter of 1993, which ended Dec. 31.
The company's name is Advanced Logic Research and it lost $915,000 in the quarter.


Observer; Serving Humble Pie
Listening to experts on the health-care problem is like reading computer manuals.
Their brilliance is obvious and indisputable, and I for one -- I won't speak for you -- can't understand a thing they say.
This leaves a person feeling melancholy, as well as stupid.
There is a certain kind of modern poetry that's like this, too.
You know it is magnificent; critics say so on the dust jacket; the poet who wrote it has been draped with medals, garlanded with laurel, and stuffed with onions by honorary-degree dispensers on five continents.
Only an ox could fail to enjoy it.


TOWARD THE SUMMIT: The High Stakes in Vancouver; Clinton Believes His Own Program Is Tied to Russian Reform
President Clinton appears to be approaching the summit meeting with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia on Saturday with an odd mix of feelings: a sense of urgency, a sense of opportunity and an unspoken fear that no matter what help he offers Mr.
Yeltsin it won't make a difference.
The urgency derives from the President's stated conviction that if the United States does not do what it can to bolster Mr.
Yeltsin, and Russian reform falters, Mr.
Clinton's ability to slash his own military budget and get his own economic program through Congress will be imperiled.


Reviews/Fashion; Shades of Napoleon By Way of California
"Please be seated and open your prayer books to the Book of Revelations," a voice intoned over the loud speaker as Richard Tyler's fall show started yesterday.
Well, tomorrow is Palm Sunday.
So the audience was treated to a procession of fashionable priests' cassocks and surplices and choir boys' tunics.
In addition, there were military greatcoats, frock coats and Empire dresses.


Eugenie Leontovich, 93, Actress, Playwright and Teacher, Is Dead
Eugenie Leontovich, an actress, playwright, director and teacher who created memorable roles on Broadway in "Grand Hotel," "Twentieth Century" and "Anastasia," died yesterday at the Kateri Nursing Home in Manhattan.
She was 93.
The cause was cardiac arrest and pneumonia, said Dr.
Joseph Klager, a doctor at the nursing home.


John Adams Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Haiti Coup Leaders Deserve No Reward
To the Editor:
Anna Husarska's prescription to end the impasse in Haiti in "Both Sides, Retreat" (Op-Ed March 16) -- full amnesty for the putschists and resignation by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide -- is ill conceived.
It would reward usurpers of power by letting them achieve their main objective and reward their many egregious violations of fundamental rights with a blanket amnesty.
It is unfortunate that, as Ms.
Husarska writes, "the Chilean and Argentine amnesties come to mind." In 1978, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet decreed an amnesty by which he forgave himself and his henchmen.
In 1983, the Argentine generals attempted a similarly blatant "self-amnesty," later nullified by the Congress and courts of a democratic Argentina.


Guardian Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Barringer Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Music; Interpretations of Bach, One Orthodox, One Not
How quaint the ponderous arguments that once surrounded the "authenticity" movement now seem!
As two performances of Bach's B-minor Mass showed this week, theories about performance practice will always be less important than the practice of performance.
It was irrelevant whether original instruments were used or not, whether ensembles were small or large, whether Bach would have liked such performances or not.
Nothing could have been predicted about the results, and nothing about the results was consistent, other than the presence in each performance of individual moments of musical insight.
On one end of the scale was the Bach Ensemble, directed by Joshua Rifkin at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin on Monday night; on the other was the Musica Sacra chorus and orchestra conducted by Richard Westenburg in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night.


Japanese Consortium Backs Motorola on Satellite Phones
Motorola's ambitious plan to provide a global satellite-based telephone service got a crucial endorsement today when an upstart Japanese telephone company with some powerful backers announced that it was organizing a consortium to invest in the project.
The consortium is being formed by the DDI Corporation, a long-distance telephone company that is Japan's equivalent of the MCI Corporation.
Other participants in the consortium will include the Sony Corporation, the Kyocera Corporation and the Mitsubishi Corporation, all of which are also investors in DDI.


No Headline
"I cut trees for a living, just like my father and my grandfather did before me. I like to think that some of the trees that started life when my grandfather was cutting are old growth today. Mr. President, you are going to be old growth some day, too." -- BUZZ EADES, a logger from Redding, Calif.  [ 6:6. ]


Furr's/Bishop's Inc. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Classical Music in Review
Music of Hector Campos Parsi  Musica da Camera  Merkin Concert Hall
Hector Campos Parsi, a Puerto Rican composer, has been writing music in many mediums for nearly 50 years.
Active on national arts councils, he has crafted a language divided evenly between classical and popular traditions.
On Sunday afternoon, Musica da Camera presented a wide selection of his songs for voice and piano, including the extended song sequence "El Libro de Matilde," based on poetry of Matilde Albert.


Final Four: It's Prime Time, Bay-Bee!
ALARM CLOCK TIME While the Final Four starts at the appropriate time of 5:42 P.M. today and should end by 10 P.M., CBS is unconscionably starting Monday's title game at 9:22 P.M.
Presumably, the network wants us to receive two "Evening Shade" reruns, and neither is the one with a topless Charles Durning.
The start time is 40 minutes later than the already too-late World Series schedule on CBS.
Maybe things will be better when David Letterman is around next season.
JUST FOR FUN, MAKE BELIEVE YOU'RE BRENT MUSBURGER Turn down the sound at game time tonight, do your tortoise-shell glasses and proclaim, as Brent once did, so often: "You are looking LIVE at the Louisiana Superdome..."


Pregnant Woman Found Slain at Home
A Long Island woman who was eight months pregnant was found shot to death in a chair in her living room yesterday morning, the Nassau County police said.
The police described the killing as a mystery last night, saying they had no suspects, no motive, no sign of forced entry at the house in Elmont and no indication of a robbery.


American Greetings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Review/Television; James Earl Ray Speaks Of King's Assassination
The high point -- which is not nosebleed high -- of "Guilt or Innocence: The Trial of James Earl Ray" is the appearance of Mr.
Ray, who has spent the last 24 years in jail for murdering the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mr.
Ray, a career criminal who pleaded guilty and took a 99-year sentence to avoid the electric chair, proclaimed his innocence up until the plea bargain and has been proclaiming it ever since.
Speaking from his Nashville prison, Mr.
Ray attributes his guilty plea to "coercion and misrepresentation" and attributes the circumstantial evidence against him to one Raoul, who he says lured him into being the fall guy in Dr.
King's assassination.
Mr.
Ray appears on screen frequently, auditing the courtroom proceedings via satellite with no noticeable reactions.


'Glass Ceiling' Chief Named
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich has appointed Joyce D. Miller executive director of the Glass Ceiling Commission, a group created by the Civil Rights Act of 1991 to study barriers that women and minorities face in advancing to senior positions in large companies.
Ms.
Miller, a vice president of the Amalgamated Textile Workers Union and of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and national president of the Coalition of Labor Union Women, was appointed late Wednesday.
She was the first woman elected to the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council.


Banyan Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Murdoch Tells of $350,000 Weekly Deficits at The Post
Rupert Murdoch said yesterday that the problems of The New York Post were far worse than he suspected when he took over last Monday, with weekly deficits running to $350,000, not $250,000, and filthy premises, broken photocopiers and shortages of everything from newsprint and ink to reporters' notebooks.
But he said he had temporarily brought in financial and managerial experts from his communications company to restore order at the bankrupt newspaper and planned to open negotiations with newspaper unions next week to write new contracts for The Post's 700 employees, who have not had raises in seven years.


Billups Pleads Innocent
Former Cincinnati Bengals defensive back LEWIS BILLUPS pleaded not guilty yesterday to two Federal charges that he made telephone calls threatening REX CHAPMAN of the Washington Bullets.


New Echoes on an Old Battlefield
Jack Sinn and thousands of New Jerseyans like him may be living evidence of the new politics of gun control, not just here but across the country.
Mr.
Sinn, a Republican since the days of Franklin D. Roosevelt's third term 50 years ago, was so upset with his party for fighting the state's ban on assault weapons that he stopped off at the Brielle Borough Hall on his way to work and changed his voter registration to Democrat.


NATO Agrees to Enforce Flight Ban Over Bosnia Ordered by U.N.
Approving its first military operation over the territory of a nonmember, NATO agreed today to enforce a United Nations-ordered no-flight zone over Bosnia and Herzegovina.
American, British, French and Dutch warplanes are expected to be patrolling the area by mid-April.
The decision came two days after the United Nations Security Council authorized NATO to shoot down planes and helicopters ignoring the no-flight order it issued in October.
United Nations observers say the ban has been violated about 500 times, though only one combat mission, by a Serbian plane, has been reported.


We Can't Replace Lab Animals With People
To the Editor:
"Many Say Lab-Animal Tests Fail to Measure Human Risk" (front page, March 23), your attack on animal testing for human cancer risks, offers no alternative for evaluating these risks, but implies that human data are preferable.
But human beings, probably thousands of them, would die of cancer to obtain such data, hardly a way to win the war on cancer and prevent the disease.
The human experiment would take decades, involving thousands of volunteers.
Without a control there would be no way to know whether the resulting tumors were caused by the test substance or something else.
Unreliable data and dead people would be the only result.
Hitler ran a few such experiments.


Accused Officer to Help New York Police-Corruption Inquiry
Michael Dowd, the police officer whose arrest led to a widespread examination of police corruption in New York City, has agreed to cooperate with the commission conducting the investigation, the official who is leading the inquiry said yesterday.
The agreement between Mr.
Dowd and the Mollen Commission, created by Mayor David N. Dinkins to investigate the breadth of departmental corruption, is considered vital to the commission's work.


Classical Music in Review
Brodsky Quartet  Weill Recital Hall
Frank Bridge's "Three Idylls" came 13 years after the Debussy String Quartet of 1893, and whether Bridge copies Debussy's techniques or simply shares in his world, both works occupy the same muted and autumnal territory.
On the other hand, the darkly pastoral quality of the first idyll, the little valse triste that comprises the second and the finale with its busier pace and shifting meters have a directness and intimacy that the quartet withholds.


IGI Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Eye Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Voice Is Friendly, the Job Hectic
THE line of scrimmage in the contest among the huge mutual fund groups is here on the 10th floor of the T. Rowe Price Associates headquarters.
On a blocklong expanse of gray carpet, amid buff partitions and soothing off-white walls, more than 300 young phone representatives strive to give this $28 billion mutual fund group a friendly, trustworthy voice.
The handling of these calls makes all the difference.
Investors might forgive a fund manager a lousy quarter, but a muffed transfer or a snide crack they will remember.


Spring's Centerpiece Comes to Midtown's


Big Selloffs in Stock and Bond Markets; Tobacco Shares Pull Others Down; Dow Loses 68.63
The stock market fell sharply yesterday, pulled down by plunging tobacco shares and rising interest rates.
Heavy selling in cable television stocks also put pressure on prices.


Yes, Study Dumping
Shortly before leaving office, the Bush Administration ordered a study to determine the impact of U.S. laws that provide for retaliation against unfair trade practices.
Now the Clinton Administration is moving to hold up the inquiry, inviting suspicion that Mr.
Clinton is caving in to protectionist pressures.
Under the laws, retaliatory tariffs are imposed against goods that are dumped -- sold in the U.S. below the exporter's cost of production -- or subsidized by foreign governments.
Such retaliation can be proper.
America, for example, was right to threaten retaliation when Europeans unjustifiably subsidized the production of soybeans, blocking U.S. sales abroad.


New Jersey Steel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Not Man of Hour or Minutes
As Greg Anthony returned from his five-game suspension tonight, questions still remained regarding the Knick point guard.
How quickly would Coach Pat Riley return Anthony to the rotation?
How much would the controversy and criticism that followed Anthony's suspension affect his play?
How much would Anthony be hampered by his still-tender sprained right ankle?
And would Anthony ever be able to repair the damage that last week's brawl in Phoenix did to his reputation?


Jacor Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sudanese Government Wars With Populace
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Sudan Is Described as Trying to Placate the West" (news article, March 26), describing the crisis in the Sudan and that Government's efforts at spin control.
You mention the millions of southern Sudanese who have been forced from their lands.
This is a conscious policy.
The Arab Government's fervor for "ethnic cleansing" has been increased by a desire to tap huge reserves of medium-grade crude oil atop which Sudan's African population lives. (After last year's offensive in the south, and technical help from Iraq, Sudan soon expects to become a member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.)


Clinton Under Crossfire At Logging Conference
President Clinton and nearly a third of his Cabinet huddled around a wooden table here today to hear about old trees, diminishing salmon and a logger named Buzz.
The President's one-day forest conference, intended to solve an extraordinary regional conflict that has drawn the highest levels of government into its fray, left an impression that the public forests of the Pacific Northwest will not be reopened to large-scale logging.
The forest have been off-limits to logging under court injunctions on behalf of rare fish and wildlife species, threatening the jobs of thousands of timber workers.


Haiti's New and Old Rich
A few Sundays ago, I sat over a long lunch in a hillside mansion above Port-au-Prince, looking over the endless mountains and the wide blue bay.
Drinks were served by silent black maids and waiters under trellises in a garden; then we moved indoors for seafood salad, fresh vegetables, fine French wines, sweets.
My host and the other guests were light-skinned Haitians, army officers, business people, professionals of the sort who traditionally have gotten rich in Haiti and recently have gotten even richer.
One did a comic imitation of an arriviste trying to drink from a cup with a saucer and thinking the saucer was used to transfer coffee from the cup to the mouth.
The black servants appeared not to notice the laughter; they remain invisible to the elite.
In the 50's, when I lived in Haiti, a Government minister told me that, with a servant nearby, he could make love and find it no more embarrassing than having a dog or a cat in the room.
This class is unhurt by the United States' embargo.
It earns money off smuggling.
It buys what it needs.
Embargos do not apply to the profitable business of transporting drugs.


Harold's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Another Scuffle; Knicks Win Ugly
The Knicks were neither kinder nor gentler tonight.
However, when tempers became short with the Miami Heat, the Knicks showed enough restraint to avoid another brawl, or another loss.
In a game punctuated by anger on both sides that led to 10 technical fouls, three flagrant fouls and Doc Rivers's ejection, the Knicks rolled to their fifth consecutive victory, 123-107, at Miami Arena.
The Knicks (50-20) reached the 50-victory plateau and remained one game ahead of the Chicago Bulls (49-21) in their race for best record in the Eastern Conference.


Income Opportunity Realty Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31





Home Intensive Care (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
HALLIBURTON CO., Dallas, signed a joint venture with China National Petroleum Corp. to create Halliburton-CNPC Co.
The new company will supply the hydrocarbon exploration and production industry with equipment and services.
MARTIN MARIETTA CORP., Bethesda, Md., purchased General Electric Co.'s aerospace business for $3.05 billion.


Environment One reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Interstate General Co. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accord Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Serb Vote Brings Dismay
The Bosnian Serbs' rejection of the international peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina was greeted with surprise and dismay by diplomats here tonight, and the announcement brought fresh pledges that the United Nations Security Council will move quickly to tighten economic sanctions against the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Government.
"It's not good news, but the Security Council will continue its efforts to pressure the Serbs into signing," said the deputy United States representative, Edward S. Walker.


U.S. Jobless Rate Steady, but Payrolls Fell in March
In a report subject to widely differing interpretations, the Labor Department said today that the number of payroll jobs fell slightly in March and that the nation's unemployment rate remained at 7 percent.
The decline of 22,000 in payroll jobs was greeted initially with disappointment, since a six-digit rise had been expected.
But after closer scrutiny of the figures, which provided the first broad view of the economy's March performance, many analysts were reassured that the economic recovery was still intact.


Sequa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imam Yusuf Shah, 65, Black Muslim Leader
Imam Yusuf Shah, a Black Muslim who helped to lead the Nation of Islam's Harlem mosque for 23 years and directed its Fruit of Islam security force in 20 Eastern states, died in his sleep on Wednesday at his home in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 65.
He had heart disease, his family said.


Care Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


New TV Battleground
The unobtrusive cable control box that sits atop many television sets is about to become a new battleground for computer, telephone and cable companies, and new alliances are emerging.
Microsoft, Intel and General Instruments are expected to announce that they are jointly developing a device that combines the cable converter and a personal computer.
Business Day, page 43.


W. Rice Brewster, 94, A Corporate Lawyer
W.
Rice Brewster, a New York lawyer specializing in corporate law and business finance, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 94.
The cause of death was heart failure following a brief illness, his family said.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing  INTERNATIONAL MOTOR SPORTS ASSOCIATION -- Named Kevin O'Brien vice president of marketing and communications.
Baseball  MLB EXECUTIVE COUNCIL -- Suspended Jose Mesa, Cleveland pitcher, and Hal Morris, Cincinnati first baseman, for three games and fined them undisclosed amounts or their parts in a fight on March 30.
American League


Digital Is Leaving Headquarters Building
In a move that even its chief executive termed surprising, the Digital Equipment Corporation announced today that it was abandoning the 146-year-old Mill building that has been its headquarters since the day it was founded here on Sept. 4, 1957.
Robert B. Palmer, Digital's president and chief executive, said that the decision to leave the 1.1-million-square-foot building, which Digital owns, was part of a continuing effort to cut costs at the beleaguered computer company.
Digital, which has not turned a profit in two years, lost $2.8 billion in the 1992 fiscal year and reported a $74 million loss for its fiscal second quarter ended last December.


Review/Film; The Sting of Revenge on a Rival in Love
"The Crush," a movie that looks like a make-work project for wayward models, tells what happens when a 28-year-old journalist attracts the amorous attentions of a 14-year-old Lolita wannabe.
Darian Forrester, supposedly a brilliant coquette equally at home on Rollerblades or at the grand piano, is played by Alicia Silverstone as if she had learned everything she knows -- not that much -- from Drew Barrymore.
Cary Elwes plays Nick, the journalist, with the help of horn-rims, hair mousse and an accent that wavers unpredictably between British and Brooklynese.
Mr.
Elwes behaves completely impassively except in those scenes that cause his character to sweat.
There are few such moments to be found since the film, written and directed by Alan Shapiro, never succeeds in becoming either torrid or scary.
It does generate a few chuckles in its depiction of what are supposedly the workings of a chic and hard-hitting magazine.


A Reminder


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Successful Soldering Requires Practice
Plastic plumbing pipe and high-strength adhesives like epoxy have reduced the need for soldering, but knowing the technique can still be useful.
Soldering is the strongest method of joining copper pipe, and it is often the best way to join sheet metal and secure electrical connections.
Soldering requires practice, but successful results are often possible on the first try.
In soldering the pieces to be joined are heated until hot enough to melt an additional metallic compound, solder, which, when it flows between them, acts as glue.
The process differs from welding, in which the pieces being joined are heated until they melt and flow together.


Kids of the 90's: A Bolder Breed
GEORGE COHEN, a human-relations specialist in the White Plains, N.Y., School District, calls it the "Bart Simpson syndrome."
Among the secondary-school students in the classrooms where he works, "you're supposed to be irreverent, confrontational, rebellious," Mr.
Cohen said.
Given an assignment, "there's a disbelief that somehow they're going to be held accountable for getting it in on time," he continued.
"It's that attitude that drives a lot of us nuts."


Prescriptions and Time Running Out For Many Independent Pharmacies
Like the mom-and-pop grocery, the village bookshop and the neighborhood hardware store, small independent pharmacies are under siege.
But unlike the pressure on other retailers, competition from large chains is only part of the problem.
Pharmacists say they are also victims of big insurers' prescription-payment systems, which they say force them to accept unfair rates and to sell drugs at little or no profit.
In addition, drugstores in New York State face increased competition from pharmacies owned by doctors, which other pharmacists say have an unfair advantage in obtaining customers.


A Loss Pushes Anand To Hone His Defense
AFTER the 23-year-old Indian star Viswanathan Anand, playing his favorite defense, was solidly beaten by Aleksandr Belyavsky of Ukraine in the second round of the Linares International Tournament in Spain, he didn't chuck the defense out of his repertory in a fit of pique.
If he brooded, it was productive, especially when he used the same opening at his next opportunity, in Round 5 on March 1, to defeat Boris Gelfand of Belarus.
In the short interim, Anand had hit upon the inspiration to sacrifice a knight as early as move 9 to create a deadly attack.


For Morales, Fame Proves Unsinkable
The best amateur athletes might be famous in the rest of the world, but in the United States they usually get less attention than a utility infielder.
Pablo Morales is an exception, and he is not always comfortable with the celebrity.
Morales is the 28-year-old California swimmer who won the men's 100-meter butterfly in the 1992 Barcelona Games.
He did it after coming out of retirement at the last moment, and television showed touching moments of Morales's father watching the race while holding a photo of the swimmer's late mother.


Mardi Welch, T. P. Dickinson
Mrs.
John H. Welch of Mount Kisco, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Martha Hayes Welch, to Townsend Penberthy Dickinson, a son of Mrs.
Townsend B. Dickinson of Surry, Me., and the late Mr.
Dickinson.
A June wedding is planned.


After Years at the Top, There's Something to Prove
In their best years, at the zenith of popularity, just one name or nickname would be needed to set them apart from the best of the rest.
Ripken. Stewart. Dykstra. Bonilla. Strawberry. Boggs.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL
JOE MORGAN A Life in Baseball. By Joe Morgan and David Falkner. Norton, $21.95.


English Blue John
To the Editor: I read with pleasure the article about blue john, "A Blue Stone Is a Local English Affair" (Jan. 17).
While traveling by car from London to Edinburgh in August 1986, a friend and I spent two days in Castleton at a delightful bed and breakfact, Cryer House.
I purchased a handsome round pendant from the shop Harrison &amp; Harrison.
Two pieces of blue john are displayed (one on each side) within a thick silver setting.
One stone has dark purple bands, the other with lighter shades of purple flecked with yellow.
It never fails to elicit admiring comments.


Successful Soldering Requires Practice
Plastic plumbing pipe and high-strength adhesives like epoxy have reduced the need for soldering, but knowing the technique can still be useful.
Soldering is the strongest method of joining copper pipe, and it is often the best way to join sheet metal and secure electrical connections.
Soldering requires practice, but successful results are often possible on the first try.
In soldering the pieces to be joined are heated until hot enough to melt an additional metallic compound, solder, which, when it flows between them, acts as glue.
The process differs from welding, in which the pieces being joined are heated until they melt and flow together.


Six Screens, With Melted Butter
Philip Thomas lives in Newark, and now he can walk to the movies.
"I'm ecstatic," he said today, clutching a tub of popcorn on his way to see the comedy "CB4" at the new Loews Metroplex on Springfield Avenue.


In the Region: Westchester; As Condos Fade, Rentals Move Into Gap
IF the 80's could be called "the decade of the condo, we're now entering the era of rentals," said Paul J. Feiner, Supervisor of the Town of Greenburgh.
With his strong support, the Town Board recently approved an 87-unit rental project, the first to be built in the town in 33 years.
"I hope we're leading the way on this issue for other communities," said Mr.
Feiner.
"Rentals is the ideal housing for our seniors and many other groups whose needs are not now being met."


Vietnam Poet Sings a Song Of Endurance
In South Vietnam before the Communist victory of 1975, Trinh Cong Son sang of the longing for peace in a divided country, the sorrow of war between brothers and the grief of mothers and sweethearts.
He was the voice of the young and the bane of the Government.
The poems that he wrote, set to music and recorded were often banned as "defeatist" by the American-supported Governments, but that only enhanced their popularity among those who felt that Mr.
Son sang what they could not say.
The songs circulated throughout South Vietnam in cassettes, and many a coffee shop was temporarily closed because a policeman happened in before somebody could turn off the stereo.


Streetscapes: The Della Robbia Bar; Does a Far-From-Pristine Remnant Rate Protection?
AT Fiori's, certainly one of the city's noisiest restaurants, the ceramic-tile ceiling's low curves bounce conversation back like news conference microphones.
But in just the place one might expect noisy argument there is none: When the Landmarks Preservation Commission proposed designation for the remains of the Vanderbilt Hotel's 1912 Della Robbia Bar, instead of argument there was only consent from both lessee and owner.
If the remaining portion of the bar is given landmark designation, it would then seem to be only the second landmarking of its kind -- the designation of part of the Oyster Bar in Grand Central Terminal is the other.
This is unusual in a discipline that highly prizes intact examples of architecture.


Disrespect Rules
WHEN Richard Wallman walks the halls of John Marshall High School in Rochester, he never knows what he might see or hear.
There are students who look right through him when he talks.
There are students who use obscenities when they tell him to get lost.
There are students who threaten each other with weapons while he is in within earshot.
Mr.
Wallman, a soft-spoken man, says he expects a little more; after all, he is the principal.
Yet last year he watched in disbelief as one student shot another at the school, evidently over a cassette player.


FOUR FUTURES FOR RUSSIA
Russia is at a painful turning point, facing momentous alternatives but appearing powerless to make a deliberate choice.
Its people stand at the junction of their authoritarian traditions and their novel experiment with political freedom; they hover between a state economy and a free market; they are simultaneously bound together and driven apart by their history and their current striving for a new identity.
Hardly any nation's future is more crucial to global well-being than Russia's and hardly any nation's future is more uncertain.
After decades of gray, predictable Soviet inertia, the land that sprawls some 6,000 miles from Europe to the Pacific rim churns with volatility.
Even tomorrow is a question.
As President Boris Yeltsin and President Clinton were preparing for their summit meeting, scheduled for this weekend, the rising confrontation between Yeltsin and his legislature reached a crescendo.
In the absence of a firm constitutional structure, any outcome seemed possible.


Enough of the Old-Style Summits
After Presidents Clinton and Boris Yeltsin leave Vancouver, it would be a good time to ratchet down the ceremony between American and Russian leaders.
One cannot help but be struck that in atmospherics the Vancouver summit resembles less the low-key sessions Mr.
Clinton recently has had with Western leaders than the media events of the cold war: two leaders flying to a third country at a moment of world drama, the throwaway remarks as they vanish behind closed doors, the TV correspondents filling time outside, the instant assessments.


. . . No Reading, Either
New York magazine celebrates its 25th anniversary with a dinner party at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, March 30.


Krzyzewski And the Greeks
To the Sports Editor:
Coach Mike Krzyzewski was right on target ("No Longer Champs, but Still Winners," The Times, March 28) about college athletics having an important part to play in the education of our young people today: not the winning or the losing, but the pursuit of excellence.
It's an idea that had its beginnings in ancient Greece, and its principles are as important today as they have ever been.
RICHARD CATUSCO Roslyn Heights, L.I.


Mr. and Ms. Smiths: Don't Sell Out
In Frank Capra's 1939 movie classic, Jimmy Stewart, as an idealistic freshman senator, Jefferson Smith, fights for the concerns of ordinary voters against a cynical and corrupt Washington establishment and wins.
Last fall, Americans sent 125 freshmen and freshwomen to Capitol Hill, the most in 44 years, hoping for a real-life remake.
But it's still unclear whether the 1993 version will have a Hollywood ending, especially in the House.
The Democratic leaders there have a tin ear for voter anger, and, as Clifford Krauss reports in today's Times, they want to initiate their party's new members into the hackneyed ways of the old order.


Their Stinky Little Secret
SMART HEARTS IN THE CITY
By Barbara Probst Solomon. 337 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95.


Corrections
The Wall Street column last Sunday about initial public offerings made by computer and software companies misstated the experience of Networth Inc.
The company went public on Nov. 25 at $16 a share; the first trade of that day took place at $28.50.


Call Her Irresponsible?
To the Editor:
Jill Gerston's article about Kaitlin Hopkins, "A 'Soap Actress': Days of Her Life"  [ March 7 ] , filled me with admiration for this person who obviously takes herself seriously as an artist.
It was, however, with disappointment that I read of her visit to the Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, where she requested a song book of old standards and photocopied (illegally, unless she received permission from the copyright owners) "I Get Along Without You Very Well" and "Call Me Irresponsible," thereby cheating Jimmy Van Heusen and the heirs of Sammy Cahn, Hoagy Carmichael and Jane Brown Thompson out of well-deserved royalties.


Perspectives: A Privatized Parking Garage; Cars at Elmhurst Hospital Head for Cover
THE unexpected is the routine in New York City construction.
Take the case of the parking garage for Elmhurst Hospital Center, at Broadway and 41st Avenue in the Elmhurst section of western Queens.
How was a Dallas-based garage builder to know that a rectifier chamber for a Transit Authority transformer lurked below 78th Street -- a portion of which became part of the 40,000-square-foot construction site -- when the company submitted its winning bid to build the garage six years ago?
It didn't, to its sorrow.
The need to relocate that equipment was one of the snags in this long-drawn-out construction effort.
It faltered so badly that a new development team had to be brought in.


Corrections
An article in The New York Times Magazine last Sunday about the actress Emma Thompson rendered the epigraph to E. M. Forster's novel "Howards End" incorrectly.
It was "Only connect," not "Just connect."


Skillful Students Offer Money-Saving Ideas
THE economic turnaround has not yet caught up with many county residents who are still looking for ways to save money rather than spend it.
For those willing to sacrifice prompt delivery of services for substantial savings, programs offered by the Board of Cooperative Educational Services at regional Technical and Occupational Education Centers can pay off.
The centers offer services ranging from automobile and computer repairs to carpentry, floral design, catering and haircuts, performed by high school students, young adults and displaced workers looking for opportunities to try out new vocational skills.
"Our purpose in providing these services is primarily to give our students an opportunity to practice what it is they have learned here, to apply the skills they have been taught here," said Dr.
Joseph S. Schwartzberg, director of occupational education at the Southern Westchester Center for Technical and Occupational Education in Valhalla.


Rule Waiver Called Likely For Murdoch
Federal regulators say they are willing to consider Rupert Murdoch's request for an exemption to rules that would otherwise bar him from buying The New York Post, but they insist that any exemption would be narrowly tailored to that case.
Mr.
Murdoch was forced to sell The Post in 1988 because of a rule at the Federal Communications Commission that bars a company from owning both a television station and a newspaper in the same city.
But the circumstances today are entirely different, and most media experts say that Mr.
Murdoch will probably win approval to own both The Post and WNYW-TV, Channel 5.


Behind the School Battle Lies the City's Identity Crisis
Few people are predisposed to think that as New York City goes so goes the nation.
But in the case of public schools, this largest of school systems, with more than 1 million students, is struggling with issues that have national resonance -- family values, sex education, gay rights and what children should learn in the confines of the classroom.
New York City's current educational cleavage, which follows the school board's recent firing of its chancellor and precedes local school board elections next month, would appear to pit borough against borough.
That may be illusory.
In this electronic age of vox populi, the election serves as a sounding board on school agendas.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
As a university professor deeply involved in student discipline over the last 14 years, I write to underscore some of the points Anne Matthews makes in her article "The Campus Crime Wave" (March 7) and offer a few of my own.
There has been a change in campus crime since the early 80's, and it doubtless has to do with the rise of student-on-student crime.
Alcohol is indeed a factor in 90 percent of the cases.
Raising the drinking age 10 years ago created enormous problems on campus while solving none: breaking the alcohol laws has simply become a more ingrained feature of campus culture.
Matthews is right to observe that today's students are consumers, preferring service to empowerment, but she doesn't say nearly enough about the cost to colleges and universities for such servicing.
Schools that are hiring more security police, only to see them spending half their nights ferrying drunken students to detox wards, have a major problem, especially if they are paying for these services by freezing or cutting expenditures in vital educational areas.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 27 about the Hawaii Tropical Botanical Gardens, in Hilo, referred incorrectly to the gardens' office.
A reader's letter dated March 16 points out that the Old Yellow Church, which housed the office, was destroyed in a fire on Dec. 18, 1988; the office is now in a house next to the site.


Editions of the Passover Tale: This Year in Profusion
Anyone shopping for a Haggadah these days will discover a new diaspora -- one of Passover services that have wandered far afield from the original.
At West Side Judaica in Manhattan, seven display counters overflow with more than 50 versions, running from the traditional, thick with rabbinic commentary, through vegetarian, feminist, pacifist, racial protest and New Age.
The last, the Santa Cruz Haggadah, has a guru in full lotus position, with a third eye and a prayer shawl and the legend, "A Passover Haggadah and Coloring Book for the Evolving Consciousness."


THE FOREIGN POLICY MACHINE
Until we amend the Constitution, we are fighting a losing battle as long as a President enjoys unchecked "the power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment" (Article II, Section 2).
This passage unintentionally fosters cronyism.
A President can enlist his own appointees to act outside the law, then pardon them should an investigation get dangerously close to himself.


Man Guilty of Killing Two in Sudafed Tampering
Joseph Meling, who was accused of lacing Sudafed capsules with cyanide to kill his wife and collect her $700,000 insurance policy, was found guilty on Friday of murdering two people.
The two victims died in 1991 after buying the tainted capsules in local stores, but Mr.
Meling's wife, Jennifer, survived taking the capsule and testified on his behalf.


Clinton the Conservationist Thinks Twice
For reasons that nobody in the White House can fully explain, President Clinton has trouble with trees.
When Mr.
Clinton was a young governor in Arkansas in the late 1970's, his proposal to end clear-cutting in the state's forests attracted such disdain it contributed to his only defeat for re-election.
Last week, on the way to a forest conference to help decide the fate of the last great stands of timber in the Pacific Northwest, Mr.
Clinton stumbled again.
Days before arriving for the meeting in Portland, Ore., the White House announced that the President had cut a deal with Western Democratic senators.
The compromise with the senators, who had threatened to oppose Mr.
Clinton's budget, derailed a bid to roll back destructive land-use practices in the West that had been subsidized for a century by the Government.


MARCH 28 - APRIL 3: New Medical Study; Estimating Rates Of Sexual Disease
Back in 1938, when Congress passed legislation to fight venereal disease, it was gonorrhea and syphilis that people worried about.
In the late 1970's and early 1980's, these curable bacterial infections were joined in the public consciousness by genital herpes, a viral infection that can be controlled but may recur.
But there are only patchwork reporting requirements for herpes and other viral diseases.
So the statistics have been sketchy at best.
But a new report by the Alan Guttmacher Institute concluded, after a review of Federal data and medical literature, that it is reasonable to estimate that one American in five carries a sexually transmitted virus.
The most prevalent include herpes and human papilloma virus, which causes warts.
Researchers have identified 50 infections or syndromes that are sexually transmitted; the incidence of some, like syphilis, rose steadily in the late 1980's, and four million cases of chlamydia, a bacterial infection, have been diagnosed annually since 1985.


Music du Jour
IN my nine years as a restaurant reviewer, logging something like 3,500 meals, I could qualify as a Ph.D. candidate on dining room music.
I have unwittingly memorized the scores to a dozen Broadway musicals, heard "Unforgettable" more than is emotionally prudent and could, on very short notice, fill in for one of the Gipsy Kings.
Sitting in dining rooms for so long, one realizes that restaurant music to a large degree echoes whatever pop culture blip is exploding at any given moment.


Home Movies
SATURDAY NIGHT MAY never be the same.
Watching movies at home is now more popular than going out to movie theaters, a recent survey by the Electronic Industries Association found.
And with a growing library of videodisks that includes cultural events as well as films, viewers have at least 7,000 more reasons for staying in.
The best news is, you don't have to spend a fortune -- or surrender the entire living room to media equipment -- to set up a home theater with many of the visual and sonic advantages of the local Cineplex.


Making a Business of Others' Paperwork
When it comes to filing medical claims, who has not been frustrated, if indeed not infuriated, by the paperwork?
"Now, under new Federal rules, doctors are required to fill out even more forms for insurance companies and Government agencies," said Stephen J. Rodgers, whose company, Benefits Management Services, acts as an intermediary among doctors, patients, the Federal and state governments and insurance companies.
"The amount of paperwork is so overwhelming and the forms have gotten so complicated that some doctors are inclined to cut back on taking new patients or consider retiring early."


Profile/Mitchell E. Kertzman; A Company Founder Who Bet His Ranch
IN 1988, after nearly 15 years in business, Mitchell E. Kertzman came to a conclusion that strikes fear into the hearts of many small-business people.
His company was going nowhere fast in a rapidly changing industry.
While the manufacturing software company, with $18 million in sales, was still marginally profitable, it was a small player in a large market, and Mr.
Kertzman saw no way to gain market share without making some dramatic moves.
Unlike many executives, who would be frozen with uncertainty and doubt, Mr.
Kertzman decided to bet his company on a new and untested technology -- to "either succeed or go down in flames," as he puts it.
He hired a software designer, David Litwack, with an idea for a new software tool for the corporate computing market.
Huddled with six programmers in a single room near the company kitchen, Mr.
Litwack set to work creating the new product, called Powerbuilder.


Great Homes Series Offers Premiere
Apart from musical performances associated with church or synagogue, the conjunction of the Easter and Passover holidays severely curtails concert activity this week.
Today's schedule, however, has some enticements, beginning at 2 P.M. when the pianist Mordechai Shehori joins the Bronx Arts Ensemble in a program including works by Handel, Mendelssohn, Chopin and Liszt.
Also on the program is the world premiere of "Variations on a Sephardic Melody" by the Bronx-born Gerald Cohen.
The concert, one of the ensemble's Chamber Music in Great Homes presentations, will take place at 4560 Delafield Avenue in Riverdale.
The number to call for reservations is (718) 601-7399.


When a Careful Hand With Eggs Yields Intricate Folk-Art Designs
DOROTHY DISCKO of Darien attracts a lot of attention at the supermarket as she painstakingly goes through carton after carton of eggs to make sure the ones she purchases are smooth and shapely.
She is not buying them to eat, but to use as an art material, the basis for pysanky, the Easter eggs decorated with designs and symbols that have been traditional in Ukraine since pagan times.
No matter that Miss Discko is of Czech and Russian rather than Ukrainian descent.
Practitioners of the folk art reach well beyond the Ukrainian community.
"It is really an Eastern European tradition," she said of the decorated eggs achieved by a sequence of waxing and dyeing.
She said that an aunt had taught her the technique when she was a child.


Over 250 Fugitive Moments, Frozen in Time
An event of cardinal importance in the museum world was the opening just over a week ago of "The Waking Dream: Photography's First Century" at the Metropolitan Museum.
This is the debut under its own flag of the museum's newly formed department of photography, and it deals on the grand scale with a period of some 50 or 60 years in the second two-thirds of the 19th century during which the possibilities of human perception were extended beyond all expectation.
The more than 250 photographs in the show are lent from the collection -- initiated nearly 20 years ago -- of the Gilman Paper Company in Manhattan.
The brainchild of Howard Gilman, the present head of the company, the collection was formed with the co operation of Pierre Apraxine, its curator.
It bears at every point the mark of an original, resourceful and unprejudiced curiosity.


Angela T. Bianco, Scott W. Smilen
Dr.
Angela Teresa Bianco, a chief resident, and Dr.
Scott Walter Smilen, an attending physician, both in obstetrics and gynecology at New York University Medical Center, were married last evening in Roslyn, L.I.
The Rev.
Joyce Fuchs-Gioia, a multidenominational minister, officiated at the Roslyn Country Club.


A Little Airline Gets a Boost
Last week Federico F. Pena, the new Secretary of Transportation, acted to protect a small upstart carrier, Reno Air, against competition from a giant, Northwest Airlines.
It was an action full of paradox -- a use of government intervention to recover a lost goal of airline deregulation, allowing new carriers to spring up among the old dominant carriers.


Page Evans, Robert Schwartz
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Beverley Evans Jr. of Wilmington, Del., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Page Evans, to Robert Crandall Schwartz, a son of Karl Schwartz 3d of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Katherine Myers Schwartz.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Evans, 26, is known as Page.
She is a freelance writer.
She graduated from American University and is pursuing a master's degree in liberal studies at Georgetown University.


SURFACING
WEDDINGS --
Bachelors at the Baths:
The Russian Baths in the East Village of Manhattan have become the latest venue for bachelor parties.
Participants sweat copiously and are drenched with frigid water, coated with Dead Sea salt and plied with iced vodka.
NOVELTIES --
Royal Trading Cards:
Trade 'em, hoard 'em.
Liz Smith wrote the bios for all the players -- the Queen Mother, Diana, Charles, Fergie, Andrew et al.
Best bits: "Dianacdotes" and "Scandals." DEBT --
System breakdowns:
Seymour Durst's Debt Clock is broken.
Though Mr.
Durst said he doubted that Congress had anything to do with it, the timing was rather odd, given a Treasury official's estimate that the Government won't have enough cash to pay bills due Wednesday.


Ellen Barkin: Is She Difficult Or Just Straight Outta Queens?
Ellen Barkin bites into a strawberry and takes a sip of decaf.
Slowly, her face crinkles up into her signature lopsided squint-grin.
"Just look at this body," she says, at once amused and exasperated.
She is pointing to herself.
Esthetically speaking, it is a pleasing body, as those who have seen her sexual duels in "The Big Easy," "Sea of Love" or "Switch" will vividly recall.
And from the perspective of a visitor roughly her age (still under 40 and, says Ms. Barkin, we'll just leave it at that), it is downright enviable: slender and full and taut in all the right places.
So?


8 Torahs Stolen Over a Half-Year Period
Eight Torahs, the hand-inscribed scrolls that stand as the Tree of Knowledge for Jews and are considered sacred second only to human life, have been stolen from synagogues in Manhattan in the last six months.
And Jewish leaders are worried that the recent thefts might be the start of a new crime wave, like the one 12 years ago in which more than 200 Torahs were stolen across the nation.


Eve Michel and Alfred Milanese
Eve Musette Michel, the director of design for the New York City Economic Development Corporation, was married yesterday to Alfred Charles Louis Milanese, who heads the New York retail and distribution operation for Martin's Handmade Pennsylvania Dutch Pretzels.
The Rev.
Michael Donahue performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis Xavier Church in New York.
Ms.
Michel, 37, is an architect.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from Washington University and received a master's degree in international management from the School for International Training.
She is a daughter of Mary Elizabeth and Henry Michel of New York.
Her father is the chairman of Parsons Brinckerhoff Inc., an engineering consulting company in New York.
Her mother, who is retired, was a social worker at New York Hospital.


Miss Kaufmann, Basil Battaglia
Sandra Kaufmann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl B. Kaufmann of Chadds Ford, Pa., was married yesterday to Basil R. Battaglia, a son of the late Bruno and Carmella Battaglia of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Allan Hohlt performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral Church of St.
John in Wilmington.
Mrs.
Battaglia is an associate with the Wilmington, Del., law firm of Potter Anderson &amp; Corroon and an assistant general counsel of the state Republican Party.
She graduated from Vassar College and Villanova Law School and was formerly the New Castle County Attorney in Delaware.
Her father is a retired executive of the Du Pont Company, and her mother, also retired, was the principal of the upper division of the Tatnall School in Wilmington.


Amy Hoyt, J. A. Backstrom Jr.
Amy McAllister Hoyt, the marketing administrator for the Philadelphia law firm of Rawle &amp; Henderson, was married yesterday to James Arthur Backstrom Jr., a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of North &amp; Vaira.
The Rev.
Edwin R. Green officiated at the Wayne (Pa.) United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Backstrom, 35, graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Hoyt Jr. of Berwyn, Pa.
Her father is the president of Pay USA Inc., a payroll servicing company in King of Prussia, Pa.


Sybaritic Serenity
WHEN THE TIME COMES TO RECORD the history of design in the 1990's, Bill Blass's Manhattan apartment will be seen as epitomizing the style of the age.
This is an era in which collecting is about connoisseurship rather than conspicuous consumption; in which uncluttered spaces have supplanted ornate decoration, and individual style counts more than the obvious stamp of an interior designer.
It is not surprising that Blass, one of the country's foremost fashion designers, has always had his own cool, yet elegant style.
For him, collecting is a way of life.
"There's nothing as much fun as discovering a wonderful object," Blass says.
"Doing up rooms is my passion."


Recent Sales
Rye, N.Y.  $45,000
360 Westchester Avenue  One bedroom, one-bath, 33-year-old co-op; entry foyer, den, beach rights, outdoor pool, parking space; maintenance $549.
Scarsdale, N.Y.  $220,000
182 Johnson Road  Two-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace. stone patio, playroom, one-car garage; taxes $5,585.
Harrison, N.Y.  $275,000
795 Lake Street  Four-bedroom, three-bath, 84-year-old Colonial; front porch, dining room, fireplace, detached two-car garage; taxes $1,900.
Enfield, Conn.  $149,000
35 Oxford Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old Dutch colonial; vinyl siding, thermopane windows, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,317.
Old Greenwich, Conn.  $700,000
191 Riverside Avenue  7-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 108-year-old colonial; 10ft ceilings with crown moldings, leaded windows, 0.66 acre; taxes $4,808.
Wilton, Conn.  $480,000
53 Branch Brook Road  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; stone work around house, 2-story foyer, 1.8 acres; taxes $5,950.
OTHER AREAS Blairstown, N.J.  $132,000
19 Cedar Lake Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling, wraparound deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,677.
Chester, N.J.  $160,000
40 State Park  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; brick flooring, full basement; taxes $2,695.
Brightwaters, L.I.  $307,000
30 Lawrence Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, 2-car attached garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $8,600.


On the Range in Riverhead:


Longer Drumbeats For Lithium Battery
ONE line that lets you know you're dealing with a revolutionary battery is "Best if used by 2002." It's the first thing that catches one's attention on the plastic bubble pack of a pair of 1.5-volt AA Lithium Energizer brand photo cells now surfacing in the marketplace.
Next year's batch will read "Best if used by 2003." And so on.
A 10-year shelf life is just one of the advances in the lithium AA batteries.
The manufacturer, Eveready Battery Company, claims they are environmentally clean, do not leak and will last three times as long in cameras as alkaline AA batteries.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
113.75
116.55
133.40
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5995
1.6340
1.6260
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2644
1.2444
1.1885
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5205
1.4865
1.7421
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$340.60
$332.25
$340.70
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Voice That Defies De Klerk and Mandela
What white South Africans know best about the Pan Africanist Congress is its blood-curdling slogan -- "One settler, one bullet" -- and its secretive guerrilla brigade, the Azanian People's Liberation Army, which has managed with just a few clumsy terrorist attacks to awaken white nightmares of a race war.
To assuage those white anxieties, President F.W. de Klerk last week dispatched soldiers to set up roadblocks along the border of Transkei, a nominally independent black homeland suspected of providing haven for the guerrillas.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL
IT'S GONE! . . .
NO, WAIT A MINUTE . . .
Talking My Way Into  the Big Leagues at 40.
By Ken Levine.
Villard, $20.


U.N. Panel Calls for More Peacekeepers in Bosnia
Meeting in emergency session today, the Security Council called for more peacekeepers in eastern Bosnia and condemned the Bosnian Serb military for besieging the eastern town of Srebrenica and barring deliveries of aid to the 60,000 civilians stranded there.
But the Council showed no inclination to accept a recommendation by a senior United Nations official that it send in an armed force to take over Srebrenica to save the lives of the residents and refugees who fled to the enclave to escape the advancing Bosnian Serb forces.


A Muse in Uniforms and Armor
The program at Christian Francis Roth's fall fashion show on Tuesday noted that the designer's inspiration was "rich girls," a far cry from his last show, which was all about grunge.
No wonder he now refers to Sloan Lindemann, who has been his business partner and financial backer since February, as his "muse."
Ms.
Lindemann, 25, a law student at New York University, is the daughter of George Lindemann, who, according to Forbes magazine's most recent estimate, has made around $685 million in the cable television and cellular telephone industries.


Data Bank/April 4, 1993


Many Are Working at Making Pleasure Boating a Safe Pastime
To the Editor:
"Boats, and Death, in Florida" (editorial, March 24) on the need to improve boating safety in light of the tragic boating accident in Florida that caused the deaths of two Cleveland Indians baseball players, is on target.
We must ask how we can prevent future losses.
There are more than 17 million boats in our country.
On the rivers, lakes, bays and every other imaginable body of water, boating is a fast-growing recreational activity.


Educators Optimistic On More State Aid
After years of gloom, Long Island educators are hoping that the state's improving financial picture will have positive effects for them.
For the first time since 1990, school districts are not expecting severe budget cutbacks from the state.
The final provisions in the budget for state aid to education had not been finalized by week's end.
But a recent announcement of a surplus of state revenue has generated growing optimism on the Island that this will mean more money for education.


Long? Short? Who Cares?
Trousers solved the problem of skirt lengths among many women attending last week's Seventh Avenue designer fall showings.
Anna Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue (top, far right), wore pantsuits the entire week -- even to evening parties.
The trousers were never in extreme widths.
The women who invest in expensive clothing have bypassed bellbottoms and drain-pipe thin pants.
Some added long flower-printed chiffon scarves.


Don't Rush to Judgment in Trade Center Blast; Damage to Pakistan
To the Editor:
"Suspect in Blast Believed to be in Pakistan" (news article, March 18) creates a false perception of Pakistan's implication in the World Trade Center tragedy.
A few years ago, the State Department listed Pakistan as the country hardest hit by terrorism, a fallout of its dauntless backing of the Afghan resistance to Soviet occupation.


Conversations/Elizabeth A. Taylor; Tourism's Latest Tough Sell: 'Waco, a Wonderful Place to Visit!'
"You could say a hidden advantage to all this is that everybody now knows where Waco, Tex., is," says Elizabeth A. Taylor, the city official in charge of marketing Waco as a tourism and convention destination.
"All this," of course, refers to the bizarre standoff between an armed doomsday cult and hundreds of Federal agents that has played out on the central Texas prairie near here for over a month.
Ms.
Taylor arrived to take over as director of the Waco Convention and Visitors Bureau on Feb. 27 -- exactly one day before a shootout at the cult's compound left at least six people dead and, however unfairly to this city of 100,000 people, left the name "Waco" synonymous with guns, violence and religious fervor run amok.
She was unpacking boxes when the news came on the radio.
Some might see her timing as a monumental case of bad luck, but Ms.
Taylor, 32, has exuberantly assumed her new duties as the challenge of a professional lifetime.


Vile and Intolerable
To the Editor:
D.
M.
Thomas's vile remark ("Much of the humor is gentler, however; particularly delicious is an account of how Irving Berlin 'de-Christs' the major Christian festivals by composing 'Easter Parade' and 'White Christmas' ") in his review of Philip Roth's "Operation Shylock" (March 7) reveals not only his own and Mr.
Roth's crude and tendentious bigotry -- who can add, with surety, Berlin's? -- but also that of The New York Times in allowing it to be printed.
ALEXANDER THEROUX  West Barnstable, Mass.


At A.C.L.U., Free-Speech Balancing Act
Maybe there was a time in the history of the American Civil Liberties Union when the issues it grappled with and the positions it took were straightforward.
But that has not been so for a long time and certainly not this weekend as its members enacted after vigorous debate (always vigorous in the A.C.L.U.) a new policy on sexual harassment.
In essence, the organization rejected complaints that it was ignoring the free speech rights of male workers and agreed that courts should make it easier for women to bring harassment complaints.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Late March auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.0
6.2
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
1.7
0.3
Wednesday
Feb. consumer credit, change, billions
$0.9
$1.0
Thursday
March producer prices, percent change
0.4
0.3
Friday
March consumer prices, percent change
0.3
0.3
Monday: European Community foreign ministers meet to discuss Russia  Thursday: Chain-store sales results released  Friday: Good Friday -- some markets closed


THE QUIZ
As humans turned to agriculture, they converted large tracts of woodland and jungle into farmland and grazing areas.
Soon trees were being harvested for fuel and building materials, and later to produce pulp for paper and other print products.
Most of us, however, know little about the forests and jungles that cover 37 percent of Earth's land surface.
Check your forest knowledge quotient here.
(Answers on Page 12.)
1.
The concept of forest conservation originated in the United States in the early 20th century.
True or False?
2.
In 1944 the United States Forest Service instituted a publicity campaign to prevent forest fires that featured what animal?
3.
Most forest fires are caused by humans.
What is the next-largest cause of forest fires?
4. What is the difference between a surface forest fire and a crown fire?
5. Is it in the interest of conservation to fight all forest fires?
6.
During the growing season, typically spring and summer, the amount of water that evaporates from the leaves of an acre of birch and maple forest per day is (a) 250 gallons; (b) 8,000 gallons; (c) 10,000 gallons.
7. What is a conifer?
8. In what way do deciduous trees benefit by losing their leaves?
9.
The following trees, with the exception of one, belong to the same family.
What is the name of the family and which tree is the exception?
Redwood, cypress, oak, cedar, hemlock.
10.
Which of the following describe the ecological benefits of forests? (a) They absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen into the atmosphere; (b) They prevent soil erosion and subsequent flooding from unchecked runoff of rainwater; (c) Rainwater is filtered in the soil, providing a fresh source of ground water for streams, lakes and wells.
11. Where are tropical rain forests found?
12.
Silviculture is (a) the study of forestry; (b) the study of the effects of forests on human culture; (c) tree farming.
13. Describe the major differences between a jungle and a rain forest.
14.
What estimated percentage of Earth's plant and animal species is found in rain forests? (a) 14 percent; (b) 50 percent; (c) 75 percent.
15.
Match the following trees with the type of forest in which they are found: teak, oak, Douglas fir, cypress; temperate Northern Hemisphere forest, tropical rain forest, temperate deciduous broad-leafed forest, Southern coniferous forest.
16.
Heliotropism is (a) the storing of carbon in a tree; (b) the leaves turning color in the fall; (c) the tendency of trees to bend toward light.
17. What gas is absorbed by trees and released when trees burn?
18.
At the present rate of logging and deforestation of tropical rain forests, scientists estimate the time it will take to destroy these forests to be: (a) 50 years; (b) 100 years; (c) 500 years.
19.
Match the following forests with their locations: Ouachita National Forest, Tongass National Forest, Petrified Forest, Black Forest; Alaska, Arizona, Germany, Arkansas.


Steelers Sign Greene
The Pittsburgh Steelers signed outside linebacker KEVIN GREENE of the Los Angeles Rams as free-agent linebackers moved among those teams and the San Diego Chargers.
As Greene, one of only six linebackers in N.F.L. history with 70 or more career sacks, moved to Pittsburgh, HENRY ROLLING left San Diego for the Rams and Pittsburgh's JERROL WILLIAMS became a Charger.
The Steelers also said they had agreed to a verbal contract with Cleveland Browns quarterback MIKE TOMCZAK. (AP)


Sculpture Garden
To the Editor: Stephen May's piece on Brookgreen Garden was excellent ("Art Against a Green Backdrop," Jan. 31).
It meant much to me since Paul Manship was a St.
Paul resident in his early days and my high school art teacher was a student of his.
He has a half dozen pieces at Brookgreen.
In addition, my good friend Walker Hancock has three or four pieces.
When I am anywhere near Brookgreen, I make it a point to visit.
WARREN E. BURGER Chief Justice of the United States, Retired, Washington, D.C.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  SUMMIT OPENS WITH U.S. OFFER


Torborg's Dreams: Mets Search for a Unifying Theory
Fred Wilpon, the president of the Mets, walked across the organization's training complex in the Florida sunshine last month, his millions of dollars in investments exploding off of mounds and at the plate.
The 1993 season was almost at hand, and the owner's mood was at once optimistic and mordantly mistrustful.
"No industry this big," Wilpon said of baseball, "applies so little real science to its research and development."


Planting With the Birds in Mind
Don't forget the birds this spring as you plant new shrubbery, trees and perennials.
Instead of planting more forsythia and rhododendrons, which do not provide food for birds, plant holly, dogwood, crab apple, rosa rugosa, viburnum, winterberry and bayberry.
"Landscaping for Birds," a free brochure by Nancy Tim, the horticulturist at the Wildlife Conservation Society (formerly the New York Zoological Society), says that birds need a variety of layers: large trees; smaller trees like mountain ash, dogwood and shad blow; a layer of shrubs like blueberry, bayberry and firethorn, and ground covers like bearberry and bunchberry.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Mar. 20  MANHATTAN  East Midtown  $188,700
410 East 57th Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining area, renovated kitchen, east exposure; maintenance $960, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  Gramercy Park  $220,000
60 Gramercy Park North  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $773, 54% tax-deductible (Broker: M.P.R. Group Ltd.)  Greenwich Village  $230,000
One Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar landmark building; 24-hr. doorman, terrace; maintenance $998, 51% tax-deductible (Broker: Ann Weintraub Realty)  Greenwich Village  $770,000
66 Charles Street  2-family attached town house; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, sauna, c/a in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; fireplace in each; 900 sq. ft. of professional space on ground floor, 18- by 49-ft. lot; taxes $6,500 (Brokers: Eychner Associates-Kingman Associates)  Upper East Side  $350,000
20 East 74th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining alcove, balcony, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,403, 44% tax-deductible (Broker: Freda Green &amp; Associates)  BRONX  City Island  $98,000
33 Tier Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. co-op in a cottage; dining area, deck, waterfront and pier, garden; maintenance $440, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Riverdale  $41,000
3240 Riverdale Avenue  (Ambassador)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, parquet floors; maintenance $483, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Kahan &amp; Kahan)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $210,000
205 Warren Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a converted schoolhouse; dining area, 2 lofts, 17-ft. mahogany ceilings, washer/dryer; maintenance $446, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Ditmas Park  $265,000
403 East 19th Street  9-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, one-family detached stucco and brick house; entrance-hall columns, grand foyer, dining room, wraparound porch, 2-car garage, 50.6- by 130-ft. lot; taxes $3,100 (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  Sheepshead Bay  $245,000
2273 East 22d Street  2-family semiattached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining area, 1 bath, new windows, parquet floors in each; finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens  $750,000
85 Ascan Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 2 solariums, finished basement, 2-car garage, 115- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $4,800 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  Kew Gardens Hills  $230,000
137-73 70th Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 25- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND  St.
George  $75,000
10 Bay Street Landing  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse co-op in a converted prewar warehouse; 2-story staircase, Jacuzzi, 195-sq. ft. terrace, harbor view, 2 parking spots; maintenance $1,426, 51% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty)  Tottenville  $116,500
72 Main Street  2-family detached colonial; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath, fireplace in each; 3-car garage, 40- by 209-ft. lot; taxes $1,175 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Wait Till 'The End'
To the Editor:
In reading Ann Hornaday's article, "Documentaries and the Oscars: No Cinderellas at the Ball"  [ March 14 ] , I was shocked to learn that the committee making the initial selection often does not watch the complete film.
It seems to me, on this basis, a masterpiece like "Shoah" would never be nominated.
It's something like the general membership of the academy sitting in judgment of, say, "The Ten Commandments" and deciding that two commandments are enough.


World Markets; Italy's Scandal Scares Investors Away
AS Italy's leaders in Rome confront a corruption scandal of huge proportions that has stripped away all sense of political direction, the outlook for the country's foreign exchange and government bond markets remains bleak.
Over the past week, the lira came perilously close to crossing the psychological barrier of 1,000 to the German mark and traded around 1,600 to the American dollar -- part of an inexorable slide from around 1,100 to the dollar last summer.


Rangers Get Their Assignment: Skate Uphill
Neil Smith looked exhausted.
His eyes were red, his shoulders were sagging and he looked as if he needed the wall to keep his head from falling.
Obviously, he did not play hockey at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, when his Rangers lost to the Islanders, 3-2, in overtime.
But he looked as drained as the players.
That is what this season has done to anyone involved with the Rangers: exhausted them.
"Stunned would be a good word," said Smith, the team's president and general manager, when asked how he felt about this season.
"There are so many words I could use. I think setback is certainly one of them."


Murphy to Rockies
Outfielder DALE MURPHY was released from a minor league contract yesterday by the Philadelphia Phillies, allowing him to join the Colorado Rockies.
Murphy, 37, hit .250 this spring.
He played in only 18 games last year because of knee surgery, hitting .161 with 2 home runs. (AP)


A Day of Concerts and the Dance
MUSICAL performances may be enjoyed almost continually today, starting at 10 in the morning with a Palm Sunday concert of chamber and choral pieces by Schumann, Bach and Noble at South Congregational Church in Hartford (call 249-8627 for details).
At 11:30 A.M., one can enjoy "gourmet food and incomparable music" as the Chamber Music Brunch at Zenny's series ends its season in Storrs.
Warren Lash and the Muir Quartet offer Dvorak's "American" String Quartet paired with the two-cello Quintet of Schubert (429-7510).
Intriguing international fare is being offered at 3 o'clock today at the Yale Center for British Art, as seven young Chinese artists expand the English tonal horizons to encompass instrumental and vocal chamber music of other European as well as American and Chinese composers.
No admission is charged for Center events (432-2850).


The Big Lizard Needs Tender Care
To the Editor:
As a longtime Godzilla fan, I am among those mentioned by Janet Maslin as "excited and alarmed" about the big lizard's impending transfer to Hollywood  [ "Godzilla (Clomp!) Bestrides the Ages," March 14 ] .
So, I'm herein begging the honchos at Tri-Star to use care with my boyhood hero.


Right. Let's Make That 'Once Again, Kudos . . .'
To the Editor:
Regarding "One More Kudo for Bell Atlantic" (Letters, March 21): Pray, what is a
kudo
? Is it related to a
patho
? Kudos please, collective noun, five letters. KAY KUHN  Princeton, N.J., March 21


Marjorie Ziemke, Howard Shoobe
Marjorie Ina Ziemke, a daughter of Marilyn and Sig Ziemke of Livingston, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Howard Alan Shoobe, the son of Dr.
Bernice G. Shoobe and Dr.
Marcus L. Shoobe, both of Albany.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Shoobe, 27, is a product manager for CUC International, a direct-marketing company, in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


West That Is No More Turns Back Land-Use Fees
Except at rodeos and in country music bars, the cowboy hat has become a rare sight in the American West.
The typical Westerner today is an urbanite, usually no more likely to know the difference between an Angus and a Hereford than the average New Yorker.
In the economy of the New West, which is tied more closely to computers than to cattle, the number of ranchers who work public lands in 11 Western states has dropped to about 30,000.
Even in the West, far more people belong to the Sierra Club than to the Cattlemen's Association.


The Good News About Freedom Came Too Late
The nine South Africans who constitute the a cappella singing group Ladysmith Black Mambazo produce a lovely sound.
A sound not unlike that of a circus calliope rolling across the far horizon, the fresh morning sunlight warming its pipes.
Or the sound, maybe, of the zephyr when it passes over empty glass bottles in the grass and suddenly makes them hum and whistle.
Even when the group is articulating forceful sentiments -- and exhorting a black youth who is fleeing the South African police to "hide by day, run at night, fight to live, live to fight" -- it does so with sweet harmonies and gentle rhythms.
The performers, dressed in khaki, function as a kind of Greek chorus in "The Song of Jacob Zulu," the drama by Tug Yourgrau at the Plymouth Theater about apartheid's terrible toll.
As the story follows its fitful course, they offer words of prophecy and wisdom, expressions of sorrow and exultation, just as the citizens of Thebes do in "Oedipus the King." But always in their distinctive musical style -- persistently beguiling, even incantatory at times.
They are not simply the best part of "The Song of Jacob Zulu." They
are
the song. The play itself is an unfortunate scramble of dramatic sharps and flats.


The One Night the 3's Just Wouldn't Go In
Kentucky fired 841 3-point shots this season; its opponents took 416.
Kentucky made 333; its opponents made only 139.
In four tournament games, Kentucky had fired 90 threes; its opponent, 55.
Kentucky made 42; its opponents, 15.
Michigan knew one thing was certain in its tournament semifinal against Kentucky here tonight: the Wildcats would begin and end with the 3-point shot and somebody on the Wolverines had to deny it and keep this game in some sort of order.


A Brooklyn Precinct: Crime Figures Send a Complex Message
His body tense, his hand hovering over his holster, Officer Dennis Gallagher cautiously pushed open the door to a dank apartment house in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
He searched the lobby for the addicts who usually scurry away when he enters, leaving behind crack vials and fearful tenants.
But he found none.
"When community policing started, a lot of people were skeptical," said Officer Gallagher, who now speaks proudly of his alliance with the building's superintendent and others in the neighborhood who have helped him rid the block of drugs.


Where Musicals Find a Home
I was interested in the article "New Jersey, a Home for Musicals" (March 14), about how New Jersey's regional theaters are picking up the slack producing new musicals.
College theaters are also involved in that process.
Last December, I produced and directed "A Wonderful Life," by Sheldon Harnick and Joe Raposo, at Brookdale Community College in Lincroft.
The work, based on the film "It's a Wonderful Life," had been produced in workshop at the Paper Mill Playhouse and in New York City, but Brookdale's production was the tristate premiere of a full-scale presentation.


As Maine Goes, So Goes Collegiate Championship
Jim Montgomery, the senior captain, and Paul Kariya, the willing freshman, complemented one another once more at a crucial time in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's championship hockey game tonight.
With Maine trailing Lake Superior State, 4-2, as the third period began, Montgomery scored three goals, each set up by a perfect pass from Kariya.
Those goals gave the Black Bears the game, 5-4, and the crown that had eluded the six previous Maine teams in the N.C.A.A. tournament.


A Few Proposals on Auto Insurance
To the Editor:
I read with interest "Let Drivers Tailor Auto Insurance . . .  Fairness and Efficiency Are Vital" (Viewpoints, March 21) by Michael Horowitz and Andrew Tobias.
The whole concept of "no fault" relative to auto collisions is flawed in the initial terminology.
The vast majority of people know who is at fault, and a fault system should be reinstituted so that safe drivers can receive compensation from negligent drivers who inflict injury.


Style: Who Needs It?
HERE ARE SOME POPUlar notions about style:
1.
It is inborn and cannot be acquired at any store that specializes in Santa Fe tin, deliberately ill-fitting and faded chintz slipcovers, or any item that might be termed an "accent."


U. of Virginia Considers Wide Ban On Intimate Teacher-Student Ties
The University of Virginia is considering a ban on sexual liaisons between professors and students, which one university administrator called higher education's "dirty little secret."
Several universities in recent years have adopted policies that forbid relationships between faculty members and students in their classes.
But the proposed Virginia rule would go further.
It would bar all relationships -- even "overtures" -- between faculty members and undergraduates.


Tacos, Tequila and Taxes
Willie Nelson's television spots for Taco Bell's new line of steak burritos and tacos may seem fairly cheesy, but they are part of a well-orchestrated promotional campaign that coincides with the release of Mr.
Nelson's "Across the Borderline." The fast-food chain is offering specially priced cassettes with certain purchases; and the Jose Cuervo tequila company, sponsor of the singer's forthcoming concert tour, is giving away "Willie Nelson signature shot glasses" by mail.
Mark Rothbaum, Mr.
Nelson's longtime manager, hopes the marketing effort will benefit both album sales and his client's public image.
"People tend to view anyone with tax problems as sick," he says, alluding to Mr.
Nelson's much-publicized run-in with the Internal Revenue Service two years ago.
"We felt it was important to let America know Willie was corporately attractive -- especially since things between him and the Government are fine now."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
BASEBALL SAVED US
By Ken Mochizuki.
Illustrated by Dom Lee.
Unpaged.
New York: Lee &amp; Low Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Hallelujahs Resound in Easter Concerts
Fierce weather, which interrupted musicians' rehearsal and booking schedules, had little or no effect on the cascade of Easter music programs to be heard around the county this week and next Sunday.
French composers continue to hold a prominent place on church programs, and one movement from a work by Widor -- the Toccata from his Fifth Symphony for Organ -- is beginning to rival the "Hallelujah Chorus" from Handel's "Messiah" for sheer frequency of performance.
Some organists are loath to leave it out because parishioners complain.
Johnette Schuller, organist at the Reformed Church in Bronxville, will be playing the Toccata at two services on Easter Sunday.
"It happens to be a very exciting piece of music," she said.


O's Await Fernandomania and Ripken Redux
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Yankees appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appear on page 2.
Baltimore Orioles
Because of circumstances beyond the Orioles' control, the primary focus on them this spring centered on Fernando Valenzuela and his valiant comeback from the scrap heap of tired and wasted arms.
All the Orioles did was invite Valenzuela to try to win a job, and he did the rest.


TriBeCa
WHAT: TriBeCa.
It's more than a concept, less than an idea, somewhere between a location and a neighborhood.
Commuters know it as the tangle of streets that don't give you any advantage at all in trying to beat the Holland Tunnel traffic.
For most Manhattanites, it's all the streets they thought were in some other borough.
Subway riders emerging at Franklin Street, confronted with street names like Varick and N. (for Nathaniel, not North) Moore, spin in a circle, then head off aimlessly and petition strangers for help.
Some call it home.
It's the right place for those who look down their noses at SoHo as a suburban shopping mall but who are too old to court death on Avenue D.


MARCH 28 - APRIL 3: Bosnia; A Small Start Against War Crimes
By most standards, it was a flawed trial -- just one substantial piece of evidence, a confession by a man with a history of mental disturbance.
But nearly five months after he ran into a Bosnian checkpoint outside Sarajevo, Borislav Herak was sentenced to death for his role in the Serbian "ethnic cleansing" of Muslims.
A shocked courtroom heard him recount cutting Muslim prisoners' throats, machine-gunning Muslim families, raping and killing 10 young Muslim women held captive.
He effectively condemned his partner in the dock, Sretko Damjanovic, 32, who confessed but then recanted, saying he had been beaten.
Unless saved by appeal or reprieve, the two Serbs could become the first soldiers in the Bosnian war to be legally executed.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SCULPTURE EXHIBITION
The Neuberger Museum at the State University of New York at Purchase has assembled the first retrospective exhibition of sculpture by Melvin Edwards, one of the country's most prominent black artists.
The show, on view today through June 27 in the South and Theater Galleries, contains 130 pieces of the abstract metal works for which Mr.
Edwards has acquired a reputation.


Irish Ex-Premier Hopeful for Ulster Accord
Life is not as exciting now for Garret FitzGerald as when he was Prime Minister of Ireland and persuaded Margaret Thatcher to give Dublin an official toehold in Northern Ireland for the first time since Ireland won independence from London in 1922.
Nor is it as vexing as when, as Prime Minister, he had what he described as an "exasperating" meeting in New York with John Cardinal O'Connor at which he failed to persuade the Cardinal to publicly condemn the violence of the outlawed Irish Republican Army.


'Flintstones' Teach Entrepreneurship Too
To the Editor:
As a past devotee of "The Flintstones," I certainly understand the enthusiasm of Thomas Fields-Meyer and Richard L. Meyer in "Bedrock Values" (Op-Ed, March 25) for that often intelligently conceived and immensely popular cartoon series.
However, before they criticize the Federal Communications Commission for questioning the educational value of this enjoyable program (which, incidentally, was modeled after "The Honeymooners," another continuously popular comedy), they should list two additional values to their list of the 15 "lessons we garnered from the Modern Stone-Age Family":


THE LAST DAYS OF CASTRO'S CUBA
Reading Jo Thomas's cover story "The Last Days of Castro's Cuba" (March 14), one wonders who gave the article its title.
Thomas's article describes, in effective and sympathetic detail, the hardships Cubans are undergoing as a result of the Soviet Union's collapse and the United States's recent tightening of its 30-year embargo on the island.
It quotes many Cubans who are fed up with the food shortages and the absence of other necessities.
Through her perceptive conversations with a wide range of Cuban citizens, it provides a useful glimpse of how they are coping during the "Special Period" of pain and sacrifice that began with the Soviets' withdrawal of aid.
But, unless I missed something, nowhere does Thomas say or even imply that these are the last days of Castro's Cuba.


Corrections
A map on March 21 with two articles about Hungary misidentified a river flowing through the town of Tokay (or Tokaj) and the body of water into which it flows to the south.
The river is the Tisza; it flows into the Kiskore Reservoir.


Q and A
Climbing Mount Kilimanjaro
Q.
I'd like to climb Mount Kilimanjaro.
What is the best time of year?
What companies provide guided climbs? -- Michael Clinton, New York, N.Y.


A New Model for Biotechnology
MOST scientist-founders return to their test tubes in short order, but the founders of the Chiron Corporation -- three scientists who left the University of California 12 years ago when their research outgrew the school's labs -- stayed on.
And today the unorthodox biotechnology company is approaching $300 million in annual sales, with the broadest pipeline of upcoming products in the industry
On any list of biotech companies, Chiron, pronounced KI-ron, is a leader in diagnostics, vaccines, drugs for a variety of cancers and diseases and products for eye surgery.
Analysts say Chiron is emerging as a diversified bio-conglomerate that could, in a decade, cover the whole spectrum of health care, much as Merck does today.


A New York State of Mind
New York style bubbles up from the bottom.
It has nothing to do with what designers say.
It crisscrosses cultures and eras.
It combines old clothes and new.
And most of all, it's personal.
It's the way young New York breaks all the rules.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 37 in some copies of The Times Magazine today with an article about baseball misidentifies a stadium.
The stadium shown is the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis, not the Houston Astrodome.


Bungee Jumping
'One scene from the last Judson Welliver Society meeting stayed with me," writes Mary Kate Cary, recollecting the assemblage of former White House speech writers, of which she is one. When that ghostly gathering learned that President Clinton had reviewed a speech on the prompter for the first time only minutes before air time, she notes, Anthony Snow, with whom she served on the Bush staff, exclaimed, "That's bungee jumping!"
As the group chuckled, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. -- a Kennedy adviser and writer, and the coiner of such phrases as "the Imperial Presidency," "the vital center" and "permanent government" -- turned to Tony Dolan, the author of Ronald Reagan's "evil empire" phrase, to ask, "What's bungee jumping?"


Nancy Freilicher and Karl Wunderlich
Dr.
Nancy Ann Freilicher, a daughter of Vivian and Ira Freilicher of East Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Karl Eric Wunderlich, a son of Dr.
Charles Wunderlich of Kirkwood, Mo., and the late Lois Wunderlich.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander performed the ceremony at Harrison House, a conference center in Glen Cove, L.I.
Dr.
Freilicher, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a postdoctoral fellow in clinical psychology at Sheppard Pratt Hospital in Baltimore.
She graduated from Williams College and received her master's and Ph.D. degrees in clinical psychology from the University of Michigan.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Hunton &amp; Williams.


A Summit to Discuss Mere Money
In the years that superpowers reigned supreme, summit meetings were awesome spectacles.
Nations great and small would watch spellbound as two men with the power to pulverize the planet met to impose limits on their rivalry and delineate their empires.
Their every utterance, their every handshake, their every signature had instant and fateful impact on millions of lives, and set billions of dollars in motion.
The summit of Presidents Clinton and Boris Yeltsin is clearly of a different order.
Sure, the hype is still there -- the "Bill and Boris" T-shirts, the entwined American and Russian flags, the miles of television cable strewn through some cavernous convention center.
But giving American money to Russia, no matter how ardently the need is argued, just doesn't have the mind-focusing quality of a nuclear holocaust.


Louisiana Alligator, From Pies to Picante
IT'S a rare kind of swamp critter that doesn't suit the taste of a Cajun cook.
Alligators are no exception.
They have never been as popular or as sociallycorrect as crayfish, shrimp and oysters, which are, after all, smaller and easier to catch.
But alligators have long been eaten in Louisiana's country houses and hunting camps in the coastal marsh lands.
Now they are showing up on the menus of restaurants well outside Cajun country, even a few upscale places that don't pretend to be Cajun.
This is largely because of alligator farming, which has made the meat available all year rather than just during the September hunting season.
There are 119 licensed alligator farms in Louisiana, raising some 250,000 or so alligators and yielding half a million pounds of deboned meat annually. (In the wild, almost a million alligators slither through the state's marsh lands, bayous and canals.)


Kangaroo Island
To the Editor: I am afraid that in describing the many delights of Kangaroo Island in Southern Australia ("An Island's Endearing Menagerie," Feb. 21), your writer might have done a disservice to readers by implying, in discussing guides and four-wheel-drive vehicles, that the tourist environment is more formidable than it really is.
It is true that a substantial portion of the island's roads are unpaved (pea gravel) but they are smooth and easily traversed in a regular car.


A Spa That Plays in a Low Key
SOME spas have programs.
They have ideologies.
They know what their guests ought to become, and so they doggedly push them toward nirvana, even if it means policing every bite of food, every sliver of lemon peel unthinkingly dropped into tea.
They have posters and leaflets and brochures and chirpy enthusiasts who are paid to provide that missing willpower.
Years ago, Safety Harbor was a spa with a mission.
Founded in 1926 by Sholem Baranoff, a man with strong convictions about the value of certain dietary and exercise regimes, it drew people who believed in him, and in the curative powers of the mineral springs under the spa.
Some of his original followers, now in their eighties, still come to the spa, which sits on Old Tampa Bay at the end of the unassuming main street of Safety Harbor, about 20 minutes from Tampa.


Crime Pays For These Teachers
A darkened room.
Gunfire.
A dead body and a body of evidence.
Whom do you call?
The professor -- at least if you're dealing in fiction.
That's Prof.
B.
J.
Rahn of New York City's Hunter College.
Professor Rahn is one of many college professors around the nation who teach crime fiction, but she has taken her love for the genre a step further.
With Prof.
Sharon Villines of the Empire State College branch campus in New York City, she produces a newsletter called "Murder Is Academic: the Teaching and Criticism of Crime Fiction on Campus," aimed at academics and scholars of crime fiction.


Not All Can Walk Again
To the Sports Editor:
Timothy W. Smith wrote how inspiring and heartwarming it was to see Dennis Byrd walking and how he has had a "rapid and remarkable recovery from a broken neck." ("For Byrd, the Plains Are Without Plateaus," The Times, March 12).
I am thrilled that Dennis Byrd is now walking around with a cane, climbing stairs and vowing to jog again by October.
I agree Byrd's quick recovery was due to a combination of many things: the expert care given to him on the football field immediately after the injury; first-rate medical, surgical and rehabilitative care and even the administration of the experimental drug Sygen-1 ganglioside; and maybe a miracle of God.


Hate and Fear in the Gay Debate
To the Editor:
A central misconception in the arguments against gays in the military in "Keep Gays Out" (Op-Ed, March 29) by Bernard E. Trainor and Eric L. Chase is that gay men (unlike straight men!) show no discrimination in expressing sexual attraction.
They say that "with openly gay and heterosexual personnel together, sexual tension would fester 24 hours a day." It takes two to fester.
Are they afraid many straight men will be tempted to dabble?
Don't count on it.


Outer Space
The first time setsuo ito visited the Bridgehampton, L. I., site where his house now stands, the sun was setting over the Atlantic Ocean; when he turned east he could see the moon rising at the same time.
So he bought the knoll and, on weekends over the next few years, camped out in a tiny hunter's shack hunched lopsidedly on the hillside, to get the feel of the light and the land.
Then, combining his love of nature and of the purely abstract, the conceptual artist-turned-designer created his dream house: a multilevel complex that, from above, looks like a spanking new space station afloat in a green galaxy.
That's the romantic side of the story. Reality was more demanding.


Phat City
QUEEN LATIFAH bought a $135 canvas jacket from the Phat Farm on its first day of business last Tuesday.
But the SoHo boutique hardly needed hip-hop credentials: this store of steel trees and street wear was created by Russell Simmons, the rap emperor-millionaire from Queens who began selling clothes, he said, because he dates a lot of models.
No, what the Phat Farm really needed on its first day -- 20 days behind schedule -- was organization (and a touch more attitude).


Sound Reasoning
To the Editor:
Our Godzilla was not nearly as tall as the five-foot one in the bedroom of Ms.
Maslin's "little fan." At about the age of 4, our son began to pester us for a Godzilla that had an arm that moved and exploded forward on the release of a switch.
My wife and I resisted but finally gave in.
Godzilla appeared under the tree on Christmas morning.
It gave our son the occasion for some early philosophizing: shortly after Christmas, we heard him tell a friend that there had to be a Santa Claus because "my Mom would never have given me Godzilla for Christmas." MICHAEL KERLIN Lafayette Hill, Pa.


Focus: California; Can Impact Fees Stunt a Town's Growth?
THERE is no receptionist at the front desk of the Riverside County Planning Department.
A revolving sign assures visitors that "someone will be with you in a few moments." Another says the agency is closed every other Friday.
Just beyond is a cavernous area filled with empty desks.
One of the fastest growing counties in California -- its rate of growth was 10 percent in 1989 and 6.4 percent in 1992 -- Riverside is a typical example of an area that has grown to depend on real estate impact fees to pay for vital services and develop infrastructure.
When times were good, the fees helped municipalities and counties grow by making development pay for its effect on the community, like the need for more or wider roads, sewers, schools, parks, fire protection and other services.


Truly Modern Filibuster: Choreographed Gridlock
On what was supposed to be an off day, the Senate came to work this morning just long enough to certify that it cannot agree to vote on President Clinton's jobs bill, to register a few political accusations and to plot its next battle.
Then it quit until Monday, when most lawmakers who were collared by reporters outside the chamber seemed to think that they would do pretty much the same thing all over again.


Caviar Distributor and 2 Fishermen Charged With Evading Limits on Scarce U.S. Roe
A prominent New Jersey caviar distributor and two Washington State fishermen have been indicted on charges of conspiring to illegally market sturgeon roe, the prized eggs used to make caviar.
Following a trail of falsified documents and high-priced fish eggs, Federal investigators said, they found poaching and mislabeling in a mysterious industry that produces one of the world's most expensive foods.
The indictment, handed down on Friday in Seattle, accuses the fishermen of harvesting 3,200 pounds of sturgeon caviar -- worth at least $2.5 million -- from the Columbia River in Washington State and selling it to the Hansen Caviar Company in Bergenfield, N.J.


On Banning Leg-Hold Traps
Re: "New Jersey's Trappers Are an Endangered Species," Feb. 28:
As the lobbyist of record for New Jersey's 1984 law banning steel-jaw leg-hold traps (and against several failed fur trade attempts to eviscerate the statute), I got from the article the distinct feeling of entering a time warp.
Nearly a decade after the law was passed, arguments that were fully discredited during legislative deliberations were being resurrected.


Wall Street; Ousting Hotshots From the Street
IF "Revenge of the Nerds" had been scripted for Wall Street in the 1990's, it would have cast the math nerds known as "quants" -- quantitative analysts -- as the new masters of the universe.
Down and out would be the kind of deal makers who swaggered in the 1980's -- has-beens who would be quickly written out of the plot.
The thought comes to mind because J. Tomilson Hill, the investment banker widely thought to be the model for Gordon Gekko of the movie "Wall Street," was ousted last week as co-president of Lehman Brothers.


Don't Rush to Judgment in Trade Center Blast
To the Editor:
A ghastly bomb blast shakes a building as big as a city, obviously the work of depraved or fanatical people.
Widespread fright and tension.
Reports of hot pursuit.
Then, in remarkably few days, an arrest, and another, based, reportedly, on impressive detective work.
Soon, indictments.
To announce the arrests and then the indictments, high officials are moved without reluctance before the televisions cameras.
A chief prosecutor and the Mayor of our metropolis tell us how reassured we should be because of the marvelous police work.
And why is the police work marvelous?
Because, obviously, villains, from whom we've heard nothing, have been snared in the nets of justice.
Many of us, perhaps most of us, are indeed comforted.


Laura B. Glazer, David G. Holmes
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Glazer of Chappaqua, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Beth Glazer, to David Gerard Holmes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Holmes of Newark, Del.
Ms.
Glazer, 24, is the director of operations for North River Press, a publishing company in Ossining, N.Y.
She graduated from the University of Delaware.
Her father is a freelance illustrator.
Her mother, Jill Glazer, is the supervisor of casework for the Westchester County Department of Social Services.


First Born, Fast Grown: The Manful Life of Nicholas, 10
A fourth-grade classroom on a forbidding stretch of the South Side was in the middle of multiplication tables when a voice over the intercom ordered Nicholas Whitiker to the principal's office.
Cory and Darnesha and Roy and Delron and the rest of the class fell silent and stared at Nicholas, sitting sober-faced in the back.
"What did I do?" Nicholas thought as he gathered himself to leave.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL
BASEBALL IN THE AFTERNOON Tales From a Bygone Era.
By Robert Smith.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.


Talking: Security; Keeping The Barn Door Shut
FEW people feel safe anymore.
Events of the last few months plus a general climate of random violence that seems as likely to strike in Mamaroneck as in Manhattan have put crime -- or security -- on everyone's agenda.
No wonder condominium, co-op and homeowner association boards and managers are changing the ways they organize and operate their crime-prevention programs.


Successful Soldering Requires Practice
Plastic plumbing pipe and high-strength adhesives like epoxy have reduced the need for soldering, but knowing the technique can still be useful.
Soldering is the strongest method of joining copper pipe, and it is often the best way to join sheet metal and secure electrical connections.
Soldering requires practice, but successful results are often possible on the first try.
In soldering the pieces to be joined are heated until hot enough to melt an additional metallic compound, solder, which, when it flows between them, acts as glue.
The process differs from welding, in which the pieces being joined are heated until they melt and flow together.


After 6 Years, a Family Reaches Broadway
The scenario is familiar.
A group of dedicated actors bands together.
Ego aside and money unconsidered, they form a company for the love of theater and the purpose of ensemble, all the while juggling odd day jobs, parenthood and things like that.
But what sets this one apart from the stock "let's put on a show" story is that it is as much about family as theater.
Or as Maria Radman, who lives in Huntington, puts it, the tale of the Willow Cabin Company involves an intermix of "friends, family and founders." Among them, count Ms.
Radman and her husband, Ken Favre, and Christine Radman, Maria Radman's sister, and her husband, John Bolger of Centerport.


Susan Mazzola, H. M. Rodriguez
Susan Marie Mazzola, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel P. Mazzola of Massapequa, L.I., was married there yesterday to Howard M. Rodriguez, a son of Lucy Torres of Rio Piedras, P.R.
The Rev.
Ronald A. Barry performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the St.
Rose of Lima Church.
Mrs.
Rodriguez, 26, is a social worker at the Jewish Child Care Association of New York, a foster-care and adoption agency in New York.
She graduated from Siena College and received a master's degree in social work from Adelphi University.
Her father is the founder and president of Employer Designed Compensation Systems, an actuarial consulting concern in Wantagh, L.I.
Her mother, Mary Ann Mazzola, is a paralegal for Alfred Lo Schiavo, a law firm in Amityville, L.I.


Manager's Profile; Barry A. Greenfield
Fund: Fidelity Real Estate Investment Portfolio, $450 million in assets (Sponser: Fidelity Investments, Boston)
Born: Feb. 23, 1935; Chicago


On Sunday; Finding Keys To Doorways Of the Mind
ANDREA JARET, a 29-year-old with a mischievous grin and a sense of humor like a new razor blade, spends much of her time examining the past.
She works with people who are losing their grip on reality, men and women of a certain age who often have nothing left but memories.
Ms.
Jaret is a social worker with the Care Network for senior citizens at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
That means she is on a constant quest to make life easier for people who not only suffer from a host of physical ailments but who also more than likely have dementia.


Emilie Mead, Joseph Pryor
Emilie Hoyt Mead, a daughter of Mrs.
Nelson S. Mead of Hobe Sound, Fla., and the late Mr.
Mead, was married yesterday to Joseph William Pryor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel F. Pryor 3d of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
Bishop John Allin, the former Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church in America, performed the ceremony at Christ Memorial Chapel in Hobe Sound.
Mrs.
Pryor graduated from the University of Vermont.
She plans to begin studies in July for a master's degree in museum education at Bank Street College; she is a former program officer for Asia at the World Wildlife Fund in Washington.
Her father was a senior vice president of the Mead Corporation in Dayton, Ohio, which was founded by her paternal grandfather, the late George Houk Mead.


Late-Night Drama Not According to Plan
THE Vanderbilt Knockout Teams, which ended a week ago, featured a series of late-night dramas.
Most involved teams with one sponsor and four or five experienced professionals.
The rules required each player to play at least half each match, so it was common to lose ground in the afternoon, while the sponsor was in action, and for the professionals to surge back at night.
The final, however, broke the pattern.
One team had six experienced players: Howard Weinstein and Peter Nagy; John Sutherlin and Dan Morse, Tom Sanders and Russ Arnold.
They had won nearly all their earlier matches by large margins.
Their opponents were led by Cliff Russell and included five seasoned professionals: Sam Lev, David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen, Bjorn Fallenius and Mats Nilsland.
For most of the week they had won matches with stretch drives, and many thought this would happen again.


A Shortstop and a Dancer No More
Every workday, the noontime horn signals the lunch break, resonating through the sprawling complex of Du Pont's Sabine River Works here in southeast Texas.
Men in hard hats and coveralls emerge from the low, buff-colored, corrugated-metal buildings, which are arrayed against the silo-like distillation units and power stacks.
Smoke billows.
There is a slight smell of something burning.


Kimberly K. Smith and Rick Miller
Mr. and Mrs.
Rush B. Smith of Chestnut Hill, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kimberly Kristen Smith to Charles Frederick Miller, the son of the late Mary Louise H. and Norman H. Miller.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Smith, 25, is a commercial loan representative for the Jefferson Bank in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Roanoke College.
Her father is the president of Plastech Inc., a plastics manufacturer in Warminster, Pa.
Her mother, Patricia Smith, is a lawyer with the Federal Department of Health and Human Services in Philadelphia.


RECORD BRIEF
Curlew: 'A Beautiful Western Saddle'
Cuneiform Rune 50; CD and cassette.


Final 2: Michigan and Carolina, Face to Face
Two games removed from the dream that brought them together, Michigan's Wolverines woke up tonight.
Their indecision replaced by conviction and their passiveness by joy, the Fab Five overcame a 4-point overtime deficit to defeat Kentucky, 81-78, and advance to the championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament for the second consecutive year.


Orsulak's Bat Speaks Volumes
He is the Mets' top bat off the bench.
He is the first choice as a late defensive outfield replacement.
He is the leadoff man if Vince Coleman goes down.
Joe Orsulak, then, is the man without glamour who could wind up having a huge impact on the Mets' fortunes in 1993.


Cards and Phillies Vie for Top in 4-Team Race
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Mets appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appear on page 2.
Chicago Cubs
Starting the season with Ryne Sandberg and Shawon Dunston on the disabled list isn't an ideal way to get into a race.
But then, the Cubs generally don't have an ideal team for a contender.
Forget the party line that they improved themselves by acquiring a collection of good players with the money they didn't use to re-sign Greg Maddux and Andre Dawson.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THRIVING ARTISTS
"They Earn(ed) Their Keep: The Struggles and Successes of American Women Artists" is the title of an exhibition opening on Saturday and remaining through May 30 at the Discovery Museum in Bridgeport.
Rare among the many women-only art shows, it focuses on female artists who have succeeded financially as early as 1841 to the present, managing to overcome prejudices and restraints.
Ellen Emmet Rand, a turn-of-the-century painter whose canvasses reflected her friendship with John Singer Sargent, was a posthumous catalyst for the exhibition.
A collection of her paintings at the Benton Museum of Art on the University of Connecticut campus in Storrs caught the imagination of the Discovery Museum's art curator, Lee Sharf.
Ms.
Sharf developed the financial theme when she learned that Rand earned about $75,000 a year during the Depression, from 1930 to 1939, a sum comparable to $780,000 a year today.


Clear Conscience
To the Editor:
I should like to clarify a point made in Ann Hornaday's article regarding my participation as a member of the documentary awards nomination committee and as the theatrical and home-video distributor of the 1992 nominated documentary "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II."


Character Counts
SCREEN DOORS THAT ONCE BANGED SHUT ON porches in Maine are among the latest arrivals in a new wave of home accessories with weather-beaten beauty.
Admiration for the crackled paint finishes on old kitchen chairs and the lively aniline dyes on the latest reproductions of rugged cupboards has brought what used to be considered Cinderella furniture into the limelight.
Farm tables that have more than served their time -- or at least look as if they have -- are also being reappreciated, snapped up by a generation of urbanites who seem to be pining for a visit to Great-Aunt Fanny's attic.
But instead of trekking out at dawn to antiques fairs in far-flung country fields, enthusiasts of this homespun artistry can meander through the new crop of stylish stores that are selling carefully crafted reproductions as well as vintage pieces -- often at similar prices.


'I Did Not Imagine That I Lived in Truth'
SANTA MONICA, Calif., is the last place on earth I would have expected to find Christa Wolf, the former East Germany's best-known writer.
This place of shallow roots, quick celebrity and Disneyland colors seems the spiritual opposite of the East Berlin where she lived for 30 years.
Plunged into Teutonic shadows for most of her life, Ms.
Wolf now finds herself in the fierce southern California light.
She has taken a year's retreat in a stately apartment hotel on the far shore of the New World -- not quite transient, not quite fixed, an alien with an address.
The building manager, who didn't know that his tenant, the nice Ms.
Wolf, was a writer -- and a prominent former Communist at that -- displayed an autographed photograph of Ronald Reagan on the office wall.
The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities has granted Ms.
Wolf the opportunity to begin a new project: a feminist rewriting of the Medea story, designed to defend a maligned woman from Euripides' charge of infanticide.


Barbara Johnson, Thomas Riley 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin T. Johnson of Radnor, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Warren Johnson to Thomas Anthony Riley 3d, a son of Emily C. Riley of Villanova, Pa., and Mr.
Riley Jr. of Wayne, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Johnson, 26, is the financial-advertising account executive at The Washington Times in Washington.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Maron's Candies, a candy manufacturer, in Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Correction
The Q &amp; A column last Sunday misstated the rule governing security deposits on a rental apartment.
A landlord need not pay interest on deposits in a building with five or fewer rentals.


Blankety-Blank! The Devils Shut Down by Maple Leafs
Just when it looked as if the Devils would play the first scoreless tie in their history, Doug Gilmour scored with 3 minutes 38 seconds left tonight to give Toronto a 1-0 triumph at Maple Leaf Gardens.
Taking Dave Adreychuk's pass from behind the goal, Gilmour jammed the puck past the left skate of Chris Terreri, who played a strong game, making 24 saves, and deserved better.


POSTINGS: Age Will Be Served; The Terra-Cotta Decision
When people get face lifts, it's to make them look younger.
Sometimes, with buildings, it's different.
Take, for instance, the one at the northeast corner of Broadway and 75th Street.
The 15-story apartment house at 215 West 75th has tan brick and some terra-cotta window details, but it's not that much unlike a white brick 1960's apartment building.
Except, that is, for its cornice.


INSIDE
His Dream Is Still Just That
Twenty-five years after the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., his frustrations are reflected in the mood of most black and white Americans.
Page 16.
Senate Brew: Filibuster Lite
The modern filibuster is contrived to give every senator as much quality time on television and as little inconvenience as possible.
Page 28.


Wall Street; Nudged by Bullion, Gold Stocks Sprint Higher
GOLD showed signs of life last week, with the London price of bullion rising $7.40 to $340.10 per ounce.
But that was old news to owners of gold stocks.
Those stocks tend to be much more volatile than the underlying metal, reflecting the fact that when bullion goes up in price, the profits of gold mining companies can go up by a much larger percentage. (The bad news is that profits also decline farther when prices fall.)
Last week the Standard &amp; Poor's index of gold mining stocks reached its highest level since the summer of 1991, and it closed the week up 32 percent from its low in mid-January.
But real gold, the metal, is well below the $390 per ounce it reached in early 1991, or the $360 it fetched last summer.


Computer-to-Go Generation
EVER SINCE the start of the microcomputer revolution, educators and parents have entertained a fantasy ideal of a computer on every child's desk.
But as schools become more technologically savvy, that idea is slowly evolving into a more practical notion of classrooms using a mixture of a few powerful desktop systems and many portable machines.
Some schools, especially at the college level, recommend and in some cases require that students carry portable machines, like laptop or notebook computers.
The Harvard Business School, recognizing that graduates will be increasingly on the go, is among many standardizing on portables.
Supplemental Tools
But even at the elementary-school level, notebook and laptop computers are getting new attention, not necessarily as replacements for desktop systems but as supplemental, mobile tools.


Braves Release Davis
The former Cy Young Award winner MARK DAVIS was cut by the Atlanta Braves yesterday as they got down to the 25-man roster limit.
By dropping the left-hander, Atlanta secured spots on the pitching staff for another former Cy Young Award winner, STEVE BEDROSIAN, and the rookie GREG McMICHAEL.
The Braves are responsible for Davis's $3.25 million salary in 1993. (AP)


Business Diary/March 28 - April 2
COMPANIES


Texas Tech Reaches Final With Ohio State
This was the height of impertinence: Sheryl Swoopes, the 6-foot forward for Texas Tech, hitting a fadeaway follow in the lane over Heidi Gillingham, the 6-10 center for Vanderbilt.
"When it's close at the end, that's when I want to take control," Swoopes said.
"I just wanted to keep attacking."


Montana Deal Predicted
Indications were growing over the weekend that JOE MONTANA could leave the San Francisco 49ers as early as next week, according to a published report.
The Kansas City Chiefs, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the Phoenix Cardinals have inquired about the 36-year-old Montana and are prepared to make offers, according to a report published today in The Santa Rosa Press Democrat.


Flying to Greece
To the Editor: I read with interest the letter from Gail and Art Burton (Letters on Travel, Jan. 10), detailing their experience flying from New York to Greece on Olympic Airways.
I had a similar experience in August 1992.
The departure procedures from the gate were nonexistent.
What went on was unbelievable and hazardous.
Although there were numerous people seated and on line, no semblance of order was maintained once the only announcement of the evening was made, namely, that the flight was available for boarding.
People began shoving and pushing and cutting into line.
To prevent a personal injury, I stepped back and allowed the unruly crowd to surge forward.
The behavior of this crowd was disgraceful and animalistic.
What was even more unsetting was the failure of airline personnel to set standards for an orderly, civilized embarkation.


Empty Houses on West Bank Testify to Israeli Change of Heart
Arranged in neat, slightly curved rows, 68 new houses stand smartly at attention on a desolate hilltop a mile from the heart of this Jewish settlement.
The Orthodox families who are waiting to move in, and are living temporarily in nearby mobile homes, call the area Shevut Rachel -- the Return of Rachel.
It is named after a young Shiloh mother, Rachel Druck, who was killed in a terrorist attack on a bus in 1991.


'McFirm' Needs a Better Focus
To the Editor:
Regarding "The Unorthodox Behemoth of Law Firms" (March 14), there is nothing intrinsically wrong with the "McFirm" model for building a global network of lawyers.
Lawyering ain't hamburgers, but business is business: successful firms consistently meet or exceed the quality expectations of the customer.


Don't Promise the World
OUT OF CONTROL
Global Turmoil on the Eve of the Twenty-First Century.
By Zbigniew Brzezinski. 231 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $21.


The Networks' Best-Laid Plans
The "television program development season" in Hollywood is like nothing so much as spring training in Florida: the sun is always shining, the breeze is full of the promise of summer, and every rookie looks like Willie Mays.
For the television executives who put the ideas of the winter into the pilots of the spring, hoping to turn their rosters into winners in the fall, the most common state of mind is sheer excitement.
At least that's what they always say.
Here is Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment, on the subject of "Sea Quest D.S.V.," a new adventure series being developed by Steven Spielberg:


All Dressed Up With Somewhere to Go


Juvenile Offenders' Salvation Strategy
THE TWO buildings, tan and drab, have that standard institutional look, and their residents all have criminal records for robbery, drug dealing, armed assault or other felony offenses.
But Honor House in Eatonville, Fla., is not a jail, and the 18 teen-agers who live there are not inmates, even though they have been sentenced to serve time.
Honor House offers an alternative to traditional juvenile detention programs, a last chance for teen-age offenders to redeem themselves before the courts begin treating them as adults.
Founded three years ago by Wilbert C. Danner, a criminal justice professor and former probation officer, Honor House operates on the assumption that education, combined with discipline and affection, can transform even the most hardened youths into productive, law-abiding citizens.


To Be Mentally Ill Doesn't Mean Raving
[ The following letter refers to a front-page article April 1 on the guilty plea by Sol Wachtler, former Chief Judge of New York State, to threatening to kidnap the daughter of his former lover.
As part of the plea agreement, Mr.
Wachtler was allowed to include in the court record a psychiatric diagnosis that concluded that Mr.
Wachtler suffered from a form of manic depression known as bipolar disorder.
After the hearing, Michael Chertoff, United States Attorney for New Jersey, insisted that Mr.
Wachtler's behavior not be excused by mental problems.
"This was not a man who was staying home in a bathrobe or going around like a screaming banshee," he said. ] To the Editor:
I am a licensed certified social worker, who has been practicing in mental health for 16 years.
Michael Chertoff's characterization of a manic depressive as someone "staying home in a bathrobe or going around like a screaming banshee" destroys the progress made by the medical-psychiatric community and the entire mental health profession in educating the public about mental illness.


A Gay-Rights President Is at a Loss for Words
Barely five months after homosexuals converged in city streets to celebrate the victory of a Presidential candidate who had aggressively sought their support, some of those revelers are threatening to turn the gay and lesbian march here this month into a demonstration against Bill Clinton.
Their disappointment, even furor, is only aggra vated as a stream of witnesses in Senate hearings picks apart the President's proposal to overturn the ban on homosexuals in the military.
Given signs that Mr.
Clinton is backpedaling, many are citing the ban -- never a front-burner issue for homosexuals -- as the test of whether he will fulfill his commitments to them.


Peru Moves Rebel Leader to a High-Security Cell
Abimael Guzman Reynoso, mastermind of the Shining Path guerrilla movement, was transferred today from a temporary Pacific island prison to a specially constructed underground cell where he is to spend the rest of his life.
Mr.
Guzman, who was sentenced to life in prison on terrorism charges in October, was moved to a windowless prison of reinforced concrete that President Alberto K. Fujimori has described as "an impenetrable jail."


With Europe in Flux, No More Politics as Usual
With public opinion polls showing voters all over Europe fed up with the political leaders and parties that have dominated politics for decades, at first glance the French elections held last weekend seemed to reaffirm the strength of mainstream democratic politics.
On a continent where far-right parties have been making hay out of rising popular frustration over the social and economic problems caused by foreign immigration and turmoil in formerly Communist countries, this was no small comfort.


Voting on The Budget: The Easy Part's Over
So far, the votes in Congress on President Clinton's economic program have been little more than tests of party loyalty.
Democrat ranks held last week, and the House and Senate approved the outline of the President's five-year budget plan without the vote of a single Republican.
Now comes the hard part.


SUMMIT IN VANCOUVER -- Reporter's Notebook; The Well-Coiffed Heads Of the First Tete-a-Tete
It could have been a really bad hair day.
With the summit meeting beginning on a dreary, rainy note, everyone here was on tenterhooks to see how two of the world's most celebrated silvery and unruly manes would fare.


Surprise! Maryland Area Shakes With Quakes
When the ground shuddered and heaved under Jackie Richards's house one night last month, she awoke with a start and thought "someone took dynamite and blew up my front yard."
There was no evidence of that, but the next morning, Miss Richards learned what had happened: a small earthquake had been centered right under her house.


The Heat of the Moment
The nature of Spring food makes this the season of sauteing and steaming.
These techniques flatter the mild flavors of spring chicken, lamb and pork.
They honor delicate fish like shad, which swims inland along the East Coast, brook trout from the heart of the country, as well as herring from Alaska and salmon just beginning their procreative push up the Columbia River.
The signposts of spring are youth -- shoots of wild asparagus and peas the size of seed pearls, all tender and impressionable in the way young things usually are.
The most precious of the season's offerings, like fiddlehead ferns and shad roe, aren't even fully gestated.
Soft-shell crabs are actually between incarnations, having shed one shell, waiting for another.
They, like the rest, cry out for a swift and judicious cooking technique.


Hate and Fear in the Gay Debate
To the Editor:
What Bernard Trainor and Eric Chase are arguing in "Keep Gays Out" (Op-Ed, March 29), is that heterosexuals and homosexuals cannot interrelate closely without its being or becoming sexual.
That is not only trite and absurd, but it also shows an unconscious fear of powerful sexual urges of those who perhaps mistakenly think that they are purely heterosexual.
It's interesting how they project these fears on to homosexuals.
FREDERIC WILE New York, March 29, 1993


'Big, Bad Knicks' Tire Of Reputation as Bullies
The Knicks are tired of their reputation as bullies and with the trouble it brings.
Larger goals, such as winning a championship, matter more to the team than establishing a sinister persona.
But the Knicks must deal with this reality: Opponents often feel challenged to stand up to them whenever they play the Knicks.
Friday night's game in Miami was the latest example, as the Knicks and the Heat combined for 10 technical fouls, 3 flagrant fouls and 65 personal fouls during New York's 123-107 victory.


Danielle Sheft, Leland Deane
May wedding plans have been announced for Danielle Anne Sheft, an assistant vice president of the General Reinsurance Corporation in New York, and Dr.
Leland Marc Deane, a plastic and reconstructive surgeon in Garden City, L.I.
Miss Sheft, 31, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard A. Sheft of Brookville, L.I., and Singer Island, Fla.
Her father is the principal partner in the New York law firm of Sheft &amp; Sheft.
Her mother, Monique E. Sheft, is a principal in Sheft &amp; Tandy, a venture-capital firm in Singer Island.


Fitness Way Up in the Sky
THE first thing they did at the spa was convert me into numerical equivalents: Five foot seven, 127 pounds, 20.6 percent body fat, 14.8-inch "back flexibility," 63-pound bench press, 47 stomach curls in one minute and, intriguingly, 35 VO2 MAX ml./kg./min.
I was handed a printout that announced, in what would have been a monotone if the computer had a voice: "NANCY, DORAL TELLURIDE RESORT &amp; SPA is pleased that your overall fitness score is 6.4, which is GOOD." The three-page summary also ordered me to do more aerobic exercises, more stretching and more workouts with free weights or progressive resistance.


Weicker's Capital Program: The Bridgeport Office
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York has gained a reputation as a man who, travel as he may, likes to get home to his own bed in Albany and will undertake strenuous arrangements to make that possible.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut, on the other hand, seems to want to move the capital to wherever he is, an equally strenuous proposition.
Mr.
Weicker opened a satellite governor's office in Bridgeport this week, and said he would be working there as much as three days a week, especially when the Legislature is not in session.
The idea, he said, is to give the state's largest and poorest city more contact with his administration.


Setting Aside Open Space For the Public
AS he has done for the last 35 years, Robert C. Boardman packed away his cross-country skis with the rest of his winter gear late last month and began thinking about a new excuse to trek through Hillside Woods, one of the few undeveloped properties remaining in this densely populated village.
Soon it will be time, the retired naturalist said, to dust off his binoculars and wait for the spring migration of birds to the woodlands and meadows here.
Mr.
Boardman speaks passionately of the many years he has enjoyed the glacial rocks, the early wildflowers and the hiking trails on the 48-acre tract, which has been considered for development.
"I was upset to think we would lose what little open space we had left to us," he said.


Hate and Fear in the Gay Debate
To the Editor:
The stereotype of gays pursuing straights in showers and toilets persists.
Why big, strong, straight soldiers can't say no if solicited is beyond me.
In my 65 years, I have never heard of gays beating up straights or of dragging them off from public toilets.
CARLOS G. MUNOZ New York, March 27, 1993


Shylock and Nazi Propaganda
Shylock has traditionally been one of Shakespeare's most provocative and analyzed characters.
In his new book, "Shylock: A Legend and Its Legacy," to be published this week by Simon &amp; Schuster, John Gross traces the history of the character and the play, "The Merchant of Venice," from their origins to modern times.
In this excerpt, Mr.
Gross, the theater critic of The Sunday Telegraph of London, explores how Shylock was used as a propaganda tool in Nazi Germany.
We have no way of knowing what was in Shakespeare's mind when he began writing "The Merchant of Venice." Even if we had, what he intended and what he accomplished are not necessarily the same thing.
"Never trust the artist, trust the tale." Still, we can take a reasonable guess at his intentions, and we can reasonably assume that they were at least partly fulfilled.


Mother Is Accused Of Scalding Son, 10
A Bronx mother frustrated by her 10-year-old son's performance at school disciplined him by stabbing him in the hand and scalding him with water on the arms and back, the police said yesterday.
The mother, Mariam Sanabria, 31 years old, of 1946 Cruger Avenue in the Pelham Parkway section of the Bronx, was arrested at her home at 8:30 P.M. on Friday after her husband, who is the child's stepfather, came home and found what had happened, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Braves Armed, Dangerous and Ready to Win
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Yankees appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appear on page 2.
Atlanta Braves
A caller to the press box during a Braves exhibition game the other day asked the person on the other end of the telephone if Sid Bream was healthy four weeks after knee surgery.
"He hit a grand slam while you were waiting for me," the club official said.


A Bad Guy Who Finished First
THE LIP
A Biography of Leo Durocher.
By Gerald Eskenazi.
Illustrated. 336 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


After Lost Seasons, Even Blank Slate Looks Good to 3 Teams
The Kansas City Royals did not expect to lose their first 7 games and 16 of their first 17.
The Boston Red Sox did not expect to finish last for the first time since 1932.
The Los Angeles Dodgers did not expect to finish last for the first time since 1905.
A year ago today, these thoughts did not exist even in the most remote crevice of their minds.
"Last year, I thought we would be better," Royals Manager Hal McRae said.
"I thought we had a chance to really improve on our record of the year before. We won 82 the year before, and I said this team is better than that team, so we should win more games."


Jennifer Scruby, A. I. Ryshawy
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Scruby of Orange Park, Fla., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Lorraine Scruby and Alexander Ivan Ryshawy, the son of of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Ryshawy of Morristown, N.J.
Miss Scruby, 26, is an associate beauty editor at Vogue magazine in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Georgetown University, where she received summa cum laude honors and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a lawyer in Orange Park.


Commercial Property: Avenue of the Americas; From Corporate Corridor to Boulevard of Barristers
FOR years, Avenue of the Americas was called the Corporate Corridor.
And for good reason: Street after street of look-alike buildings, headquarters to Exxon, J.C.
Penney, W.R.
Grace and other corporate stalwarts, stretched from the 40's to Central Park, spelled only by an occasional hotel.
But now many of those companies have packed up and moved South.
Others, like McGraw-Hill, have retrenched, creating a space vacuum along Avenue of the Americas/Sixth Avenue that, increasingly, law firms have rushed to fill.
A result is that the Corporate Corridor is rapidly becoming Barrister Boulevard..


Day Later, Islanders Come Up A Goal Short
The energy was gone, expended the night before in Madison Square Garden.
When the Islanders skated onto the Nassau Coliseum ice tonight, they looked tired, they looked flat, they looked as if they needed a night off.
Who could blame them?
Less than 24 hours earlier, they had battled to a huge overtime victory over the Rangers that solidified their bid for a Patrick Division playoff spot.
They didn't have much of anything left over -- energy or enthusiasm.


From Two Great Voices, a New Message
Some of America's great voices are far from perfect.
They're tattered and cracked, leathery and raw; they're seasoned, with scars to prove it.
Willie Nelson and Ray Charles have impure voices, with traces of blues, gospel, jazz, country, Tin Pan Alley and rock; their singing is wayward and stubborn and private, each inflection and silence distilling years of experience.
Charles knocked down barriers between sacred and secular music and between black and white styles, and Nelson breached country music's isolation so that it could speak to the entire world.
They might seem to have nothing to prove, and in their concerts they cling to longtime staples.


YELTSIN TIPTOEING ON SENSITIVE ISSUE
No Russian or Soviet President has ever traveled abroad watching his back quite as anxiously as President Boris N. Yeltsin must in Vancouver.
In his very first comments on arrival here for his summit meeting with President Clinton, Mr.
Yeltsin gave a measure of the danger he faced when he acknowledged that even overly generous Western aid could be a weapon against him in the vicious political struggle back home.


Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight saving time starts and ends.
The day this spring is tomorrow.


It's Impossible to Grow Just One Columbine
There is something about columbines.
The flowers are so beguiling in form, they are sure to please.
Their name was derived from the Latin columba, meaning dovelike, which refers to their shapely form.
What's more, columbines are easy to grow.
Beginners should consider this flower since it will thrive with minimum care and provide generous rewards.
It can even be used as a cutting flower.
The blooming season, which usually begins the early part of May, can extend into early summer.
Another advantage is that the columbine is not exceptionally fussy about its location.
Although the plant will do moderately well in full sun, columbines put their best foot forward when they have some shade during the hottest part of the day.
A bright somewhat shaded nook is even to their liking.


Foreign Affairs; Plotting To Sell Reform
Not so long ago, Boris Yeltsin was Communist Party boss in Sverdlovsk and Bill Clinton was Governor of Arkansas.
Now both country pols have made good: the back-slapping Russian bear and the bear-hugging American.
And now they are binding their fortunes and futures in Vancouver, the Russian plotting to survive and the American to succeed in a place appropriately much closer to Washington than to Moscow -- and at a meeting it is no longer fitting to call a summit.
Both men overcame long odds with perseverance and daring to get to Vancouver.
Each in his own way, each according to his circumstance.


Dishes Making the Most of Asparagus When It's at Its Peak
What better way to begin a meal than with cooked fresh asparagus, dipped in melted butter or a fruity olive oil, and eaten with your fingers?
April and May are the peak months for asparagus, even though (like just about every fruit and vegetable these days), it is available throughout the year.
But the best arrives on the market in the spring -- and the prices plummet.
A spectacular dish for a dinner party is steamed asparagus served on a colorful two-tone sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
Asparagus is also good with pasta, mixed with shrimp and tomatoes to go with fresh linguine, or tossed with wild mushrooms and cream in a sauce for farfalle (bow ties).
The pasta dishes can be served both as first and main courses.


NOTES
The semiotics of lapels is becoming more complicated.
Red and pink ribbons (for AIDS and breast cancer awareness) have paved the way for purple ribbons, which were worn most recently by Denzel Washington and Morgan Freeman on Monday night at the Academy Awards.


A Few Proposals on Auto Insurance
To the Editor:
Mr.
Horowitz's idea of reducing pain and suffering coverage is too simplistic, and Mr.
Tobias's gas tax idea is too regressive.


Katherine Fox, Nicholas Franklin
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald J. Fox of Greenwich, Conn., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Katherine Williams Fox, to Nicholas Samuel Franklin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Franklin of London.
Miss Fox, 24, is the assistant to the director of admissions at the Nightingale-Bamford School, a private school in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Princeton University, where she received cum laude honors and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Miss Fox also is a master's degree candidate in education at Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.


A Certain Style
A chair, if it's the right one, can have it.
So can a room, a house and possibly everything in it.
Even a tree can be said to have it (though that is certainly not the first thing to consider when planting).
Many people go happily through life without a trace of style.
But just as many others are continually pleasured by their ability to create it or appreciate it.


Sound Bytes; Champion of MS-DOS, Admirer of Windows
Brad Chase is general manager for MS-DOS at the Microsoft Corporation, and thus is responsible for the development and marketing of the world's most popular personal computer operating system.
Last week, Microsoft unveiled the latest version of the venerable software, MS-DOS 6.0.
Mr.
Chase's wife, Judy, is product manager for Microsoft Word for Windows, and thus they are one of many "Microsoft couples," although unlike most they did not meet at Microsoft.
The Chases have a 2-year-old son, David, and are expecting their second child in June.


Encyclopedias Go Multimedia
INSTRUCTIONS to "look it up in the encyclopedia" may not send students reaching for a book anymore.
Now they are just as likely to boot up a computer and reach for a CD-ROM disk.
And what they are likely to find is not just words and pictures, but stereo sound, animation, film clips and a spoken pronunciation guide.
What they can do includes looking up related subjects in different volumes by merely pointing at the appropriate word and clicking a mouse button.
Most of the electronic encyclopedias carry names that are familiar in the world of textbook encyclopedias: Compton's (a division of Britannica), Grolier's, Columbia and World Book.
And all are based on the bound volumes and adhere to that format.
The text on the computer is usually identical to the written text; photographs and diagrams are gathered from the same sources.


Defense Lawyer in Bomb Case Slams Mubarak's Disclosures
A lawyer working with the defense team in the World Trade Center bombing case charged yesterday that the disclosure by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt that one of the defendants had provided "a great deal of information about the bombing" was an attempt to prejudice potential jurors, divide the defendants and encourage cooperation with investigators.
The lawyer, William M. Kunstler, said he believed the Egyptian president commented on the case, either at the behest of United States officials or on his own initiative, in an effort to improve already good relations on the eve of his first meeting with President Clinton, whom he will ask for continued financial and military assistance.
May Have Been Tortured
American officials have said that the defendant referred to by President Mubarak, Mahmud Abouhalima, may have been tortured into making statements about the bombing after his arrest in Egypt last month.
Under United States law, statements made under duress can neither be used as evidence in a trial nor as leads to developing evidence.


A Controversial Man in an Eccentric Place
Mention Richard H. Glanton's name to any student or former student at the Barnes Foundation or to anyone connected with the art world or Pennsylvania politics, and you may hear a string of expletives that would make a longshoreman blush.
Mr.
Glanton's tenure as president of the Barnes Foundation, which began in 1990 and runs through 1995, has produced several court cases.
Every day, Barnes students distribute pamphlets outside the foundation's building here, on the Philadelphia Main Line.
The latest is entitled "Grand Scam. How the Trustees Faked It: Renovation Budgets and Other Hoaxes." A billboard on nearby Conshohocken Road accuses the foundation of violating a public trust. (It was paid for by Augustus F. Brown, a retired college professor, who said he was glad to spend $5,500 to educate the public.)


King's Exceptional Play Creates Nets Time Crunch
Bernard King has presented Coach Chuck Daly with a problem.
Given the way King played for the Nets against the two-time defending champion Bulls here Friday night, Daly may be forced to find more minutes for King at the risk of angering some other New Jersey players.
To Daly, it's all about earning minutes.
He goes with the hot hand, and King had one of the Nets' hottest as they lost, 118-105, to the Bulls.
The hottest hand for New Jersey was Derrick Coleman, who took over in the third quarter and finished with a team-leading 30 points, 7 assists, 6 rebounds and 2 blocked shots.


Ms. Kauffman, Stephen Hollowell
May wedding plans have been announced by Dorothy Andrea Kauffman, who is the music department associate and a producer at WQXR-FM, and Stephen Alan Hollowell, the investigations manager at Mount Sinai Medical Center, both in New York.
Ms.
Kauffman, 30, is the host and producer of "Lufthansa's European Connection" and "The Sunday Night Opera House." She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


It's Impossible to Grow Just One Columbine
There is something about columbines.
The flowers are so beguiling in form, they are sure to please.
Their name was derived from the Latin columba, meaning dovelike, which refers to their shapely form.
What's more, columbines are easy to grow.
Beginners should consider this flower since it will thrive with minimum care and provide generous rewards.
It can even be used as a cutting flower.
The blooming season, which usually begins the early part of May, can extend into early summer.
Another advantage is that the columbine is not exceptionally fussy about its location.
Although the plant will do moderately well in full sun, columbines put their best foot forward when they have some shade during the hottest part of the day.
A bright somewhat shaded nook is even to their liking.


Dishes Making the Most of Asparagus When It's at Its Peak
What better way to begin a meal than with cooked fresh asparagus, dipped in melted butter or a fruity olive oil, and eaten with your fingers?
April and May are the peak months for asparagus, even though (like just about every fruit and vegetable these days), it is available throughout the year.
But the best arrives on the market in the spring -- and the prices plummet.
A spectacular dish for a dinner party is steamed asparagus served on a colorful two-tone sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
Asparagus is also good with pasta, mixed with shrimp and tomatoes to go with fresh linguine, or tossed with wild mushrooms and cream in a sauce for farfalle (bow ties).
The pasta dishes can be served both as first and main courses.


Chicano Art: A Lustier Breed of Political Protest
There are two very differment kinds of political art on view in New York these days.
One can be seen at the Whitney Biennial, an exhibition distinguished chiefly by the unrelieved didacticism of its contents.
Installation is the preferred format, as if individual objects were inadequate to the task of conveying ideas, and the topics alluded to -- gender identity, racism and sexual abuse -- are those that have received particularly close attention in the New York art world in recent seasons.
The environmental and consumerist issues so pressing just a few years back are nowhere to be found.


BEST SELLERS: April 4, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
2
2
34
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
6
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
4
1
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two Kansas teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a famous model.
5
6
4
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
6 *
7
2
THE DEVIL'S HEART, by Carmen Carter. (Pocket, $20.) The crew of the U.S.S.
Enterprise in a new "Star Trek" tale of adventure and betrayal.
7
8
7
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905.
8
9
10
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist.
9 *
5
9
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
10
4
4
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state and the human race is approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his fate.
11
10
19
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
12
11
31
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
13 *
14
4
TO GREEN ANGEL TOWER, by Tad Williams. (DAW, $25.) The third and concluding volume in the fantasy series "Memory, Sorrow and Thorn."
14
2
MCNALLY'S RISK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) The sleuth Archy McNally investigates the history of a Palm Beach woman and the mysterious deaths that are linked to her.
15
38
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
2
3
34
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
3
2
29
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
4
20
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
5
5
5
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
6
6
42
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
10
3
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A Yale historian assays social and political forces and how they will affect the future.
8
8
16
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) Spirituality in everyday life.
9
9
4
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
10
7
28
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
11
12
6
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
12
11
11
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
13
14
24
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
14
13
9
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
15 *
16
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
16 *
39
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
5
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) How to adapt to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
3
3
38
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
4
2
56
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
4
6
COOKING WITH REGIS &amp; KATHIE LEE, by Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford with Barbara Albright. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips on cooking and more than 150 recipes from the talk show hosts.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE LAST PANDA, by George B. Schaller. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A distinguished biologist's group portrait of "the most endearing creatures I have ever seen" and a catalogue of human bungling that may guarantee the extinction of the wild panda.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
PROOFS: And Three Parables, by George Steiner. (Granta/ Penguin, paper, $10.) "Proofs," to which the "Parables" are appendages, is Mr.
Steiner's arresting novella of the collapse of Communism among some of its last adherents.
POOR THINGS: Episodes From the Early Life of Archibald McCandless M.D., Scottish Public Health Officer, by Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) The experimentally minded Scottish artist-novelist's heroine is a female suicide, reanimated by a wizard surgeon and given her unborn daughter's brain.
BUFFALO SOLDIERS, by Robert O'Connor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
O'Connor's first novel successfully involves us with a self-absorbed nihilist, a drug-peddling Army clerk of impoverished moral sensibility but acute esthetic intelligence.
THE ELEPHANT VANISHES: Stories, by Haruki Murakami. (Knopf, $21.) Stories that render Japan as a country sunk in a spiritual torpor; bizarre events are frequent but little noted.
FUZZY LOGIC, by Daniel McNeill and Paul Freiberger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) How computer scientists generated programs that can handle propositions like "40 percent true," and why such programs are often more useful than plain old true/false logic.


Rio de Janeiro Battles Cholera
With cholera spreading through Latin America for the last two years, the city of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil reported its first cases last month.
Health authorities in the city are working to prevent the outbreak -- fewer than 30 confirmed cases, and one death as of the end of March -- from spiraling into an epidemic.
Water purification throughout the city has been upgraded and sanitation controls at various entry points, including ports, airports and highways, have been tightened.


At Last, the Gotham. In First, As Indicated.
After several blasts of winter and two postponements, they finally ran the Gotham Mile at Aqueduct yesterday, and the race turned into a roaring homestretch duel that was won in a photo finish by the Heatherwood Farm's As Indicated over the Brophy Stable's Itaka.
None of the eight colts in the race -- including the favorite, Ogden Phipps's Strolling Along, who ran third -- might go on to the Kentucky Derby.
But the best of them might surface as stars later in the season, notably As Indicated, who has won four times in five starts and who somehow thrived this winter in New York.


ARREST OF DRIVER IS PROVING TRICKY
A top aide to former President George Bush who specialized in humiliating Massachusetts Democrats has created some political embarrassment for Gov.
William Weld, a Republican, with a highly publicized arrest here this week on a drunken-driving charge.
The former aide, Ronald Kaufman, was stopped by the state police at 1:45 A.M.
Wednesday on the Southeast Expressway near Savin Hill, 75 minutes after leaving the Governor's house in Cambridge, where he had spent four hours playing poker.
Mr.
Kaufman, a Quincy native, told the police he had had three drinks.
The state police said he had been speeding and swerving between lanes and was "extremely unsteady" on his feet.


Hate and Fear in the Gay Debate
To the Editor:
The March 29 Op-Ed article by Gen.
Bernard E. Trainor and Col.
Eric L. Chase struck me at first as a balanced, reasonable argument.
Then I remembered my years as a teen-ager in the late 1940's, on posts where my father was stationed.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 4, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
62
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
51
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
4
37
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
3
WILDEST HEARTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A businesswoman's proposal of a marriage of convenience to a rich man has stormy romantic consequences.
6 *
15
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
7 *
1
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing helps others.
8
2
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $6.99.) The tales of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their Jewish heritage.
9
5
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them.
10 *
11
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
11
4
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
12
1
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
13
27
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
14
5
SILENT PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lieut.
Lucas Davenport on the trail of an escaped serial killer.
15
1
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser and his old friend Hawk investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
2 *
491
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
3
12
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
4 *
6
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
5
98
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6
26
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How members of a rugby team survived a plane crash.
7
77
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8 *
3
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $5.99.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
9 *
14
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
10 *
8
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
11 *
8
HILLARY CLINTON: The Inside Story, by Judith Warner. (Signet, $4.99.) A biography of the First Lady.
12 *
24
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
128
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
111
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
86
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
11
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
5
5
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Justice Cuomo?
There is this much to be said for the idea of putting Mario Cuomo on the Supreme Court.
By leaving Albany for Washington, he might improve both places.
After a dozen years of dominating New York's political scene, Governor Cuomo's departure would allow a new generation of leadership to develop.
Certainly New York politicians of both parties are rooting for a new Cuomo career.
Democrats stir at the possibility of movement at the top of the party.
Republicans have already begun to see their party's 1994 nomination as a prize worth seeking.


13 Millionaires, 90 Losers
THE WORST TEAM MONEY COULD BUY
The Collapse  of the New York Mets.
By Bob Klapisch  and John Harper. 304 pp.
New York: Random House. $21.


Superstars, but Not in Adland
THEY are the darlings of sports memorabilia, of trading-card sets and of autograph hounds.
More than $2 billion in merchandise with their team logos were sold in stores last year.
Their sport is often written about mythically, as if the Greeks had bequeathed bases, bats and balls to America.
And by the time October arrives, more than 3,000 of their regular-season games will have been telecast.
Yet when another baseball season starts tomorrow, no national advertiser will present a major campaign built around superstars like Barry Bonds, Kirby Puckett, Cal Ripken Jr., Dave Winfield, Gary Sheffield and Roger Clemens.


Therapists in Allen Case Often Seem Like Family
In a voice that even the court stenographer had to strain to hear, Dr.
Susan Coates testified last week about the day last October when Mia Farrow told her that she had, once and for all, had it with psychotherapy.
"She was very distressed," the psychologist told the custody trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
"She felt that she wanted psychiatry out of her life. She said, "I don't want any meddlers in my life.' "


Kitchen Gadgets
Simple in function and form, these handy utensils are high in style but low in price: Many cost less than $5.


Bed and Bath
Hand-crafted objects, scented soaps, and towels and sheets in natural fibers are not only practical but luxurious.


MARCH 28 - APRIL 3: Ireland; A Cry of Protest Against Violence
Officials in both Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic agree adamantly on one point: that, although they have been unable to end the civil war that has killed more than 3,000 people in the predominantly Protestant North since 1969, this does not mean there is an officially acceptable level of killing.
But to many Irish women and men, especially those who have lost loved ones in the violence of the mostly Catholic Irish Republican Army or the Protestant paramilitaries, the official inability to end the murder is de facto acceptance.


Conciliation Service Aids Mental Patients
ALMOST any hospitalized patient experiences a sense of helplessness and a loss of control.
But for someone in a psychiatric unit those feelings can be intensified.
And when such a patient has a question, a criticism or a major dispute about the treatment given by a mental-health-care provider, resolution of the complaint can be a problem.
Patients may be reluctant to take a grievance to the very institution that the believe is causing them harm.
Family members of a patient who want to intervene on his behalf are also sometimes hesitant to antagonize the hospital that is caring for the person they love.


Seattle Has a Plan: Urban Renewal for Fun
It is the Fourth of July in the year 2000, and another half-million people have moved to Seattle.
Every gas station has an espresso machine subsidized by the city and Boeing machinists can work out of their homes.
In a summer mist, civic leaders cut the ribbon to Seattle's contribution to the dawning century: a grand new park in the center of the city, lined by apartments, town houses and open-air restaurants.
A salmon stream runs down the middle of the manicured greenway and all the people who live in its vicinity have cellular phones.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Herd in the Tunnel
How does an elephant commute to Manhattan?
Anyway it wants.
Unless it works for the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus.
Then it and its cronies take the train.
The lions get the bar car.


An Asian-American Feels Deep Pain
"Asian-Americans Say They Are Treated Like Foreigners"  [ March 7 ]  provoked real sympathy, since I know what it is like growing up and living in this country as a third-generation Japanese-American.
I am conscious of the fact that I am not always viewed as an American, or somehow less of an American because of my racial characteristics.
Immediately after reading your article I happened to be contemplating on a choice of bagel before placing an order when I was confronted with, "In America we stand in line." I was totally taken by surprise and experienced that piercing pain in the belly that only such remarks will incite.
The audacity this young white woman had clearly implied that I was a foreigner; she may as well have been wearing a white sheet.


Pizza, Pasta and a Children's Menu, Too
BART'S PARADISE CAFE may sound like a song title from the 1960's but the Greenwich restaurant, in a building that dates to the early part of the century, offers a menu that's mostly pizza and pasta and very much of the 90's.
In its most recent previous incarnation, Bart's was an Italian restaurant called Portofino, with dark wood walls, trim and wainscoting, a menu mostly of seafood and pasta dishes, and a trio of owners.
Now there is one owner, Bart Destefano, and the interior has been repainted apple green, creating a lighter look.


Chasing Down the Best Buy
LOLEEN had her nose in a newspaper, her feet up on the new blue recliner.
"Maybe we ought to think about a new car," she said.
"Um," I said, encouched across from the TV and hip-deep in a rerun of "The Rockford Files." Rockford was fleeing the baddies in his old gold Firebird.
They had guns; he didn't.


Woodrow Swancutt, 77, General In Air Force and Atomic Test Pilot
Woodrow Swancutt, a retired major general in the Air Force who was a decorated World War II pilot and later flew the plane that dropped a test atomic bomb on Bikini Atoll, died on March 21 while walking near his at home in San Antonio.
He was 77.
He collapsed from cardiac failure, his family said.


You're an Unlikely Hero, Charlie Brown
It was a surprise for the batter -- and the cartoonist.
Charlie Brown not only hit a home run last week, he won a game.
Breaking a losing streak that goes back to when baby boomers were babies was no April Fool's joke.
But Charles Schulz, who has been drawing "Peanuts" since the 1950's, said the homer just happened.
First he drew a panel that showed Charlie turning somersaults and shouting, "I was the hero!" Then he worked out the rest.
The record books will show that the losing pitcher was the great-granddaughter of Roy Hobbs.
Never heard of the mythic home-run king in Bernard Malamud's novel "The Natural"?
Neither had Charlie's sister Sally.
What's next for "Peanuts"?
Will Schroeder forsake Beethoven for 2 Live Crew?
Will the kite-eating tree go vegetarian?
Will Snoopy trade his Sopwith Camel for a Stealth fighter?
Will Charlie even break .500?
Experts doubt it.
"I don't mean to knock his skill," said Clark Gesner, who wrote the musical "You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown," "but his average is not very good."


No Singing Required . . .
'On Stage at the Met' brings hundreds to the Opera House for a benefit dinner, March 28.


Anne R. Lloyd-Jones, J. D. Calder
Anne Rutledge Lloyd-Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Lloyd-Jones of Stamford, Conn., was married on Friday to John David Calder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Calder of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Calder, 35, is a senior vice president of Hospitality Valuation Services, a hotel-investment consulting concern in Mineola, L.I.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and received a master's degree in hotel administration from Cornell University.
Her father is an executive director of the American Express Bank in New York.


The Rocky Road to Comics' Fame and Fortune
COMEDIANS before the laughter comes are the subject of Jim Geoghan's "Only Kidding," now having its Long Island premiere at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through April 24.
The play is not as much a comedy as it is a morality tale, yet there are plenty of laughs, and the moral is sugarcoated.
Mr.
Geoghan looks at the wheeler-dealers, con men and hack writers who overload the bottom rung of the ladder to success.
In this case the ladder leads to the comic heights of the "Buddy King Show," a late-night television talk show much like Johnny Carson or Jay Leno's.
A comic's successful appearance on late-night television will serve as a paid-up career-insurance policy to those few lucky enough to get that far.


Chile Advances in a War on Poverty, And One Million Mouths Say 'Amen'
Adan Ramirez and his wife, Gladys Fuentes, say that in the 1980's, when their family income was $170 a month from his electrician's job, "we had to choose between eating and paying the bills." Then, in 1990, Ms.
Fuentes borrowed $350 through a new Government program set up to help tiny businesses, bought an industrial sewing machine and began doing piece work for clothing manufacturers.
Last year, another loan.
Now she has five machines running, and Mr.
Ramirez has given up his electrician's work to join the sewing business.


Environmentalist Who Sets His Own Agenda
Will the real Richard L. Amper Jr.  [ Letters, March 7 ]  please stand up.
One day, he is attempting to persuade politicians and government officials to follow his Nimby line.
Cajolery, intimidation and feigned reasonableness are his tools.
When they dance to his tune, they are good guys.
Another day, when those same representatives of government remember that they "owe you not their industry only, but also their judgment" and that judgment dares to differ from Mr.
Amper's opinions, he castigates them all in your newspaper with his own kind of cynicism and arrogance.
" 'Government leaders,' " he writes, "has always been an oxymoron." One wonders if Amper has ever heard of Abraham Lincoln.
How dare he?
He spouts about other "special interests," which are, of course, all bad.
But how about his special-interest group.
Not everyone agrees with them, either?
Yet, his special interests are acceptable.
The others are not.


CLINTON PRESENTS BILLION TO YELTSIN IN U.S. AID PACKAGE
As President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia began their first summit meeting today, Mr.
Clinton presented the Russian leader with some $1 billion in American aid programs intended to support Russian democrats and spur the Western allies to make Russian reform their top foreign policy priority.
Among the new or expanded programs in the package were loan guarantees to build apartments for demobilized Russian soldiers; loans for Russian entrepreneurs; medical supplies, food and grain assistance; funds to help the Russian Government sell state-owned industries, and technical advisers to help repair pipelines and oil wells and begin exporting again.


Don't Rush to Judgment in Trade Center Blast; Abused the Privilege
To the Editor:  In "Tirades and Sympathy" (Op-Ed, March 27) John Hockenberry makes a misguided attempt to humanize one of the World Trade Center bombing suspects.
If guilty, Mahmud Abohalima is one who has abused the privilege of living in this country: more to the point, he is a malicious killer.


Incest Stories
To the Editor:
As the author of "Confabulations: Creating False Memories -- Destroying Families," I have spoken to hundreds of parents of adult children across the United States, Canada and England.
They all have the same remarkable story: their children accuse them of abuse after decades-delayed discoveries that emerge in therapy from repressed memories.
It often takes years of therapy to recover memories.


France Goes to the Right, by Default
It was the election result that polls had promised.
It brought the political change that people had expected.
Yet last week, after dumping the Socialists unceremoniously from office and installing a new conservative Government with a huge parliamentary majority, the French were strangely muted.
So why was there no cheering?


Congressional Memo; Freshmen Run Afoul of Status Quo
Long before the most rebellious House freshmen met their Waterloo this week, Representative Luis V. Gutierrez knew his revolt against Congress was over.
Before he was even sworn in, at a meeting last November among 25 Democratic freshmen and the House leaders in Chicago, Mr.
Gutierrez confronted Speaker Thomas S. Foley with the modest request that he make time for the freshmen to meet during the December orientation week.


New &amp; Noteworthy
FIVE HUNDRED SCORPIONS, by Shelby Hearon. (Warner, $9.99.) In this novel, an estranged husband and wife undertake vastly different personal odysseys.
Paul Sinclair, a lawyer, leaves Charlottesville, Va., to join an anthropological project in Mexico; his wife, Peggy, does some social experimenting of her own at home.
In 1987 our reviewer, Lowry Pei, called the book "witty" and "fast-paced," adding that "the demonic and the domestic inhabit the novel together in a struggle that denies neither and intensifies both."
COMING INTO THE END ZONE: A Memoir, by Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $9.95.) The novelist Doris Grumbach began this journal the year she turned 70, expecting to chronicle unsentimentally her own decline.
Instead the memoir celebrates her spiritual strength as she travels, buys a house in Maine and continues to record her own vibrant perceptions.
"The immortal and immune part of her has triumphed, and the result is a deeply satisfying book," Noel Perrin said here in 1991.
Norton has also reissued Ms.
Grumbach's 1981 novel, THE MISSING PERSON ($9.95), the story of a Marilyn Monroe-like actress who allows herself to be completely defined by others.
Our reviewer, Herbert Gold, described the author as "ironic and discreet," praising the novel's conclusion for "its special distanced note of grieved attention." Also available in a new Norton edition is CHAMBER MUSIC ($9.95), in which Ms.
Grumbach used the life of another historic figure, the American composer Edward MacDowell, as the inspiration for fiction.
Written as the memoir of a woman whose husband was truly married only to his music, the book provides a "look into the chamber of one unassuming heart," Gail Godwin said here in 1979.


Results Plus
GOLF Seniors Lead Shared After burning up the Cochise Course at Desert Mountain for three days without breaking away from the pack, Gibby Gilbert wasn't certain who would win The Tradition in Scottsdale, Ariz.
"Ten-under-par's not out of it," Gilbert said yesterday after he and Tom Shaw each birdied the 18th hole to drop to a 54-hole tournament record of 14-under 202 and took one-shot leads into the final round of the $850,000 tournament, the first Senior PGA major of the season.
Mike Hill was at 203, with Dale Douglass and Tom Weiskopf at 204. (AP) A Surprise Leader: Greg Kraft, who has never finished higher than sixth in seven pro seasons, shot a three-under-par 69 and took a one-shot lead after 54 holes in the Freeport-McMoRan Golf Classic in New Orleans.
Kraft was at four-under 212, a stroke ahead of Payne Stewart and Russ Cochran. (AP)


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Feb. 93
Jan. 93
Feb. 92
Nation
$ 104,200
103,100
$ 103,200
Northeast
136,900
134,400
141,900
Midwest
84,700
82,600
81,500
South
90,600
89,900
91,000
West
140,900
141,300
148,100
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.73
7.66
9.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.91
4.96
6.30
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.58
7.55
9.03
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.73
4.73
6.13
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.58
7.60
9.12
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.52
4.51
6.09
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.86
7.80
9.29
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.47
5.47
6.67
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.30
3.36
4.64
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.28
7.49
8.15
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


'I Want' Now Gets
POWER to the people. The little people, that is.
Marketers and some decidedly grown-up interest groups have discovered that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line: straight from advertisers to children who will use a product.


Devils Mascot Charged
A 23-year-old man who wears a hockey puck costume as the New Jersey Devils mascot is accused of molesting three female vendors during games, prosecutors said Friday.
BRAD EBBEN, of Mendham, N.J., a part-time Devils employee, was released on his own recognizance after appearing last month in municipal court in East Rutherford, N.J., said the Bergen County prosecutor, JOHN FAHY.
Two complaints of criminal sexual conduct and one of harassment were filed. (AP)


No Headline
We've put Martin on this rotunda of irrelevant adulation and removed him from the struggle for economic justice.
Somewhere along the line we managed to resurrect the messenger and bury the message.
THE REV.
JOSEPH LOWERY, on the legacy of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. [ 16:4. ]


Still a Dream 25 Years After King's Assassination
Twenty-five years after the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in Memphis, more than half of black and white Americans rate the nation's race relations as poor, and blacks and whites remain deeply divided on economic issues like preferential hiring and promotion of minorities.
The findings in a New York Times/ CBS News poll conducted March 28-31, as well as the prevailing sour racial mood, in which the name King today more often summons up Rodney G. King than the slain civil rights leader, provide a gloomy counterpoint to nationwide observances in memory of Dr.
King's death on April 4, 1968.


At a New Gallery, Seven Different Approaches to Portraiture
The art scene continues uncertain, yet the new galleries keep coming.
Phoenix Group, at 247 Main Street here, is the third one to be visited by this reviewer in as many months.
And a snappy setup it is, too, installed in the ground floor of a clapboard house, complete with Ultra Era white interior, polished wood floors and, in back, space to park three or four cars.
For its second show, Phoenix has come up with "Portraits '93," a selection of paintings, drawings, photographs and sculptures by seven artists.
Not all are likenesses in the conventional sense, and several predate 1993.
No matter; the interest is in the way the dealers, Kathie Mukaida and Larry Jones, have tried to blend different approaches to the task of portraiture.


Rent Control
To the Editor:
In your article on March 21 entitled "Rent Control, at 50, Still Stirs Controversy" both Anthony Downs and Peter Marcuse miss an arcane but crucial point: Real estate taxes are severely skewed due to rent controls.
Since the "controlled" buildings produce abnormally low rent rolls, they are assessed at lower values than they should be (based on comparable structures without rent regulations).
The net effect of this is that
all
taxpayers subsidize these rent-controlled tenants.


Two by Churchill


A Day With Christine Whitman
AT 10:30 one recent morning, after a 40-minute drive from her family farm in Hunterdon County, Christine Todd Whitman called a meeting of her campaign staff in the People for Whitman headquarters in a modern office building in Clark.
"This is clearly a wonderful story," Ms.
Whitman said, holding up a newspaper article in which a public opinion poll had been interpreted as showing tepid support for the re-election of Gov.
Jim Florio.
"We can use it to feel good, get excited, and to confirm what we've been hearing out on the street. But we can't let it go to our heads. Things haven't gotten nearly as hot as they're going to get."


Rivers Roaring Out West
This spring and summer river-rafters can anticipate wild rides rocketing over rapids on swollen rivers in the Western United States.
Weather and river forecasters are predicting the best river-running season in years due to heavy run-off from snowpacks as high as 200 percent above normal in sections of southern Utah, southwestern Colorado and the Sierra Nevadas.
"This will be the best year for floaters and rafters in the West in six or seven years," said David Brandon, a hydrologist at the Colorado Basin River Forecast Center in Salt Lake City, Utah.
According to Mr.
Brandon, the melt will peak on most rivers in Colorado and Utah, including the Colorado and Green rivers, late this month or in early May.


Rumors Swirl Around a Death on Movie Set
After days of dark rumors about plots and superstition, and much speculation about accidents and fake cartridges used in a real gun, the authorities are still baffled by the death of the actor Brandon Lee during the filming of a movie here last week.
Mr.
Lee, the son of Bruce Lee, the martial-arts star who died in 1973, was fatally wounded when a gun that was supposed to be loaded with blanks was fired at him by another actor.


BENEFITS
A Concert to Fight AIDS
TONIGHT -- Dancers from the American Ballroom Dance Theater will open a musical evening at a fund-raiser for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS at St.
Paul the Apostle Church on Columbus Avenue between 59th and 60th Streets.
Many Broadway performers will also entertain in "Celebration of Life 2." The show starts at 8 P.M.; a reception at the church follows the performance.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 978-9390.
Seders in TriBeCa
MONDAY AND TUESDAY -- Traditional Sephardic-style Passover seders, using the recipes of the Turkish-born mother of the restaurant's owners, will be held in a communal setting on two nights at Capsouto Freres, 451 Washington Street near Watts Street.
The Passover services, which begin each night at 6:30, will benefit the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, a relief and social welfare organization.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 966-4900.
Benefit at the Big Top
WEDNESDAY -- Childhelp USA, a Washington-based agency that specializes in the treatment of abused children, will hold its first benefit in New York with an evening at the Cirque du Soleil under the big top at Battery Park City.
The activities start at 6 P.M. with a carnival party, including games and circus foods, in an adjacent tent.
The circus performance is at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $500 for adults, $100 for those 16 and under, or $1,000 for a family of two adults and two children, from (212) 685-1095.
French-American Evening
WEDNESDAY -- The French-American Foundation, established to bolster cultural relations between the two nations, will hold its annual spring benefit party starting with cocktails at 7 P.M. at the Plaza.
Dinner and dancing follow.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-2660.
Preview Exhibit of Drawings
THURSDAY -- The Drawing Center, devoted to the presentation of drawings, will hold a benefit preview of "Odilon Redon: Selections From the Woodner Family Collection" at the gallery at 35 Wooster Street between Broome and Grand streets.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 355-6363.
Landmarks and Heritage
THURSDAY -- Sir Peter Brooke, the Secretary of State for National Heritage in Britain, will be the guest at a noon luncheon at the St.
Regis to benefit the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation.
Mr.
Brooke's authority ranges from the royal palaces and parks to tourism, the BBC, sports and virtually all the nation's arts and libraries.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 861-4562.
Autos to Help Children
FRIDAY -- A 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. preview of the New York International Automobile Show at the Jacob Javits Convention Center will benefit Tomorrows Children's Fund, which suports research into childhood cancer.
Luncheon will be served from 1 to 3 P.M.
The show will be open to the general public from April 10 to 18, when an estimated one million people are expected to view some 1,200 vehicles.
Preview tickets, $15, from (212) 307-7171.


Bolshoi Express Offers Rail Tour
The Bolshoi Express, a luxury steam train built in the 1950's and refurbished last year, will offer tours in the former Soviet Union between May 2 and Oct. 28.
The Express had been used by high-level Russian officials; now, under the auspices of Cox &amp; Kings, a 235-year-old London travel company, the train will carry tourists on four itineraries ranging from 10 to 14 days.
The train has its own satellite telephone system and features six sleeping cars that accommodate up to 65 passengers.
A small bathroom with sink and shower is shared by two compartments; each compartment is equipped with two folding beds.
There are also one cocktail car and three restaurant cars.
Passengers can choose from Continental and regional (Ukrainian, Georgian or Baltic) cuisines.


Abbott Ends at Zero on Day in Mid-40's
The baseballs felt frozen solid, the mound like some strange Queens glacier.
None of it mattered.
Nothing has for Jim Abbott since he reported to the Yankees in February.
The left-hander,who came into a cold and miserable Shea Stadium with a run of 19 zeros, walked out of the spring with the total at 21.
Abbott's 1993 earned run average, flashed on the scoreboard early, burned a bit in everyone's consciousness when it was over -- 0.00.


Judgment Days
Just when you thought it couldn't happen here, it has come to pass.
The telefonino -- the cellular phone, an emblem of Italy's rags-to-Rolex, Gucci-guzzling 80's -- has been pronounced, definitively,
out
.
Not because of any worries about health hazards, but simply because cellular phones do what they always have done: attract too much attention.
The same goes for watches with seven moons, regimental silk ties, tailored blue blazers with gold buttons, late-model BMW's and cashmere sweaters, according to the author Lina Sotis, a guru of 1980's chic.
"Even the most uncouth person," she said, "uses the telefonino with care. It has become dangerous."


Joseph H. Farnham 3d, Maria Ritter
June wedding plans have been announced for Maria-Meta Zoe Ritter, an owner of Tri Design, a graphic and industrial design studio, and Joseph Hollister Farnham 3d, a computer graphics designer for Tana Color Graphics, a printing and design company.
Both work in New York.
Ms.
Ritter, 30, is known as Maria.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a daughter of Mary O. Ritter of Palm Beach, Fla., and Donald W. Ritter of Newport, R.I.


A la Carte; Upgraded Carmel Wines Finding a Niche
One of the Island's most highly rated northern Italian restaurants, Guilia in Great Neck, now offers Carmel wines to its customers.
Carmel, Israel's largest wine producer, is also available at some of the Island's biggest and best-known wine and liquor stores, among them Greenvale Liquors, Pope Liquors in Medford and Peninsula Liquors in Hewlett and Inwood.


Mutual Funds; A Capital Quarter for Real Estate
CALL it Wall Street's nod of approval for the new occupants of the White House: a 3.3 percent rally for equity funds in the first quarter.
At that pace, there would be double-digit returns for the year as a whole.
The only losers were health-and-biotechnology funds, which fell 14.1 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
The other 22 stock fund categories showed gains ranging from a low of eight-tenths of 1 percent for environmental funds to a high of 21.7 percent for gold, which gained on dwindling supply after being last's year worst performer.


Sunset of the Golden Age for America's National Pastime
SOMEDAY, crouched over their keyboards in front of their interactive television sets, tapping out their instructions to the managers and their bets to Commissioner Rose's office, major league baseball fans will remember this 1993 season as the sunset glow of the golden age, when salaries were in check, morale and morality were high, and the pastime still reflected the myth of its grassy-sweet big innings.
This is as it should be.
Season after season is painted over on our memory of the game.
Only a fool would try to scrape anything away.
Baseball itself has changed far less than, say, basketball or football, and compared with the rest of American life, it has hardly changed at all.


The Gun Lobby Is on the Run
When New Jersey reverses itself and defeats a measure sponsored by the National Rifle Association that would overturn a ban on assault weapons, you know something is happening.
And when Virginia, the home to hundreds of thousands of hunters and gun owners, passes a tough new gun control law over the N.R.A.'s strong objections, you know something very big is happening: the gun lobby is on the run.
The old N.R.A. practices of intimidating lawmakers with political contributions to their opponents, and scaring honest gun owners with the specter of a police state seizing Uncle Bob's prize duck-hunting shotgun, have finally fallen flat.


In Thrall to a Beaky Muse
THE MAN IN THE TOWER
By Michael Kruger.
Translated by Leslie Willson. 176 pp.
New York: George Braziller. $19.95.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Reassigned Chad Ogea, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.


Yanks Start With New Faces, New Hopes and Old Boss
Listen closely and hear the optimism: Players are freely talking about challenging for the American League East.
Management is bragging about selling more season tickets than last year.
And the owner, George Steinbrenner, is predicting greatness for a team searching for its first winning record since 1988 and its first hint of October fun in a dozen years.
Look closely and see why there is optimism: Jimmy Key and Jim Abbott immediately make the starting rotation formidable.
The presence of Wade Boggs gives fans the luscious chance to see him bat in front of Don Mattingly.
Bernie Williams is blossoming in center field.
Pat Kelly is emerging at second base.
And the essential Danny Tartabull has actually stayed healthy all spring.
Chat with Steinbrenner and the positives could escalate into double figures.


Diversity Bedevils M.B.A. Programs
SUPERFICIALLY, it's a simple issue: Since tomorrow's managers will have to cope with an ethnically, culturally, racially and gender-diverse work force, business schools should be teaching today's M.B.A. candidates how to do so.
In fact, it's not nearly that cut and dried.
Controversy waxes supreme on whether appreciation of differences can be taught, or whether experience is the only teacher.
If it can be taught, should it be a separate class or built into every class? 5 Experts, 7 Answers
Talk to four or five experts, you'll get six or seven answers.
"Stereotyping happens at an unconscious level, and can only be overcome through experience," insists James I. Cash, chairman of the Harvard Business School's M.B.A. program.


A Reminder


Labs, a Scientist's Foreign Country
ASK MOST people -- even students majoring in science -- to describe the typical life of a successful scientist, and chances are they will describe a sort of Arrowsmith existence: long hours in the laboratory, toiling alone among racks of test tubes and beakers.
But researchers say that nothing could be further from the truth.
Indeed, they say, the irony is that to succeed in science, most people have to leave the lab completely.
Leading biologists and chemists say they spend no time in the laboratory.
Instead they write grant proposals, travel and give talks on their group's research; they think up ideas for their staff of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to work on, and try their best to motivate and encourage staff members to be creative and productive.


Kelly Takes Job And Runs
Pat Kelly is 25 years old now.
Not ancient, but he is no kid anymore either.
He is starting his third major league season.
Has it really been that long?
It sure has.
And the Yankees are still waiting for Kelly, still waiting for him to be their next great second baseman.
Maybe this will be the year.
Kelly is different now: at the plate, in the clubhouse, on the field.
But not with a glove on.
That aspect of his game has not changed.
He has been and still is as smooth as Roberto Alomar.


How a Country Boy Snared a Money Man From the Big City
Two jets, a yacht, limousines, mansions, a Fifth Avenue office -- by the end of the 1980's, whatever money could buy, Steven Hoffenberg had.
That included, of course, access to influential people.
As the chairman of a fast-growing conglomerate called the Towers Financial Corporation, Mr.
Hoffenberg had hired a bipartisan entourage that included Ben Barnes, a business ally of former Texas Gov.
John Connally, and Thomas B. Evans Jr., a former co-chairman of the Republican National Committee.
In Louisiana, regulators got calls on his behalf from attorney Victoria Reggie, daughter of a powerful state judge and future wife of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
A legal wrangle in California was handled by Mickey Kantor, now President Clinton's trade representative.


In Defense Of JoAnne Akalaitis
To the Editor:
As friends of JoAnne Akalaitis and members of Artistic Associates of New York Shakespeare Festival, we would like to express our outrage about the board's decision to fire her as artistic director of the festival.
Ms.
Akalaitis's work has been courageous and extraordinary, both as director and as artistic director.
Her commitment and love for the theater has imbued a body of work for more than three decades, and as artistic director she has made a profound impact on both artists and audiences during her 20-month term.


It's Impossible to Grow Just One Columbine
There is something about columbines.
The flowers are so beguiling in form, they are sure to please.
Their name was derived from the Latin columba, meaning dovelike, which refers to their shapely form.
What's more, columbines are easy to grow.
Beginners should consider this flower since it will thrive with minimum care and provide generous rewards.
It can even be used as a cutting flower.
The blooming season, which usually begins the early part of May, can extend into early summer.
Another advantage is that the columbine is not exceptionally fussy about its location.
Although the plant will do moderately well in full sun, columbines put their best foot forward when they have some shade during the hottest part of the day.
A bright somewhat shaded nook is even to their liking.


Gilding the Loft
"IT'S PRETTY SAFE TO SAY THAT 97 PERCENT of my pad is covered with some kind of handwrought pattern," says Marian McEvoy.
The effect may be high-chic but its execution is decidedly low-tech.
McEvoy, the editor in chief of Elle Decor magazine, is a strictly do-it-yourself diva.
"If you can write your name," she says, "you can do this."
Practically every corner of her 1,800-square-foot SoHo loft flaunts densely packed geometric motifs that resemble everything from micromosaics to tribal tattoos.
In the two-story living room, she has decorated a motley collection of 19th- and 20th-century French furniture with golden dots, triangles and teardrops, yards of shimmering sawtooth trim and concentric circles galore.
Surfaces in the(Continued on page 37) ordinary open kitchen are covered with African-style patterns, from the cabinets to the microwave oven.
Directly above is a balcony bedroom where McEvoy has created a baroque "headboard" consisting entirely of black doodles scrawled onto the Sheetrock wall.


MARCH 28 - APRIL 3: Wachtler's Obsession; A Judge Admits Harassing His Ex-Lover
He was at the top of New York State's court system, married 41 years with four children, but he couldn't shake the spell of his former lover.
Now the twisted acts of his obsession are sending the judge to jail.


High-Tech Talk
I have dialed the future, and it has brought me, on a 3.3-inch Videophone screen, a regular-looking guy in a white shirt and a very dull tie.
His name is Tom Burns, a service representative in the video services group of A.T.&amp;T.
He's in St.
Louis, I'm in New York and the two of us are having a high-tech face-to-face.
This is it, at last -- the telephone equivalent of the moving sidewalk, the monorail and space-food sticks.
Somehow, it's anticlimactic.
Burns's image moves with the time-delay jerkiness familiar from NASA footage of the astronauts in their space capsule, but he's not coming out with stirring "one giant step for mankind" rhetoric.
Instead, he's describing the etiquette challenges posed by Videophone, which no longer allows him to roll his eyes or do the crossword puzzle when a customer is yelling at him.


WATCH CONGRESS SQUIRM
Elizabeth Drew, like many writers on campaign finance, misstates the problem ("Watch 'Em Squirm," March 14).
It's not that special interests have too much power; representing interests is what elected officials in a democracy are there to do.
The problem is that politicians' overdependence on campaign contributions gives too much influence to the interests of the rich and leaves the rest of us underrepresented.
No campaign finance law can change the fact that the rich have more money to give out than the poor.
So no reform will work unless it makes fund raising less important in the election process.
Public financing or free air time on television would help enormously.
Eliminating PAC's sponsored by labor unions and other mass-membership organizations -- the only means by which small contributors can now have an impact -- would just reinforce the power of the large donors.
BENJAMIN ROSS
Bethesda, Md.


Wendy Friedman, Roy Futterman
Theodore H. Friedman and Judge Eve Preminger of New York have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Wendy Kate Friedman and Roy Louis Futterman, the son of the late Drs.
Edward and Sara Lee Futterman.
Miss Friedman, 28, is a Ph.D. candidate in clinical psychology at Adelphi University.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in developmental psychology from Columbia University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother is a judge in Surrogate's Court in New York.


Driver Education Exceeds the Basics, Attracting Japanese
The classroom topic at Sacred Heart High School in Yonkers one recent day was ergonomics, the science of designing a workplace to meet people's needs.
But this was not a science class.
The course was driver education, and the workplace in this case was a car.
"Cars in the 90's are built to be more efficiently driven," said Frederic DePalma, the teacher and director of the school's driver-education program.
"Switches and controls are more easily usable and placed where people can find them. But safety concerns must be integrated into car designs with things like crumple zones and air bags to protect against crashes."


Casino Panel's New Mission: Save Atlantic City
New Jersey's powerful Casino Control Commission is changing its mission from micro-regulation of the casino industry to the restoration of aging Atlantic City to its former prominence as a resort.
It is a race against time, says Chairman Steven P. Perskie, to insure that the gaming industry, confronted with mounting competition from explosive growth in all forms of gambling across the country, does not fall victim to stagnation as the once-grand city did.


Mansell Hurt in Crash During Practice Run
NIGEL MANSELL was injured yesterday in a crash during a practice session for today's Valvoline 200 Indy-car race at Phoenix International Raceway.
The accident left Mansell hospitalized with a concussion that will keep the English driver from making his oval-racing debut.
Mansell, 39, also suffered a bruised right shoulder from the safety harness, but no other injuries were discovered after he was flown by helicopter to Good Samaritan Regional Medical Center in Phoenix.
Dr.
Steve Olvey, Indy-car's director of medical affairs, said Mansell was expected to be released this morning.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL
HITTER The Life and Turmoils  of Ted Williams. By Ed Linn. Harcourt Brace, $23.95.


'Flintstones' Teach Entrepreneurship Too; Design Inspiration
To the Editor:
One addition to the list of Bedrock values noted by Thomas Fields-Meyer and Richard L. Meyer (Op-Ed, March 25).
As any parent who grew up with "The Flintstones" could tell you, it is the source of inspiration for what has to be the best-built car in America today: the Cozy Coupe toy car.
Pollution-free, seldom, if ever, recalled for defects or life-threatening design flaws, the coupe and its variations are clearly the progeny of Fred and Wilma Flintstone's car.


One Year Later, Russians Doubt West's Aid Total
From the day the first parcels of relief aid were unloaded from American military aircraft at Moscow's international airport more than a year ago, Russians have been puzzled by what they see as the West's fumbling attempts to help their beleaguered country.
First, amid a blaze of publicity, came shipments of food, ranging from baby food to American military rations left over from the Persian Gulf war.
Then the Group of Seven major industrialized nations patched together a complex $24 billion financial aid package intended to help Russia build a vibrant economy.


Bosnia Vows All-Out War If Serbs Don't Sign Accord
The Bosnian Government warned today that it would abandon the shaky cease-fire here and resume full-scale war against Serbian nationalist forces if the West failed to press the Serbs into signing a peace accord that has already been accepted by the country's other two factions.
The Muslim-led Government issued the warning after the self-proclaimed parliament of the Serbian nationalists in Bosnia formally affirmed the decision it had made on Friday to reject the peace plan proposed by the United Nations and the European Community.
The plan calls for Bosnia to remain a sovereign state, but with 10 semiautonomous provinces that would each be controlled by one of the three main national groups: Muslims, Serbs and Croats.


An Urban Landscape
It was raining.
It was 39 degrees.
It was a good day for a hot toddy by the fire.
But no, the roses, the lilies, the
orchids
even, were blooming their heads off at Rockefeller Center -- on the first morning of the center's very first Flower and Garden Show, which runs through Easter Sunday.
"It was 17 degrees two weeks ago, so everyone was in an absolute panic," said Dave Murbach, manager of the gardens at Rockefeller Center.
Mr.
Murbach is also the man who rallied the talents of about 20 of the metropolitan region's best growers and garden and floral designers to exhibit at the free show.


POSTINGS: 1,400 Rooms for a Buyer; Proposals for Sloane House
With 1,400 rooms, the William Sloane House at 356 West 34th Street was once the largest Y.M.C.A. residence in the United States.
The quality that distinguished it -- sheer size -- may have daunted some buyers.
The 14-story building has been on the market since December 1991, when it was closed.
Also for sale is the two-story building next door, on Ninth Avenue, where the Y.M.C.A. of Greater New York had its headquarters until it moved recently to 333 Seventh Avenue.


Influential Christian Journal Prints Last Issue
Christianity and Crisis, a journal that provoked and guided the liberal wing of American Protestant Christianity for half a century, is publishing its last issue this weekend.
The ethicist and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr founded the nonprofit magazine in New York in February 1941 to encourage American intervention in the European war against Nazism.
Adlai E. Stevenson, Karl Barth, Hans Morgenthau, Margaret Mead, Jacques Maritain, Lewis Mumford, Paul Tillich and Alan Paton were among the magazine's contributors.


Creating Parks In a Crowded Metropolis
IN their effort to create new parks and playgrounds in sections of New York City that do not have enough of them, government agencies and nonprofit organizations are understanding more and more that, as Kermit the Frog would say, it's not that easy being green.
Seeking to establish open spaces, Lilliputian or Brobdignagian, in underserved communities throughout the five boroughs, they are devising new strategies to cope with diminishing budgets and are increasingly turning to the unexpected: vacant lots, abandoned buildings and the top of a huge sewage-treatment plant on the Hudson River in West Harlem.


What? LuPone Bothered By Streisand?
Patti LuPone, who's set to star in "Sunset Boulevard," the new Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, could be upstaged by Barbra Streisand.
Ms.
Streisand has already recorded two songs that Ms.
LuPone (below) will sing in the show when it opens in London on June 29.
It is based on the 1950 Billy Wilder movie that featured Gloria Swanson as Norma Desmond, a has-been silent-movie star. (The Los Angeles production, opening in the fall, will not include Ms. LuPone; the New York production is planned for the fall of 1994.)


Suzanne Kogan, Andrew Yearley
Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Kogan of Newton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Lynn Kogan to Andrew Taggart Yearley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas C. Yearley of Westfield, N.J., and Scottsdale, Ariz.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kogan, 26, is the merchanising and special events coordinator in the corporate advertising department of Conde Nast Publications in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a regional partner, in Boston, for the business-systems consulting practice of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the Chicago accounting firm.


Successful Soldering Requires Practice
Plastic plumbing pipe and high-strength adhesives like epoxy have reduced the need for soldering, but knowing the technique can still be useful.
Soldering is the strongest method of joining copper pipe, and it is often the best way to join sheet metal and secure electrical connections.
Soldering requires practice, but successful results are often possible on the first try.
In soldering the pieces to be joined are heated until hot enough to melt an additional metallic compound, solder, which, when it flows between them, acts as glue.
The process differs from welding, in which the pieces being joined are heated until they melt and flow together.


Restrictions On Glen Cove Estate
I am the president of the Daniel Gale Agency, a residential real-estate organization, an exclusive affiliate of Sotheby's International Realty.
We are assisting Sotheby's in the marketing of Salutation on West Island in Glen Cove.
An item article in the Long Island Journal  [ March 28 ]  mentions that the the property can be subdivided or used as a conference center.
We understand the property may not be further subdivided because of a prior deed restriction by the late Mrs.
Morgan prohibiting any further subdivision of West Island as a whole.
Also, any future use such as a conference center of Salutation, except as a single-family residence, must be approved by the West Island Home Owner's Association -- at present, an unlikely circumstance.


Andrew Goodman, 86, Inheritor And Innovator of Bergdorf's, Dies
Andrew Goodman, the owner of Bergdorf Goodman who greatly expanded its stature as one of Fifth Avenue's most elegant and lucrative fashion stores in the 1950's and 1960's, died yesterday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 86.
He had a long illness, a family spokeswoman said.


Florida Blazes Trail to a New Health-Care System
The Florida Legislature approved a sweeping overhaul of the state's overburdened health-care system early today, making Florida the first state in the nation to combine free market competition and government regulation in a way similar to the Clinton Administration's plans for controlling soaring medical costs.
Overcoming obstacles posed by lobbyists who sought to gut the proposal with hundreds of amendments, Gov.
Lawton Chiles, the author of the plan, won bipartisan support for his package after three days of marathon deliberations in the State Capitol and threats to call lawmakers back for a special session if the plan was voted down.
The difficulties the Governor faced provide a glimpse into the resistance that President Clinton is likely to confront in his efforts to revamp the system.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Blairstown  $132,000
19 Cedar Lake Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceiling, wraparound deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,677.
Chester  $160,000
40 State Park  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; brick flooring, full basement; taxes $2,695.
Long Valley  $240,000
492 Nauright Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial, ceramic entry, greenhouse, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,505.
Mount Olive  $150,000
363 River Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old bi-level; move-in condition, new deck, full basement; taxes $3,972.
Raritan  $232,000
30 Meadow Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; wooded lot on cul-de-sac, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,779.
Whippany  $428,000
5 Vail Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, new colonial; family room, gourmet kitchen, back staircase, full basement; taxes $5,900.
OTHER AREAS Harrison, N.Y.  $275,000
795 Lake Street  Four-bedroom, three-bath, 84-year-old Colonial; front porch, dining room, fireplace, detached two-car garage; taxes $1,900.
Enfield, Conn.  $149,000
35 Oxford Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old Dutch colonial; vinyl siding, double-hung windows, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,317.
Brightwaters, L.I.  $307,000
30 Lawrence Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, 2-car attached garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $8,600.


Indulged on Australia's Sunshine Coast
I AM not a spa kind of person.
The one time in my life I had an appointment for a facial, I canceled.
Herbal wraps, aromatherapy and the cult of beauty are beyond me.


A Few Proposals on Auto Insurance
To the Editor:
Regarding the proposed abolition of pain and suffering or uninsured-motorist coverage, I would suspect that neither author, nor any of the authors' close family members, has suffered a catastrophic injury caused by an uninsured or a negligent motorist.
Perhaps if either's children had suffered an amputation or been rendered quadriplegic, their outlook on the current compensation system would change.


Drowning Victim Was Student From Japan
The police yesterday identified the woman who drowned in the Hudson River in the West Village on Friday as a 22-year-old student who moved to New York City six months ago.
The woman, Atsuko Mori, was a resident at the Martha Washington Hotel at 29 West 29th Street in Gramercy Park.
She moved to Manhattan from Japan to study at Cambridge Schools on East 43d Street.


Basketball Slavery
This final weekend of the N.C.A.A. tournament should be basketball's golden hour.
The field is down to two teams from which the national champion will be crowned tomorrow.
The players, soaring to the basket with power and grace, evoke metaphors of flight, the ultimate freedom.
But beyond the arena doors, it's pretty clear that big-college basketball has spread into a system akin to slavery.


Fine Points Stall Budget In Albany
The prospects for passing a New York State budget by the end of the weekend dimmed somewhat today because of last-minute disputes over a variety of issues and because of a court decision that requires changes in the way appropriations bills are written.
Three days after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo sealed what he called a handshake budget deal with the state's legislative leaders, negotiators are still wrangling over state aid to education, welfare and Medicaid spending, prison construction and housing.


Q and A
An Unwanted Guest Question: I am a board member in a co-op.
Four months ago, when a tenant moved out of his apartment, a board member gave him permission to have one of his so-called relatives stay in the apartment for a short time while he paid the maintenance for the apartment.


A Shift of Focus on Abortion Law
There have been few more graphic symbols of the anti-abortion movement's power than the Hyde Amendment, a nearly total ban on Federal financing of abortions for poor women.
It has endured for 16 years, in one version or another, with substantial bipartisan support and the backing of three Presidents.
Last week, the White House said it would ask Congress to lift it.
Whether Congress will comply is unclear; it was a measure of the shift in policy on abortion that no one on Capitol Hill had a good sense of how President Clinton's request will fare.


Gridlock In the Peace Business
With President Clinton, President Boris N. Yeltsin and practically every European leader in between tied up in knots over domestic problems, the United Nations, the NATO alliance and other international bodies have been hovering close to uselessness.
Last week, the most frustrating spectacle continued to be the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There, Serb commanders repeatedly blocked United Nations forces trying to deliver relief to starving Muslims in the east, but backed by neither the international will nor the power to insure peace.
The parliament of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists rejected even a conditional acceptance of a peace plan already approved by the country's other two warring factions.
One of the authors of the peace plan, former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, ended his months of effort with little success, handing over his United Nations mediating role to Thorvald Stoltenberg, Norway's Foreign Minister.


Travelers' Warnings


To Antarctica
To the Editor: Ushuaia, the southernmost city in the world, prides itself as "the Gateway to Antarctica" when, in fact, a more appropriate municipal title would be "the Gateway to Argentine Bureaucracy."
On a recent cruise to Antarctica, our vessel, the Professor Molchanov, was delayed two days in port while the ship's leasing agent struggled to extract prepaid fuel from the local authorities.
Previous cruises, we were told, were held up in port 6 to 24 hours for a variety of other bureaucratic reasons.


The Children of the Shadows: Shaping Young Lives
They are the children of the shadows: the impoverished youth who live in the tumbledown neighborhoods of the American inner city; the children of often desperate and broken families, where meals are sometimes cereal three times a day; the young people who daily face the lures of drugs, sex, fast money and guns; the unnoticed youths who operate in a maddening universe where things always seem to go wrong.
Their world, while never especially sunny, has grown far bleaker.
After a period of decline, the proportion of children living in poverty has been rising.
School performance has steadily fallen.
Juvenile crime has exploded and turned more violent.
Teen-agers are killing more often, killing younger and being killed with numbing regularity.


Inside Job: Tar Heels Power Past Kansas
North Carolina earned a berth in the national championship game today with a convincing victory over Kansas that proved the maxim that when speed and quickness meet size, speed and quickness, size almost always wins.
Kansas, hoping that its quickness and outside shooting would prevail, was beaten up inside by Eric Montross, then cut up along the edges by outside shooting as North Carolina earned its seventh appearance in a title game with a 78-68 victory over the Jayhawks.


Sightings Of the King, Etched in Glass
Bertelsmann AG plans to add a touch of Graceland to its new U.S. headquarters at 1540 Broadway (45th Street).
The German media conglomerate, which owns RCA Records and Doubleday Books, will install a 9-foot-high Elvis Presley triptych in the lobby when the building opens in June.
The artwork is three glass panels etched with Presley's likeness.
It's a replica of a larger piece that RCA donated to Graceland, the Presley mansion in Memphis, honoring Presley as the best-selling recording artist of all time.


East Gets a Win, Place, Row
Eastern crews dominated the opening heats of the 20th annual San Diego Crew Classic today.
The University of Pennsylvania's heavyweight varsity eight won the first heat of the featured Copley Cup in 6 minutes 5.05 seconds, establishing the standard by which the other crews were measured.


Deep in the Soul of Texas
For most of her life, Jo Carol Pierce has been on a spiritual quest for Jesus.
In her semi-autobiographical play, "Bad Girls Upset by the Truth," the quest starts when she is a teen-ager in Lubbock, Tex., and a cute young boy named Joey asked her to join his Highway Witness for Jesus Program.
She agrees, and they drive out to Prairie Dog Town in his pickup truck and witness together. (He feels guilty about it afterward; she doesn't.)
Later, Joey asks her to marry him, but Jo Carol is too excited about all the other cute boys waiting for her in the world, and she declines.
"Jo Carol, why do you think they call it premarital sex?" Joey says angrily.
"You gotta get married afterward."


NO MIDDLE INITIAL
Apparently William Safire is unaware that some women still choose not to change their names upon getting married (On Language, March 7).
"A generation ago," he writes, "some militant feminists refused to adopt the surname of their husbands." Having married this fall, I chose to keep the name I was given at birth and which has served me well for my first 28 years.
And yet, while I do consider myself a feminist (as should anyone, man or woman, who believes that men and women should be treated equally), I do not consider myself militant in any aspect of my life.


Sports of The Times; Questions Only Games Can Answer
YOU hear it everywhere -- people saying, "I'm not as interested in baseball as I once was." Too many bottom lines.
Too few box-score lines.
Once upon a time, opening day in baseball was virtually a national holiday.
But in those years baseball was perceived as a joyous sport of teams you could root for, out of personal devotion or civic loyalty.


Who Said It?
To the Editor:
I couldn't imagine James Joyce saying, as Edna O'Brien has it ("It's a Bad Time Out There for Emotion," Feb. 14), that one has not lived unless one has conceived of life as a tragedy.
Joyce was not given to such humorless abstractions, but let what Ms.
O'Brien wonderfully describes as the "fierce ebullience" of his prose speak for itself.
It was actually Yeats, in his autobiography, who wrote, "We begin to live when we have conceived life as tragedy."  DIARMUID WHITE Douglaston, Queens


MARCH 28 - APRIL 3: Egypt; The Fight Sharpens Against Fundamentalism
Egypt last week was in the grip of the Government's fiercest struggle in over a decade to crush the country's armed Islamic militant movement -- a campaign that amounted to a dangerous gamble by President Hosni Mubarak.


Japan's Recession Felt in the County
FOR Kumiko Buller, a real estate agent who works for Ye Village Realty in Dobbs Ferry, a particular three-bedroom Colonial in Irvington had always been an easy rental property to offer to relocated Japanese executives who sought her services.
That house's location near the train station and the elementary school made it desirable -- and as soon as one Japanese family returned to Tokyo, Mrs.
Buller could count on a waiting list of clients.
But when the last Japanese tenants went back to Japan in July, the house remained vacant until March 1, an ominous sign to Mrs.
Buller of the changing Japanese market in the county.
"We see people going back, but we're not seeing their replacements," Mrs.
Buller said.
"Japanese companies are sending fewer people over, or they are closing offices in the metropolitan area. In the past, when the selling market was very weak, the rental market was very strong. Now the rental market is also weak. I can see the change very well."


Corrections
An article on March 21 about young Hollywood executives referred incorrectly to Elizabeth Guber's production company.
It is Fried/Woods.
The article also characterized a film company incorrectly.
It is Largo Entertainment, an independent company with a distribution arrangement with 20th Century Fox and Universal.


Hallelujahs Resound in Easter Concerts
FIERCE weather that interrupted rehearsal schedules, and musicians' bookings thrown into confusion by postponements had little or no effect on the cascade of Easter music programs to be heard around the state.
The French composers continue to hold a strong position in church programs and a single movement of a work by Charles-Marie Widor -- the Toccata from his Fifth Symphony for organ -- is beginning to rival the Hallelujah Chorus from Handel's "Messiah" for sheer frequency of performance.
Some organists are loath to leave it out because parishioners complain when they do.


When Beryl Became Barry
IMAGINARY MEN
By Enid Shomer. 152 pp. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.Jobs: Procedural vote on an amendment that would have forced cuts in other programs to pay for much of a proposed $16.3 billion jobs measure.
Failed, with 52 in favor and 48 opposed (8 short of the 60 votes needed to keep the amendment alive), March 31.
2.Budget: Vote on final passage of the broad outline of President Clinton's budget package.
Approved 55 to 45, April 1.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
N
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
Y
House
1.
Committees: Vote on A Republican proposal that calls for a 25 percent cut in spending on House committees.
Rejected 246 to 171, march 30.
2.
Committees: ote on a Democratic proposal to cut spending on House committees this year by only 5 percent below the 1992 level.
Approved 224 to 196, March 30.
3.
Budget: Vote on final passage of the broad outline of President Clinton's budget package.
Approved 240 to 184, March 31.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
N
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
Y
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
N
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
N
N
6. Pallone (D) . . .
N
Y
N
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
N
8. Klein (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
N
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
N
13. Menendez (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
N
N
3. King (R) . . .
Y
N
N
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
N
N
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
11. Owens (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
13. Molinari (D) . . .
Y
N
N
14. Maloney (D) . . .
A
N
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
N
N
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
N
N
21. McNulty (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
N
N
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
N
N
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
N
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
N
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
N
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
A
A
A
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
N
N
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
N
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Here, Kitty! Let's Go To the Office
Letting the cat out of the bag is one thing. Making the cat
into
a bag is quite another, but that is what Sulan Inc., has done.
A feline shape has been sculptured out of black rubber sheets and given metal studs for eyes.
Complete with a small handle, it is a good size and shape for carrying papers and such -- a cattache case, if you will.


It's a Shop. It's a Club. It's the Latest.
ROMP, a three-week-old store in the NoHo section of Manhattan that sells what it calls "avant-garb," is indeed a romp through every current teen-age fashion trend.
The store's name could stand for Really Old Memories Persist -- particularly memories of clothes from the 70's, like sharply flared bell-bottoms and zipper shirts with pointy collars and pull rings.
Or it could mean Regardless of One's Musical Preference.
For grunge rock fans, there are plaid shirts and the requisite Doc Martens.
If shoppers are into hip-hop, there are trousers taken to new extremes of jumbo-ness, some with drop flaps in back.


No Wonder Strauss Was Deaf To Debussy
After Richard Strauss attended a performance of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande," a friend explained the audience's dismay: "There are musical phrases, but they are not stressed or underlined so that the general public notices them." Strauss replied: "Yes, but I'm a musician, and I can't hear anything."
The French novelist Romain Rolland also tried to help Strauss understand Debussy.
He spoke of "the restraint of this form of art," its "shades and half-tones," its "little touches of color." None of it worked.


Poet in Pinstripes
O HOLY COW!
The Selected Verse of Phil Rizzuto.
Edited by Tom Peyer and Hart Seely.
Introduction by Roy Blount Jr. 107 pp.
Hopewell, N.J.: The Ecco Press.
Paper, $8.95.


Memorable Dim Sum, Always Available
Not all Chinese restaurants are clones with similar-sounding names, interchangeable menus and predictable food.
The Emperor's Wok in Kings Park has one of those forgettable names, but its food is memorable.
Dim sum, the delectable Chinese appetizer tempters rarely encountered outside of Chinatown and almost never offered at night, are always available at the Emperor's Wok.
The 18 choices cost $2.25 to $2.50.
Each plate contains two to four pieces.


Sports of The Times; No Underdog Ever Wins Final Four
THE Final Four.
It's so big now.
Dean Smith can remember when he couldn't give away his two competitor's tickets in 1952, but now it's an annual convention of biggies.
No underdogs, no outsiders, no Sycamores need apply.
These were the big boys assembled here last evening: four teams that had all been rated the best team in the country at some point during the season.
Now it will be either Michigan or North Carolina, and the first impulse is to say that Michigan has tremendous energy coming out of its 81-78 escape over Kentucky in overtime last night, but as Smith said, "It's a good thing we have the rest day in between."


The Executive Life; The Mountain Comes To Silicon Valley
THE home of the Yosemite Climbing Archives is currently the spare bedroom of a house in El Portal, just outside the California park.
But the 3,000-item collection is destined for a new home within the next couple of years.
Its tenders, Ken Yager and Mike Corbett, are in the midst of creating a National Museum of Climbing in or near Yosemite, which Mr.
Yager describes as "the rock climber's Mecca."
As arcane as such a museum may sound, it is getting financing and putting on exhibits.
Rock climbing turns out to have a national following and a number of avid and powerful fans, including Frank G. Wells, president of the Walt Disney Company; Richard Blum (the San Francisco financier who is married to Senator Dianne Feinstein), and NBC's Tom Brokaw.


Vile and Intolerable
To the Editor:
The only thing sicker than Philip Roth's latest regurgitation is The New York Times's glorying in it on page 1 of The Book Review.
It is a vile little conspiracy, a cheap vendetta against those who dare to be offended by calumny.
Self-hate has to be one of the most virulent destructive forces, if not the most.  (Rabbi) JOSEPH B. GLASER  New York


'Sweet &amp; Hot,' a Revue of Arlen's Music
For a spell, "Sweet &amp; Hot," a revue that decks out 38 songs by Harold Arlen, is sustained by the composer's ineffable bounty and its own simulated sass.
Embracing some 500 songs, the music of Arlen, who died in 1986 at the age of 81, remains too diversified and original to type.
Although Arlen is more associated with the blues than with Broadway, it was the composer's contention that he wrote only one real blues song, the essential "Blues in the Night."


Yomi, We Hardly Knew Ye
Viewers of CBS'S "Northern Exposure" are well used to the show's splashes of whimsy, like the moose that ambles affably around the corner in the opening credits and the eclectic music that complements, however obscurely, the loopy plot lines.
Those who stayed on past the end of a recent episode may have noticed another unusual touch: that night's show was dedicated to someone named John (Yomi) Rothlisberger, who, the dedication said, had died this year.
The dedication followed a poignant final scene in which Mike Monroe, played by Anthony Edwards, bade goodbye to the citizens of Cicely, Alaska, and headed off on a quixotic environmental crusade above the Arctic Circle.
Mike, who had suffered from a mysterious ailment that kept him housebound in a sealed dome, now believed he had recovered.
But there were intimations of mortality in his parting words to the townspeople: "So, my dear friends, fare thee well -- and if forever, still forever, fare thee well."
Mike had also been dating Maggie (Janine Turner), whose previous boyfriends had all been killed in various unfortunate accidents.
So who is Yomi Rothlisberger, and was the farewell scene written in tribute to him?
To answer the last question first: No.
"The timing was kind of interesting, but it had nothing to do with it," said John Vreeke, the show's associate producer, speaking from Roslyn, Wash., where the show is filmed.
Mr.
Vreeke explained that Mr.
Rothlisberger was simply a "little old farmer who lived in Roslyn" and had been more or less adopted by the "Northern Exposure" cast, appearing on the series numerous times as an extra.
Mr.
Rothlisberger, 73, died after a bad fall, Mr.
Vreeke said, and the producers wanted to do something to remember him.
A week after the March 15 show was broadcast, The New Yorker coincidentally published an article on relations between "Northern Exposure" and Roslyn, suggesting that residents were a bit put out by the onslaught of actors, producers and other television types crowding into their tiny mining town.
But Mr.
Vreeke insists that the meeting of Hollywood and Roslyn has been smooth and that people like Mr.
Rothlisberger have helped make it so.
"He didn't care about being in the TV show as much as he cared about being with us when were up here shooting," Mr.
Vreeke said.
"He was kind and loving and generous. We have lots of extras, but he was the most special person we knew."


A Plain Jane Becomes A Swan
No one could have predicted the way this fall and winter's film festivals have turned out: the New York Film Festival seemed old and stale, Sundance was young and vapid, and the New Directors/New Films Festival, of all things, has become the hot series of the moment.
If this season were made into a movie, New Directors would play the part of the plain and studious librarian who suddenly tosses away her (or his) glasses, gets made over in stylish clothes and emerges as a glamorous sex symbol.
New Directors, co-sponsored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art, has had successes over the years (most famously, Steven Spielberg's "Sugarland Express" in 1974).
But it has been better known for obscure art films from countries you've barely heard of and directors never heard from again.
This year its selection committee had the luck and judgment to find "Orlando," "The Music of Chance," "Savage Nights" and "Sunday's Children" -- a handful of films that are both audacious and accessible.
Together they have created the sense of discovery that is any festival's secret weapon.


Recent Sales
Brightwaters  $307,000
30 Lawrence Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, 2-car attached garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $8,600.
East Northport  $225,000
24 Autumn Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 23-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 0.50 acre; taxes $4,600.
Greenlawn  $107,000
193 Broadway  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old high ranch; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Levittown  $127,500
98 Butternut Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, Florida room, ; taxes $3,400.
West Islip  $325,000
2 Dolphin Lane  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 26- year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sunporch, deck, 264-feet bulkheading; taxes $8,000.
Williston Park  $195,500
511 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room, porch, 2-car garage; taxes $3,400.
OTHER AREAS Chester, N.J.  $160,000
40 State Park  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; brick flooring, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,695.
Harrison, N.Y.  $275,000
795 Lake Street  Four-bedroom, three-bath, 84-year-old Colonial; front porch, dining room, den, stone fireplace, detached two-car garage; taxes $1,900.
Enfield, Conn.  $149,000
35 Oxford Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old Dutch colonial; vinyl siding, thermopane windows, large master bedroom, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,317.


All That's Taken for Granted Is Power of Gay Vote
In a room crowded with more than 200 of New York City's most politically alert gay and lesbian voters in Greenwich Village last week, City Council President Andrew J. Stein was confidently explaining why he would be a better mayor for them than David N. Dinkins when a slider came across the plate.
What would Mr.
Stein do, a listener wondered, if the predominantly gay and lesbian synagogue in the West Village that wants to march in the Salute to Israel Parade next month is denied the chance?
Mr.
Stein -- who once said he hoped to be the first Jewish President of the United States and who is counting on support from conservative Jewish voters in his race against Mr.
Dinkins -- paused and cocked his head.


At Work; When Daughters Invade the Office
There was a time, and not as long ago as anyone under 40 might think, when career planning for young women consisted almost entirely of advice to go to college and major in "getting a man." Coeds with a practical streak spent their college years taking genteel degrees in library science or teaching, fields in which jobs were compatible with family obligations and readily available.
As the phrase, delivered by mothers all over America, went, such degrees were "something you can always fall back on."
Don't tell mama, but to many women, the thought of getting a degree to fall back on now seems as quaint as the phrase "career girl." Since the 1970's women have poured into the work force at all occupational levels.
By the end of the century, two of every three new workers are expected to be female.


U.S. Passport: New Antifraud Model Issued
People receiving United States passports, either new or renewed, in the next few weeks will be the first to get a new antifraud model.
The cover will be green fabric instead of blue cardboard, and the inside pages will be revised to thwart forgeries: new inks, new graphics and a device called a kinegram, similar to the color-changing holograms used on credit cards, showing Benjamin Franklin's face and the letters U.S.A.


For 75¦, a History Of Malta's Heroism
THE siege of Sarajevo, now entering its second year, is likely to leave deep scars on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
By contrast, the most recent historical parallel, the siege of Malta from 1940 through 1942, ended in a triumph of human spirit that was rewarded when King George VI awarded Malta the George Cross for gallantry.
Malta is the only country to be so honored, and the cross was incorporated into the flag of the Mediterranean nation when it became independent of British rule in 1964.


Rabin's Promised Peace Gets Lost in the Violence
One reason Yitzhak Rabin is Israel's Prime Minister is a teen-age girl named Helena Rapp.
Helena Rapp was viciously stabbed to death by a Palestinian a year ago as she waited for a bus near Tel Aviv, and Mr.
Rabin invoked her killing again and again during his election campaign last summer.
Install me as leader, he told Israelis, and you will have someone flexible enough to forge peace with the Arabs but also tough enough to stop Arabs who think they can get their way by knifing Jewish girls.
As the final vote proved, it was a winning strategy.


Corrections
The March 21 column, on new color-reversal printing paper, misstated the availability of Radiance-paper printing.
While Radiance papers have been sold in the United States for almost two years, they are not used in most processing labs.
The Kodalux lab in Dallas uses Radiance paper for making enlargements from prints, but none of the other Kodalux labs offer this service.


Laura Colin and Marc Klein
"WHAT we really wanted to do was go to Las Vegas and rent a pink Cadillac and find the Elvis Chapel, but we both realized our parents would never talk to us after that," Marc Klein said several days before his wedding.
Mr.
Klein, 29, a freelance advertising art director, and Laura Colin, also 29, the community coordinator for the Teen Outreach Program at the Association of Junior Leagues in New York, met at Harvard University (class of '87).
As it turned out, their wedding was nothing like eloping in a pink Cadillac.


MARCH 28 - APRIL 3: Regulating Communications; The F.C.C. Gives A Sharp Blow To Cable TV Prices
It has been a long time since the Government hammered a business as hard as the Federal Communications Commission did last week, when it ordered cable television companies to cut prices by more than $1 billion a year.
The rules, adopted to put in practice a law passed by Congress last year, sent the stocks of some big cable companies tumbling by 20 percent over two days.


Where Do Musicals Come From?
THIS is the time for singing about musicals.
Given a blitz of "Oklahoma!" nostalgia, it is difficult to avoid knowing that the Rodgers and Hammerstein classic opened on Broadway 50 years ago -- last Wednesday to the day.
Another yearlong observance marks the centennial of Broadway itself, the theater district that has been traditionally defined by musicals.
Add four new-issue stamps by the United States Postal Service, commemorating musical milestones -- "Showboat," "Porgy and Bess," "My Fair Lady," in addition to "Oklahoma!" -- and it's clear that a celebration of musicals, old musicals, is in the air.


Public &amp; Private; Justice Made Easy
The President of the United States has a good deal to do this spring before he gets around to what will likely be the summer announcement of a nominee for the Supreme Court.
He may not have decided yet
who
will get the job, but the question of
how
that person will be selected should be much on his mind.
And guidance will surely come in the lessons of recent history.
From the public humiliation of the conservative ideologue jurist Robert Bork, to the empty questioning of David Souter, to the evasions and obfuscations of Clarence Thomas, the President can figure out what
not
to do.


Now You See It, Now You Don't
"MORPH 1.1" (Macintosh): $149 list price, Gryphon Software Corporation, 7220 Trade Street, Suite 120, San Diego, Calif. 92121; telephone (619) 536-8815.
Spatially warped cross-fading, popularly called "morphing," is a computer-generated special effect that smoothly transforms one image into another.
It was used to create stunning effects in films such as "Terminator 2" and "Bram Stoker's Dracula." Now, morphing can be used in class on standard Macintosh computers. (A Windows version is expected in the summer.)
Morph 1.1 shows three windows on the screen.
One is the original image -- a student's class photograph that has been digitized with a scanner, for example.
Another is the target image, such as a second student's photograph.
In the middle is the "morph" window.
The user matches similar points on the two authentic images, nose and nose, right eye and right eye, and the software calculates the shape and color values in between.
A sliding scale allows the user to slowly blend the first image into the second, third and beyond.
The resulting "morph" images can be saved as a Quicktime movie.
Displays Video Images
Quicktime is the video software available on newer Apple Macintosh systems.
It allows the addition of video images to regular Macintosh files and displays them on the computer screen.
Slick special effects are the currency of the music-video generation, and Morph 1.1 gives this group a powerful classroom tool.
Students can create computer-based movies showing continental drift, or an animated illustration of a caterpillar becoming a butterfly.


Boys Need Not Be Boys
To the Sports Editor:
I wish to congratulate Robert Lipsyte ("Must Boys Always Be Boys?," The Times, March 12) for courageously and wisely connecting the demigod status of male athletes and the sexual abuse of women.
It is no surprise to me, as a therapist working with women who have been victimized by boys and men who are honored by our academic institutions and the sports/ media industrial complex, that there is a moral issue in this very lucrative sports culture.


The Most
There's nothing like a great buy, although what makes it great isn't always immediately apparent.
Here are 12 household items, each a superlative example of its kind, whether it's the fluffiest, tiniest -- or even just the oddest.


L.I.E. Walls Constitute Visual Obscenity
This is yet another letter on the continuing saga of the "noise walls" on the Long Island Expressway  [ "Expressway Noise Walls Disputed," Feb. 14, Letters, March 14 ] .
I travel between my home in Glen Cove and the East End regularly.
The great wall has made the two-hour trip less than pleasant.
The environment is of major concern to most citizens on Long Island and, allegedly, of local and national governments.
Apparently this concept is denied or negated on the Long Island Expressway, evinced by miles of "sound barriers walls" now under construction.


Incest Stories
To the Editor:
As a male survivor of childhood sexual abuse, I was greatly disappointed by Carol Tavris's essay and by the ensuing letters ("Real Incest and Real Survivors: Readers Respond," Feb. 14).


Contemporary Artists Travel Two Paths in Hartford Shows
IN Hartford, Real Art Ways has thrown down the gauntlet again, this time with a show about sex.
At the same time, Paesaggio, the kind of gallery regarded as an alternative to Real Art Ways, remains calm with paintings by Donna Senger and sculpture by Mary Barringer.
Though the lines are drawn it is not a duel, the war between the vanguard and establishment having ended decades ago.
All the same, the galleries illustrate two of the routes open to contemporary artists.
"Identifications and Desires" at Real Art Ways is composed of works by 12 artists whose purpose, the news release says, is twofold.
They address, on the one hand, "the pivotal role of fantasy in the formation of sexual identity" and, on the other, "the role of gender and object choice in the making of works that aim to open up and expose the structures of power and pleasure at play in culture today."


The Executive Computer; To Pentium or Not to Pentium? The Question Looms
THE Intel Corporation formally and finally introduced its powerful Pentium microprocessor last month, and by summertime PC buyers will see the first systems that use it.
The Pentium is the eventual successor to Intel's wildly popular i486 microprocessor, which has become the standard for desktop computers and network file servers used in businesses, but analysts are divided over whether the new chip will ever be as successful as its predecessor.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Georgetown
THE Wilsons are typical of many young adults who grew up in well-to-do Fairfield County.
Thomas Wilson is from Westport, his wife, Susan, from Weston.
Like many of their peers, they are rearing their first child, and cannot afford to live in either town.
After spending two months looking at 40 houses -- "whatever we could afford in Westport or Weston was in terrible disrepair," said Mr.
Wilson -- they decided to look farther north where prices were more reasonable.


Dishes Making the Most of Asparagus When It's at Its Peak
What better way to begin a meal than with cooked fresh asparagus, dipped in melted butter or a fruity olive oil, and eaten with your fingers?
April and May are the peak months for asparagus, even though (like just about every fruit and vegetable these days), it is available throughout the year.
But the best arrives on the market in the spring -- and the prices plummet.
A spectacular dish for a dinner party is steamed asparagus served on a colorful two-tone sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
Asparagus is also good with pasta, mixed with shrimp and tomatoes to go with fresh linguine, or tossed with wild mushrooms and cream in a sauce for farfalle (bow ties).
The pasta dishes can be served both as first and main courses.


With or Without Bo, White Sox Are in Fight
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Yankees appear on page 3.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
Staff predictions for the teams' order of finish in each division appear on page 2.
California Angels
If not for Mark Langston and Chuck Finley, a pair of fine pitchers, this could be mistaken for an expansion team in this year of expansion.
In their starting lineup, the Angels have two rookies, J. T. Snow and Tim Salmon; two others with a year or less in the majors, Damion Easley and Chad Curtis, and one other player with less than two years, Gary DiSarcina.
They also have in their pitching rotation 36-year-old Scott Sanderson and John Farrell, who hasn't pitched for two years while recovering from an elbow injury.


It's Impossible to Grow Just One Columbine
There is something about columbines.
The flowers are so beguiling in form, they are sure to please.
Their name was derived from the Latin columba, meaning dovelike, which refers to their shapely form.
What's more, columbines are easy to grow.
Beginners should consider this flower since it will thrive with minimum care and provide generous rewards.
It can even be used as a cutting flower.
The blooming season, which usually begins the early part of May, can extend into early summer.
Another advantage is that the columbine is not exceptionally fussy about its location.
Although the plant will do moderately well in full sun, columbines put their best foot forward when they have some shade during the hottest part of the day.
A bright somewhat shaded nook is even to their liking.


Dishes Making the Most of Asparagus When It's at Its Peak
What better way to begin a meal than with cooked fresh asparagus, dipped in melted butter or a fruity olive oil, and eaten with your fingers?
April and May are the peak months for asparagus, even though (like just about every fruit and vegetable these days), it is available throughout the year.
But the best arrives on the market in the spring -- and the prices plummet.
A spectacular dish for a dinner party is steamed asparagus served on a colorful two-tone sauce made with red and yellow peppers.
Asparagus is also good with pasta, mixed with shrimp and tomatoes to go with fresh linguine, or tossed with wild mushrooms and cream in a sauce for farfalle (bow ties).
The pasta dishes can be served both as first and main courses.


Caroline Ewing, Jonathan Crystal
Caroline Day Ewing, the daughter of Alexander C. Ewing of Winston- Salem, N.C., and Millbrook, N.Y., and the late Carol Sonne Ewing, was married yesterday to Jonathan Michael Crystal, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Crystal of Beverly Hills, Calif.
The Rev.
Anne Bolles-Beaven, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Colony Club in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Ewing, who is 27, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer at the Center for Public Representation, a public-interest law practice in Newton, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.


POSTINGS: On the East River; Design for Middle Income
Four towers designed by Cesar Pelli anchor a major development on a vast waterfront site in New York.
It sounds like Battery Park City, but the description could apply to the Queens West project in Hunters Point.
Cesar Pelli and Associates of New Haven is to work with Frank Williams and Associates of Manhattan on four apartment buildings, with about 1,500 units, as part of the first stage of Queens West.
The goal is "fine architecture that's affordable for middle-income New Yorkers," said Herbert J. Sturz, president of the Trotwood Corporation.


The Answers
1.
False.
In the early 19th century, centers of forestry education were established in many European nations.
2. Smoky the Bear.
3.
Lightning.
Some 8 million bolts of lightning strike Earth each day.
Every year lightning starts approximately 50,000 forest fires worldwide, including 10,000 in the United States.
4.
A surface fire burns on the forest floor, destroying shrubs and floor litter.
A crown fire burns the tops of trees and, fanned by winds, can be much more dangerous and faster moving than a surface fire.
5.
False.
Factors are weighed such as whether life and property are endangered or whether weather conditions are such that the fire could spread out of control.
And some fires benefit forests, consuming litter on forest floors that provides a habitat for many tree-killing insects.
6. b) 8,000 gallons.
7. It is a cone-bearing tree.
8.
Leaves on deciduous trees emit a great deal of water.
In winter months in the North or during dry spells in warmer climates, little moisture can be drawn up from frozen or arid ground.
So, trees would dry up and die if they retained their leaves.
9. Conifers. The oak is deciduous.
10. All of the answers are correct.
11.
In a narrow belt that girdles the globe at the Equator in regions where the temperature ranges from 68 to 82 degrees Fahrenheit and more than 80 inches of rain on average falls per year.
12.
Tree farming; the process of developing and raising trees for their ability to meet various human needs.
Forests created by silviculture often feature one type of tree (monoculture), and thus attract a limited variety of wildlife.
13.
Tropical rain forests never have a dry season.
Most of the trees have broad leaves that are never bare.
Because little sunlight filters through the thick treetops, there is relatively little undergrowth on the rainforest floor.
By contrast, jungles are characterized by dense, low vegetation and may grow in dry or wet climates.
Some jungles have few trees and only impassable thickets of low shrubs.
14. b) 50 percent.
15. a) teak/tropical rain forest; b) oak/temperate deciduous broad-leafed forest; c) Douglas fir/temperate Northern hemisphere forest; d) cypress/Southern coniferous forest.
16. c) the tendency of trees to bend toward light.
17. Carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere.
18. a) 50 years.
19. a) Ouachita Forest/Arkansas; b) Tongass National Forest/Alaska; c) Petrified Forest/Arizona; d) Black Forest/Germany.


Rare Gold Baubles: Small, Ancient And Radiant
Gold was the metal Mycenaean nobles chose for rings the size of kumquats and belt decorations as showy as any cowboy's.
Women also opted for gold in their necklaces, their enameled pendants and the ornaments that glowed on their gowns.
Described in the eighth century B.C. by Homer as "rich in gold," the Mycenaeans amassed impressive holdings of exquisite metal miniatures and carved gemstones.
The ancient land of the Mycenaeans, the first Greek-speaking people, encompassed modern-day Greece.
Their legacy was initially uncovered in the 1870's by the German archeologist Heinrich Schliemann.
A rare group of precious objects similar to those Schliemann excavated is exhibited in "Gold of the Mycenaeans" at the Michael Ward Gallery in Manhattan, through June 5.


Fit and Lean: The Antidote To Insanity
NAME: Susan Powter.
IDENTITY: The host of "Stop the Insanity," the most frequently broadcast infomercial on television last month.


Jefferson Remembered in 2 Cities
The cities of Charlottesville, Va., and Philadelphia are celebrating Thomas Jefferson's 250th birthday this month with a series of special exhibits, lectures and tours.
Born on April 13, 1743, Jefferson lived primarily in Charlottesville at Monticello, the house he designed in 1769 and built over a period of 40 years.
He also drew up the original plans for the University of Virginia. ("Architecture is my delight and putting up, and pulling down, one of my favorite amusements," he once said.)
Events starting this month through the fall include garden tours of Monticello and the University of Virginia and walking tours focusing on African-American life on the Monticello plantation.
On April 12 William H. Rehnquist, Chief Justice of the United States, will give a free lecture on Jefferson at the University of Virginia Law School.
Events on April 13 include the unveiling of a Jefferson stamp at Monticello and the opening of a major exhibition of the house as it was during Jefferson's time.
Birthday events at the University of Virginia include speeches by Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the columnist George Will.
Events on April 13 are free, except for the special exhibition at Monticello, where visitors must pay the regular admission fee of $8.
Hours at Monticello, which is about two miles east of downtown Charlottesville on Route 53, are ordinarily 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
On April 13 the house will open at 9:30 A.M.
Monticello information, (804) 295-8181; University of Virginia information, (804) 982-1900.


Bonnie Dommert and Andrew Benkard
June wedding plans have been announced for Bonnie Marie Dommert, a sales-promotion specialist in the office of the publisher at the World Bank in Washington, and Andrew Minturn Benkard, a project manager at American Office, an office-furniture dealership there.
Miss Dommert, 25, graduated from Louisiana State University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
A.
Roland and Mary M. Dommert of Schaumburg, Ill.
Her father is the executive director of the American Veterinary Medical Association in Schaumburg.


Charity Photo Ops
Society portraiture flowered in European courts, came back in vogue with Andy Warhol and re-emerged recently at a benefit auction held at Sotheby's for Friends in Deed, which helps people with life-threatening diseases.
A $1,000 donation bought an 8-by-10 Polaroid taken by one of four prominent photographers.
In 90's style, not only was vanity served, but charity as well.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2 Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A A special report examines the bolder breed of youth in the 90's.
Also: *
Adult students at alumni colleges. *
A mixed message in black schools.


Incest Stories
To the Editor:
Carol Tavris's essay "Beware the Incest-Survivor Machine" (Jan. 3) has just been brought to my attention.
I feel it borders on a dangerous trend in psychology, blaming the victim -- something that harks back to the Freudian days when all stories of incest were sloughed off as patient fantasies.


Donna Tempel, Andrew Lazarus
Dr.
Donna Lynn Tempel, the daughter of Guenter Temple and Adrienne Krumbruch-Felicciardi, both of New York, was married on Friday to Andrew Scott Lazarus, the son of Theodore Lazarus of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Fredye Lazarus.
Rabbi Phillip Hiat performed the ceremony at the chapel of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations in New York.


Settling With The Airlines
SOME $400 million in airline discount vouchers are scheduled to be distributed to travelers under a settlement in a class-action suit charging nine airlines with price fixing.
The settlement was approved by Federal District Judge Marvin H. Shoob in Atlanta on March 22.
The deadline for filing claims had already been extended to June 1, and the judge ordered that renewed efforts be made to notify potential claimants through newspaper ads and other publicity.


Kangaroo Island
To the Editor: In addition to the raucous fairy penguins, the cuddly koalas and the shy echidnas of Kangaroo Island, are the hordes of white pelicans and gannets that arrive promptly at 4 P.M. to be fed by one devoted islander, and eager tourists.
We, the tourists, and the birds all waited eagerly for their patron to drive in his truck loaded with buckets of fish heads.
When it finally arrived, the sky was filled wingtip to wingtip with noisy, raffish sounds from the birds and delighted screaming from the tourists at the extraordinary sight.


Missing Person


Waiting for That Letter From Princeton
The letters are in the mail, and by tomorrow, the hundreds of high school seniors around the state who applied for admission to Princeton University will know their fate -- acceptance, or a message from the dean of admission that concludes, "We do appreciate your having had the interest and taken the time to submit an application."
Similar letters are being dispatched from all of New Jersey's colleges and universities, of course, but Princeton's decisions are special -- not only because it is the state's only Ivy League university or because of its academic excellence, but because its graduates represent the cream of the state's leadership in areas as diverse as politics, education and commerce.
For generations of high school seniors and their parents, alumni and nonalumni alike, admission to Princeton has seemed a ticket to the good life.


Alumni Colleges Bring Them Back
ALL YOU ADULTS who wish you had gone to an Ivy League or other hard-to-get-into college but never had the chance, take heed.
It is not too late.
For an intense summer week or two, you can sample what life is like on some of America's finest colleges by living there, attending classes, eating in dining halls and rubbing shoulders -- and minds -- with professors.
It is a phenomenon known as alumni college, and the best part is this: You don't have to take the College Boards or be an alum to participate.
The programs -- offered independently at campuses such as Dartmouth, Cornell, Brandeis, Harvard, Yale, Smith, the University of Michigan and Washington and Lee -- go well beyond the routine evening continuing-education classes taught by often exhausted faculty members.


Chasing Chairs
ISAAC MIZRAHI, FASHION designer and compulsive chair buyer, walked into Lubin Galleries, an auction house in lower Manhattan.
From every corner of the showroom, chairs began singing to him, like Circes in slipcovers.
"Why do I have this chair karma?" he asked, pausing before a tattered pair of 1950's swivel chairs.
"I have 1,001 chairs. I need tables, lamps, andirons."
Soon he was swiveling in one of the chairs, talking about their "good bones," about how he would dress them.
"They'd be so witty covered in a beige-y kind of burlap, don't you think? Or in pink moire with a delicate, funny, little stripe. Oh, dreamy."


Squabble Over Sponsorship Puts Unicef Bill in Jeopardy
The United Nations has its own inscrutable ways, but when it comes to the arcane protocols of governing bureaucracies, it may have met its match in Albany.
A seemingly innocuous piece of legislation to help the United Nations Children's Fund expand its offices in Manhattan -- a bill described as vital to keeping the relief agency and its 950 jobs in New York City -- has become mired in the politics and proprieties of the Legislature.


A Season Boils Down To Sweetness and Sales
"PUT on the fog lights," said Jo-Ellen Servilla.
Smoke from two evaporators filled the Rock House Maple Syrup Sugar house in Easton recently as they boiled 120 gallons of sap into three gallons of syrup.
"Maple season started three weeks late," said Mrs.
Servilla, who is 36 years old and runs the sugar house with her husband, Jim, who is 38.


A Nicotine Fit Brings Down The Bull Market
EVERYONE knew that the Marlboro Man was lethal to many of his customers.
But who thought he could kill a bull market?
Whatever else Philip Morris's decision to cut prices may signify, it marks an end to the era in which big consumer product companies were viewed as growth stocks on Wall Street.
The belief was that such branded companies could push up prices forever, thus raising profits even if consumption was growing slowly or, in the case of tobacco, shrinking.


College Majors Often Prove Minor
IN THESE judgmental times, when you are what you eat, wear and drive, it's comforting to think back on those simple days in college, when all you were was your major.
On campus, a field of emphasis was a trusty Rorschach test: A declaration of electrical engineering meant a nerd with a pocket protector; business, a loud fraternity brother with a sweatshirt and loafers without socks; philosophy, a head-in-the-clouds intellectual who was disconnected from life.
But while the common stereotypes often ring true -- sociology majors do tend to be liberals, premeds serious and music majors dressed in black -- conversations with graduates from all walks of life reveal that a degree is not destiny.
Manzi?
Classics?
For instance, Jim Manzi, president and chief executive officer of Lotus Development, the second-largest software company in the world, studied classics at Colgate.
Roger Corman, the Louis B. Mayer of B Movies, earned his degree in engineering at Stanford, and Jonathan Winters, the comedian, and Patrick Ewing, the center for the Knicks, both majored in art -- at Kenyon and Georgetown, respectively.


From a Humble Sump, a Sanctuary
AN old drainage basin doesn't seem like much of a place to set up a bird sanctuary.
But that's just what Hofstra University plans to do with the state-owned sump that runs under Hempstead Turnpike west of the New York Jets practice field in Hempstead, L.I.
It doesn't look like much now, just a steep-sloped neglected piece of land, right next to the campus, with a dried-up marsh in the middle, a few cattails, some pines and cedar planted by the wind and the birds, a few groundhog holes and the usual cans and bottles and old shoes (though an army of volunteers filled 65 garbage bags with those one day last fall).


The Challenge of a Monologue in the First Person
Making a career as a solo autobiographical performer seems an inherent contradiction: if what you do is talk about yourself, eventually all you'll have to talk about is talking, sure to drive an audience away.
One solution may be to move on, in form and content -- once the personal ground is covered.
Two performers whose work will be in repertory at the Joseph Papp Public Theater this month occupy positions at each end of this spectrum.
David Cale has been delivering his idiosyncratic, musiclike monologues since 1982.
"Deep in a Dream of You," which opens tonight, includes his first forays into pure fiction.
Marga Gomez, a Latina comedian who lives in San Francisco, will present her first performance piece, "Memory Tricks." An affectionate sendup of Hispanic culture as well as a homage to her mother, who has Alzheimer's disease, it opens on April 13.


Richard N. Lander, 64, Historian And Ex-Westchester Jurors Chief
Richard N. Lander, the retired Commissioner of Jurors for Westchester County and also a local historian and church official, died on Friday at his home in Armonk, N.Y.
He was 64.
He had a long illness, his family said.


Impact Fees Re-Examined in California
There is no receptionist at the front desk of the Riverside County Planning Department.
A revolving sign assures visitors that "someone will be with you in a few moments." Another notes that the agency is closed every other Friday.
Just beyond is a cavernous open area filled with empty desks.
One of the fastest growing counties in California -- its rate of growth was 10 percent in 1989 and 6.4 percent in 1992 -- Riverside is a typical example of an area that has grown to depend on real estate impact fees to pay for vital services and develop infrastructure.
When times were good, the fees helped municipalities and counties grow by making development pay for its effect on the community, like the need for more or wider roads, sewers, schools, parks, fire protection and other services.


Beth Rubin and Mitchell Hofing
Beth Sharon Rubin, a daughter of Herbert Rubin of Brooklyn and the late Lillian Rubin, was married last evening to Mitchell Herman Hofing, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney L. Hofing of Yardley, Pa.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in Manhattan.
The bride, 30, is a vice president in global operations at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.
She graduated from Hofstra University.
Her father owns and operates a taxicab in Brooklyn.


CRIME
It's child's play to solve the infernal puzzle-plot of Colin Dexter's latest and best Inspector Morse mystery, THE WAY THROUGH THE WOODS (Crown, $20), the winner of Britain's 1992 Gold Dagger Award for best crime novel.
All you need is Morse's grasp of poetry, ornithology, pornography, ballistics, human nature and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
It also helps to adopt the work method of "prayer and fasting" that he recommends to his good Sergeant Lewis.
Failing that, you can always surrender in admiration to Morse, the most prickly, conceited and genuinely brilliant detective since Hercule Poirot.
The irascible hero is on vacation in Lyme Regis, planning to reread Jane Austen and the "Odyssey" and to catch up on church architecture, natural history and his billiard skills, when he is distracted by a newspaper account of "sinister verses" that hold clues to the year-old disappearance of a Swedish student.
Intrigued, he makes his own anagrammatic contribution to the lively, allusive dialogue in the letters to the editor column -- a cryptographer's delight of "extraordinary if possibly unwarranted ingenuity" -- which eventually leads to the reopening of the case.


Sanchez And Graf Gain Final
First, Gabriela Sabatini, with disbelief in her eyes, but sportsmanship in her manner, walked toward the net to shake the hand of Steffi Graf, the familiar nemesis who had just snubbed her, 6-0, 7-6 (7-3), in the semifinal of the Family Circle Magazine Cup.
Then she trudged to the baseline behind Graf and checked the mark of the barely errant service return that cost her a chance to fight to the finish in her bid to reach her fourth consecutive final here.
The out-of-bounds smudge confirmed her worst suspicions; her improbable comeback from a 1-5 second-set deficit after being denied even a game in the first set would not, after all, make a third set inevitable.


THE FOREIGN POLICY MACHINE
I was delighted to read Mark Danner's incisive analysis of George Bush's foreign policy failures ("How the Foreign Policy Machine Broke Down," March 7).
Danner fearlessly points out that "enthusiastic appeasement followed by diplomatic bumbling forced the country to send its young to needless military action" in Panama and Iraq.
I nearly applauded while reading that there was "clear evidence that remarkable stupidity, and perhaps even criminal misuse of Government institutions, had helped lead to Saddam's military buildup and his invasion of Kuwait." But I did not applaud.
Instead I wondered why this article was not published
before
George Bush lost the election.
Where were these brave words when a powerful adversary was in the White House?


Juvenile Gala, Very Animated
EVERY string in town had been pulled for the "Bunny Hop" benefit for the pediatric day hospital at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, which was held at F.A.O.
Schwarz on Wednesday night.
"I'm good friends with Christine and Austin Hearst and they own Popeye, Betty Boop and Olive Oyl, so that's how we got them," said a chairwoman of the event, Courtney Arnot, a young mother and the wife of Dr.
Bob Arnot of CBS News.
"Also, the man who invented the Ninja Turtles once stayed at Sloan-Kettering, so he donated them to us."
The party, packed with live cartoon characters and some name entertainers on the children's pop-culture circuit, was like a juvenile Garden of Earthly Delights in Sensurround.
It was refreshing in a headache-inducing sort of way.


CLINTON IS CAUGHT BY BOSNIA DILEMMA
The Bosnian Serbs' rejection of a plan for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina brings President Clinton face-to-face with the question he raised during the Presidential campaign and has avoided ever since: Should the United States use force to stop the fighting in Bosnia?
Now, the Serbs have called the Administration's bluff -- betting, in essence, that Washington will not respond with force and that they can weather sanctions while they continue grabbing land in Bosnia.
Even today, fighting was reported in Sarajevo and the eastern enclave of Srebrenica, in violation of a cease-fire.  'Argument Still Goes On'
Administration officials said that they plan to support tighter sanctions against the former Yugoslavia in meetings at the United Nations next week, and then to look into exempting Bosnia from the arms embargo.
Already today, the Security Council called for more peacekeepers in eastern Bosnia, but did not respond to a request that the peacekeepers take over Srebrenica to save the besieged residents.


Amy S. Goldman, Jonathan Cohen
Amy Susan Goldman, an assistant merchandiser at Brooks Brothers in New York, was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Jonathan Charles Cohen, a clinical psychologist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.
Rabbi Judah Miller performed the ceremony at Temple Brith Kodesh in Rochester.
Mrs.
Cohen graduated from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of David and Marilyn Goldman of Rochester.
Her father is the chief executive and president of the Voit Corporation, a sporting-goods manufacturer and distributor in Rochester.


A Strong First Quarter For Foreign Portfolios
For the first time in four years, Americans who invested their dollars in foreign stocks in the first quarter instead of here at home had cause to be satisfied.
The quarter was characterized by falling interest rates in many industrialized countries, generally benign swings in the value of the dollar and a Japanese Government-led surge on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, the world's second biggest.


Interferon Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Phoenix or Beyond? Montana Rumors Fly
Rumors of a trade that have trailed 49ers quarterback Joe Montana for the last two years heated up again over the weekend with a report in a California newspaper Saturday that Kansas City, Tampa Bay and Phoenix are interested in acquiring him and that a deal could be done as soon as today.
A trade of Montana would have a two-fold purpose for the 49ers.
First, it would clear the way for Steve Bono, an unrestricted free agent who hasn't announced whether he wants to stay with or leave the 49ers, to be named the backup to Steve Young.
And second, it would free up the $2.5 million that Montana is scheduled to earn this year.
The 49ers are trying to sign Eagles defensive end Reggie White with an eye to a possible salary cap in 1994 under the National Football League's new rules on free agency.


Stage Is Set: Control vs. Cockiness
They cried on that final Monday night nearly a year ago.
They spat obscenities in the Michigan dressing room after what had been a taut championship game against Duke suddenly dissolved at the very end into a crushing 20-point loss for them.
From that moment on, in a high-profile business usually dominated by the personalities of its coaches, Michigan's Fab Five was the focal point of this year's national college basketball tournament.


Moorco International reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Let's Curb Social Security Number's Uses
To the Editor:
Marc Greidinger sued the State of Virginia and won his case for keeping his Social Security number private when registering to vote (news article, March 25).
This may make Mr.
Greidinger, a 29-year-old staff lawyer with the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, appear like the hero David defeating the mighty Goliath, but I think his slingshot was misdirected.
The privacy that needs to be protected is not the Social Security number, but the information in the files that the number helps identify.
It would probably be a good idea if Social Security numbers were generally used and available for identification.
They are unique, universal, unambiguous and relatively concise.
I do not advocate that we give up our names in favor of numbers, but if an organization has to deal with 10 John Smiths, something more is needed.
In the past our local police department promoted Project Theftguard, encouraging people to engrave their driver's license number on household articles to assist in their identification in case of theft.
I chose to use my Social Security number as being much more practical.
The problem with privacy is not that Social Security numbers are used for identification, but that the custodians of confidential information have inadequate procedures for releasing that information.
If a name is not sufficient to provide access, neither should a Social Security number be.
There are other possibile choices.
The most obvious is the use of a brief personal identification number, a system used by banks and bank cards.
There will be situations in which it is not practical to set up an identification system in advance, for example, a request for a birth certificate or a request to a credit bureau for one's record in its files.
Each organization must be responsible for setting up adequate procedures for safeguarding and releasing its information.
A Social Security number may be helpful for identification, but it need not and should not be the key that unlocks the door to private information.
JEROME KURSHAN  Princeton, N.J., March 26, 1993


Wainwright Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SUMMIT IN VANCOUVER: The Play at Home; Presidents' Summit Seems Remote to Many Russians
The summit meeting between President Boris N. Yeltsin and President Clinton was the first item tonight on "Itogi," Russia's popular and respected news and commentary program, but the focus was not summitry or foreign aid.
Rather, it was the political crisis that rocked the country last week and its likely impact on the April 25 constitutional referendum.
After the high drama of Mr.
Yeltsin's showdown with the Congress of People's Deputies, the meetings in Vancouver, British Columbia, seem tame and distant to many Russians.
Add to this the fact that no Russian newspapers come out on Sundays, and it is understandable that the first day and a half of news from Vancouver has received only cursory treatment.


GATT Chief Says U.S. Delays Pact
An international trade agreement that would stimulate the shaky world economy is being delayed while the Clinton Administration devotes political energy and negotiators to the North American Free Trade Agreement, the departing head of the world's free trade body says.
The remarks by Arthur Dunkel, the director general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which is based here and administers international free trade rules, underscore the problem the Clinton Administration faces as it tries to reach two free trade agreements at the same time.


In Russia, Employee Ownership Is Succeeding; A Credit Union Link
To the Editor:
In "The Right Stuff for Russia" (Op-Ed, March 24), Senator Bill Bradley suggests that Americans should "reach out generously toward the peoples of Russia, Ukraine and the other republics." Such action is already taking place within the credit union movement.


Tristar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Corrections
The Sports of The Times column on Saturday about an exhibition on the history of the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament misidentified the coach of the 1949-50 City College basketball team.
He was Nat Holman, not Clair Bee.


Envirogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United-Guardian Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Kulwicki Raced, Reigned As a Driven Outsider
Soon after Alan Kulwicki won the 1992 Winston Cup championship, he was asked half-jokingly whether it meant that his financially strapped team might finally get to fly to and from races in a private plane, instead of on commercial flights.
As it turned out, the greatest triumph of Kulwicki's life would indirectly lead to his death, last Thursday night in a plane crash in Bristol, Tenn.


China's Newest Partner: South Korea
Four decades after battling each other in a ferocious war, China and South Korea are signing a wave of investment and trade agreements that provide the basis for an important new economic partnership in East Asia.
It would be a formidable alliance, for while South Korea engineered an economic miracle with its skill in manufacturing and marketing, its growth has slowed in the last few years, in part because of rising labor costs.
China offers just the kind of $3-a-day wages that, under Korean management, may produce yet more garments, television sets and stereo players for international markets.


CHRONICLE
JOE CLARK, whose unorthodox approach to education was depicted in the film "Lean on Me," told students they should not use society's problems as an excuse for dropping out.
"I know it's hard for black Americans, but it was harder for your great-great-grandmama and your great-great-grandpapa who worked from can't-see mornin' till can't-see night," the former principal of Eastside High School in Paterson, N.J., told 120 youngsters in Indianapolis on Saturday, The Associated Press said.


Dance in Review
Hidejo Kanzaki And Seijo Kanzaki  Japan Society
Jiuta-mai, an exquisite form of Japanese classical dance, is seldom performed in New York.
And so it was good to see a program of jiuta-mai, presented on Thursday in the Lila Acheson Wallace Auditorium of the Japan Society.


Housing Plan Prompts Look At Past Effort
After years of the fear and uncertainty of living in dilapidated apartments with drug-dealing neighbors, tenants at 526 West 158th Street in Manhattan had reason for hope when, with the help of a nonprofit agency and the city, they took over the property in 1989.
But not everything has gone smoothly.
The building, in Washington Heights, has fallen behind on its property taxes and loans from the city, and an attempt to renovate it has left some families struggling with incomplete bathrooms, broken windows and drains filled with concrete and plaster.


Acier Leroux reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Rebecca Victor, Sami Baadarani
Rebecca Lynn Victor, a daughter of A. Paul and Ellen G. Victor of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to M. Sami Baadarani, a son of Leila and Sami M. Baadarani of Beirut.
Judge Martin Marcus, of the New York State Court of Claims in the Bronx, officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Baadarani, 27, is an independent associate producer of videos and films, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges.
Her mother is a real estate broker for Douglas Elliman, a real estate company in New York.


Out at Shea, Mets Will Begin Against a Beginner
For one club, the Mets, the season that opens today at Shea Stadium is supposed to be a serious, purposeful trip back from ignominy and toward redemption.
For the other, the Colorado Rockies, the season is a birth, a thrilling, awkward, historic explosion into identity.
Call it, then, the odyssey and the ecstasy, and it all gets under way for the two clubs today at 2:10 P.M.


To Our Readers
Starting today, the suggested newsstand price of The Times on weekdays and Saturdays outside the New York metropolitan area increases to 75 cents.


Editorial Notebook; The Past Is Not a Prison
Dismayed by bleak news from Moscow, some Americans jump to a bleaker conclusion -- that Russia's democratic experiment is doomed.
Russians are bred to autocracy, pessimists contend, and have no conception of minority rights nor any habits of compromise.
The Yeltsin experiment is a mere parenthesis, they say, an interlude between tyranny past and tyranny yet to come.
What makes this dark vision seem plausible is its core of historic truth.
In a famous passage, Alexis de Tocqueville remarked long ago that Americans rely on the common sense of the people, while Russians center all authority in the state: "The principle instrument of the former is freedom; of the latter, servitude."


Frisch's Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 7


New Lead-Poisoning Law Is Hampered by Delays
Last year, amid growing recognition of the health risks of lead to children, New York State passed a law to create one of the nation's most comprehensive programs to prevent lead poisoning by requiring that all young children and pregnant women be tested for lead in their blood.
The law went into effect Thursday, but its most sweeping provisions have not yet been put into place.
Because of bureaucratic delays and what some say is foot dragging by the state, mandatory testing may not start until the summer.


INSIDE
Israel Trims Arab Workforce
Israel has begun measures to reduce the number of Palestinians working in the occupied territories and is looking for Jews to fill the jobs.
Page A7.
Another Version of Raid
Lawyers for the leader of the Branch Davidian cult are contradicting the Government's account of a deadly shootout in Texas.
Page A10. 47 Points and a Title
Sheryl Swoopes set an N.C.A.A. finals record as Texas Tech beat Ohio State for the women's basketball championship.
SportsMonday, page C7.


Essay; In the Cruelest Month
"April is the cruelest month," wrote the poet T. S. Eliot, ". . . mixing Memory and desire."
In the April that features the first global presidential campaign, Boris Yeltsin is reminding both his compatriots and former superpower competitors of the threat to freedom of revanchist apparatchiks, while fanning the desire "to move from general assurances to pragmatic, specific acts."


Washington at Work; Arts Chief May Have Met His Match
"When you travel around the world, if you go to London, you go to the Festival Hall. You go to Paris, you go to the Opera. You go to Moscow, you go to the Bolshoi. You go to Washington, you go out to dinner. I'd like to change that." -- James D. Wolfensohn, chairman of the Kennedy Center, in 1990.
Three years ago, James D. Wolfensohn descended on Washington from New York with plans to snatch the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts out of the red and into international artistic prominence.


Noise Com Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-9  AID RISES TO $1.6 BILLION  President Clinton pledged $1.6 billion in assistance intended to show "immediate and tangible" support for Boris N. Yeltsin's reforms.
The amount was higher than the initial $1 billion because of $700 million in long-term, low-cost credits to enable Russia to start receiving American grain shipments.
A1  A NEW BRAND OF SUMMIT  In the summit meeting of the 1990's, it's partnerships, not handouts; pragmatism not pomp, and trafficking in money, not threats.
Image is paramount, and low-key is the operative word.
A9


Hey, I'll Ride It, Won't You?


Man Held in 3 Slayings
A 27-year-old Queens man was arrested on Saturday in the shooting deaths of three men in a Mexican restaurant in the Bronx last month, the police said yesterday.
The suspect, Oscar Pagan, was arrested at his home at 88-09 214th Street in Queens Village shortly after 2 A.M., said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.
Two employees of the Lena Restaurant at 206 East 198th Street in Bedford Park and a nephew of the owner were shot on March 9 after at least two robbers took about $100 from the cash register.
One customer survived a gunshot wound and another employee escaped.


Egypt Warned U.S. of Terror, Mubarak Says
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said today that the United States could have prevented the bombing of the World Trade Center if American officials had heeded his country's warnings about an Islamic fundamentalist network in the United States.
But he suggested that the information provided by Egypt related generally to activities by individuals in the United States, not that Egypt had passed on specific information foreshadowing the bombing.


Review/Ballet; A 'Swan Lake' Updated to the 18th Century
By the time the San Francisco Ballet offered a reprise of its shimmering "Swan Lake" on Saturday afternoon with a new cast that included a sensational guest appearance by the great Cuban dancer Jorge Esquivel as Von Rothbart, it was clear that the company had won the hearts of its New York audience.
Helgi Tomasson's 1988 version of "Swan Lake," set in the 18th century rather than the usual medieval locale, has been the big hit of the troupe's debut season at the New York State Theater.
But Mr.
Tomasson, the San Francisco Ballet's artistic director, has also put as many of his impressive dancers on display as possible.


Box Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Callon Consolidated reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Hypocrat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


McCann-Erickson Returning to Hotels
The Doubletree Hotels Corporation of Phoenix said it had selected McCann-Erickson Los Angeles to handle its account, which had been with GBF/Ayer of Los Angeles since February 1991.
Billings were estimated at $11.5 million.
The assignment is an especially triumphant one for McCann Los Angeles because it signals the agency's return to the travel and tourism sector.
Last September, the office suffered a blow when it lost the $16 million Hilton Hotels account after 25 years.


Good News Garage Leads to Radio Laurels
Heather from Idaho needs advice on buying a "new" used pickup truck.
Her husband is a teacher, but in the summer, see, he runs a landscaping business on the side, so he needs a big truck.
"Where in Idaho do you live?" Tom Magliozzi demands in a belligerent tone.


Martin Marietta's Defensive Strategy
For Norman R. Augustine, chairman of the Martin Marietta Corporation, signing up to buy the General Electric Corporation's aerospace division for $3 billion last year was far easier than the monumental task he now faces in consolidating the two businesses under one roof.
That will mean laying off thousands of workers, closing production plants, and selling mediocre operations to achieve the economies of scale that Mr.
Augustine promised last November when he agreed to the deal, which creates the world's largest military electronics company.


SHUTTLE READIED FOR OZONE STUDY
Preparations moved ahead smoothly today as technicians readied the space shuttle Discovery for a mission to study the changing nature of Earth's atmosphere.
A spokesman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said there were no major barriers in sight for a launching of the spacecraft and its five-member crew scheduled for 1:32 A.M.
Tuesday.


Seat in the Penalty Box Is Expensive for Devils
It was only after they fell behind the Penguins by four goals tonight that the Devils were awakened from their deep lethargy, but it was too late and they suffered their third consecutive loss.
The Penguins took advantage of the Devils' slow start and a number of untimely penalties by the home team for a 5-2 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Review/Circus; The Lions Are Only Humans
As a Big Top performance event, the Cirque du Soleil operates in a sphere where myth meets magic.
In keeping with the Italian name of its new show, the Cirque takes a Fellini esque turn.
"Saltimbanco" is closer to "Satyricon" than to "Juliet of the Spirits," with an eerie, erotic edge that makes it an entertainment more suitable for adults than for the youngest children.
In contrast to the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey extravaganza, this French Canadian troupe is like a European circus: one ring filled with singular acts.
The difference is in the Cirque's high-powered style, an unearthly mixture of commedia dell'arte and rock-concert razzle.
"Saltimbanco" is less innocent than the company's two previous shows in its tent in Battery Park City.
But the framework remains free-form, one act flowing into another without introductory fanfare.
At times the show is breathtaking, as in the elasticized aerialism of Claude Lergenmuller, whose team of trapezists bounces through the sky like a quartet of balletic bungee jumpers.


Optelecom Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Aaon Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Yvette Starer and Joseph Weiner
Dr.
Yvette Regina Starer, a pediatrician with Tenafly (N.J.) Pediatrics, was married yesterday to Dr.
Joseph Stuart Weiner, a physicist at A. T. &amp; T. Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Irving Spielman officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Dr.
Starer, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Starer of Tenafly.
Her father is the president of the Interboro Supply Corporation, a restaurant supply company in Brooklyn.


Confusion And Cuts On Yanks' Final Day
Six weeks after they began workouts under the Florida sun -- and one day from their season opener in frigid Cleveland -- the Yankees finally made their unkindest cuts of the spring.
Gone are Hensley Meulens, Gerald Williams, Andy Stankiewicz and Jeff Johnson, all sent down yesterday to Class AAA Columbus.
Pitcher Neal Heaton was left in a state of limbo, asked to accompany the team to its opener but given no assurances beyond the first few days.


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 6


Italian Party Feeds on Others' Shame
Not too long ago, Umberto Bossi's brash invective and tousled mop of hair seemed emblematic of a lunatic fringe of northern Italians given to strange garb and fanciful dreams of separation from what they depicted as the slothful, tax-evading sump of the south.
These days, they are not so easy to dismiss.
More than any other political group in Italy, Mr.
Bossi's Northern League has benefited from the disgrace of more orthodox parties embroiled in the nation's widening bribery and corruption scandal.
Their downfall has propelled his party to prominence and popularity with a speed matched in Italy's recent history only by Mussolini's Fascists in the 1920's.


World Economies


Gail Stavitsky and Richard Sheinaus
Dr.
Gail Beth Stavitsky, a freelance art historian in Brooklyn, and Richard Arthur Sheinaus, the owner of Gotham Design, a graphic design and advertising concern in Manhattan, were married yesterday.
Judge Abraham Gerges, a New York State Supreme Court Justice in Brooklyn, officiated at El Teddy's restaurant in Manhattan.


Epigen Inc.(ECM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bronx Area Is Stunned By a Spate Of Killings
Mike Pena, manager of De Luca Hardware Supplies in the Wakefield section of the Bronx, used to put out boxes of brooms for display just outside his store, but slowly the brooms began to disappear.
He stopped setting them outside last year as, he said, he watched his neighborhood decline.


The Unfulfilled Legacy of a Daring Experiment
FIFTY years ago this spring, Martin Luther King Jr. was beginning high school, Harry S. Truman was just a relatively obscure Senator, Jesse Jackson was 1 1/2 years old and Linda Brown, whose family name would be immortalized 11 years later by a United States Supreme Court decision, had not yet been born.
But in downtown Brooklyn a white Midwesterner named Branch Rickey was already plotting a civil rights revolution of enormous magnitude.
In 1943, Mr.
Rickey -- barely anybody addressed him more familiarly -- approached George V. MacLaughlin, president of the Brooklyn Trust Company, with a daring proposal.
Mr.
Rickey was the president of the Brooklyn Dodgers, a team that was deeply indebted to MacLaughlin's bank.


Finish Line Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Once-Rare Security Now in Style
The search for higher yields at a time of low interest rates is leading many large investors to a kind of mortgage-backed security that was a rarity a few years ago, but is now the fastest-growing part of the mortgage securities market.
The securities, called private label by traders and investors, are backed mostly by mortgages that are not acceptable to the three Government agencies that dominate the mortgage securities market, usually because the mortgages exceed the agencies' size limit.


In Russia, Employee Ownership Is Succeeding; Student Exchange
To the Editor:
In recent days the importance of continuing and expanding American investment in Russia, despite the internal tensions and uncertainties in that country, was underscored by President Clinton at his first press conference, by Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher, addressing the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, and by Senator Bill Bradley in "The Right Stuff for Russia" (Op-Ed, March 14).
All three make the point that the United States has a vital and strategic interest in helping Russia achieve a stable democracy with a free-market economy.


Why Sex-Abuse Case Evokes Witch Trials
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen contends in "But Not Both" (column, March 31), on the Kelly Michaels child sex abuse case, that evocation of the Salem witch trials by Ms.
Michaels's supporters was "a cheap and easy metaphor that implies malevolent hysteria." The parents whose children testified, she states, "truly believed that those children were violated and that they still show the effects."


Ludwig Jesselson, 82, Commodity-Trade Executive
Ludwig Jesselson, a philanthropist and retired commodity trading executive who was chairman of the board of trustees of Yeshiva University, died Saturday at Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem.
He was 82 and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
Sam Hartstein, the university's director of public relations, said he died after suffering a heart attack in an apartment he maintained in Jerusalem, where he had gone for Passover.


It Takes a Good Host to Run a Spy Agency
Given the setting and circumstance, the guests at a recent weekend retreat at which the new Director of Central Intelligence played host might well have wondered if the gathering was intended as some sort of recruitment.
The meeting place was Camp Peary, the legendary C.I.A. compound in Virginia at which American operatives are taught to enlist foreign agents.
Inside its classrooms, a dozen members of Congress listened quietly as the Director, R. James Woolsey, offered this pitch: intelligence is a business with a future.


Sore Shoulder Slows a Free Spirit
Of all the gold medalists in the 1992 Summer Olympics at Barcelona, Spain, perhaps none led a wilder life than Nelson Diebel.
He talked freely of his overactive youth: getting into fights, experimenting with drugs and alcohol, jumping out of windows on a dare, rebeling against authority.
And perhaps no gold medalist this side of Michael Jordan or Magic Johnson became more recognizable at Barcelona than this free-spirit swimmer with a shaved head covered by a red, white and blue bandana.


Maynard Oil Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Poachers on Ad World's Rich Terrain
The West Coast has become the land of the advertising carpetbagger.
Creative Artists Agency, the talent agency run by Michael Ovitz, has produced 27 commercials for Coca-Cola (one of which may become a situation comedy), struck a deal with Nike and initiated talks with the American Express Company about an event-marketing program.
Now, International Creative Management, another of Hollywood's largest agencies, is poised to get involved in advertising, as well.


Caller ID Arriving for Phone Customers in Parts of Manhattan and the Bronx
The controversial telephone attachment known as caller ID that displays the number of an incoming call finally will become available on April 15 in many areas of Manhattan and the Bronx, continuing the introduction of the service that began last November in parts of the three other boroughs of New York City, Long Island and Rockland County.
If a residential subscriber decides to pay $6.50 extra a month for the service, the attachment will display the number of an incoming call after the first ring and then store the number for later retrieval, providing the call is from an area where the service also has been introduced.


HORSE RACING: KENTUCKY DERBY '93 -- In the Running; Two Herds Are Better Than One
Just when they had grown accustomed to her face, Eliza has departed and left the road to the Kentucky Derby still confused and crowded with colts with less than four weeks to go to the 119th Run for the Roses.
But her owner, Allen E. Paulson, was plotting a new strategy for the weekend of classic races at Churchill Downs: to win the Kentucky Oaks on April 30 with the filly Eliza, then shoot for a sweep in the Derby the next day with the colt Corby and maybe even his stablemate Diazo.


Gotham Apparel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Reprieved Rangers Pull No Punches
They sat in their hotel rooms Saturday night with a good grip on the channel changer.
Back and forth went the television picture.
ESPN hockey, N.C.A.A. basketball.
Hockey, basketball, hockey again.
For the Rangers, the day began with a feeling somewhat akin to desperation, although most don't like the sound of that word.
It ended with faint flutters of hope.
The Islanders had lost.
The Devils had lost.
And the Rangers, in fifth place in the Patrick Division, had new reason to believe that their fight to make the playoffs is not over -- not yet, at least.


Masur Takes the Philharmonic on the Road
Most major American orchestras tour nationally and internationally, but European tours hold a special place in their hearts.
Historically, orchestras were European in origin, and they still play mostly European music.
The big record companies are there, along with a sophisticated public and venerable concert halls and world-renowned orchestras with which Americans would like to be compared.
The vast majority of the conductors of American orchestras are European themselves and naturally want to show off their New World ensembles to their Old World audiences.
Often, as in the case of Kurt Masur, because such tours augment their own reputations.


Reviews/Television; For Modern Medicine, No Easy Cure
"Medicine at the Crossroads" is a sort of CAT scan of chronic ailments of modern medicine that remain resistant to cure.
The eight hourlong programs scrutinize such trouble spots as doctor training, the cost of life support for old people, the benefits and perils of expert surgery and miracle drugs and the problems of caring for the mentally ill and dealing with AIDS.
American practices are compared with those in other countries.
Tonight's opener, "Temple of Science," offers a close-up of the training of doctors at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, where the highest of high-tech equipment exists along with an emergency room jammed with gunshot victims, drug addicts and residents of Baltimore who simply have no doctor of their own.


After the Peace, Finding Customers
Amid the tidy row houses of College Point, Queens, stands a company that makes minesweeping systems, sonar equipment to track nuclear submarines and a small arsenal of other combat gear.
Hardly growth areas in the post-cold-war era.
So the EDO Corporation, a 63-year-old government contractor, is venturing gingerly into bicycle spokes, subway speedometers, golf club heads and filling-station pumps for natural gas-powered vehicles.


Canadian Foremost reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


King Anniversary Observed in Memphis


Treasury Auction in Doubt If Debt Ceiling Is Not Raised
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
However, should Congress not act to raise the debt ceiling, today's auction is expected to be postponed, as was last week's one-year bill auction.
Traders said that by late Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.90 percent, with the rate on a six-month bill at 2.99 percent.


Knicks Don't Blink With Bulls in View
If the Knicks finish with the best record in the Eastern Conference, they will remember tonight's game as a crucial victory.
Winning an emotional test of wills against a quality opponent on the road, New York (51-20) beat the San Antonio Spurs, 108-103, in overtime at the HemisFair Arena.
The triumph extended the Knicks' winning streak to six games, and it kept them one game ahead of the Chicago Bulls (50-21) in the East.


Bayport Restaurant Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Thermwood Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Military Cuts: A Millstone for Ex-Workers
David H. Dolson assumed he was on the right track.
He was part of a team coordinating the production and delivery of replacement parts for aircraft made by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
While still there, he set about preparing himself for work in a society no longer bracing for war with a Soviet superpower.
Mr.
Dolson, who is 27 years old, determined that industry needed managers for foreign plants, so he earned a master's degree in international relations.
Laid off in September 1990, he went to Bolivia and learned Spanish.
Home again, he said, "I'll go anywhere." So what is he doing now?
"Installing kitchens," he said.
He earns $7.50 an hour, half his pay at McDonnell Douglas.


No Headline
"At previous meetings, the nations' leaders discussed primarily the disassembly of confrontational structures, but here in Vancouver we talked about building the new, laying the foundations of a future economy." -- BORIS N. YELTSIN  [ A9:2. ]


Bar Mitzvah Meets the Age Of Computers
Barron Gati wanted his rite of passage into Jewish manhood to be a true medieval warrior's quest.
And the 13-year-old Rye Country Day School seventh-grader wanted that quest to be more than slaying a fire-breathing dragon.
He wanted to scale mountains, dodge hot lava, crush boulders and fireballs and do battle with scorpions, piranhas and an evil leader.


At Last, a Team for Justice
After much thrashing and delay, the Clinton Administration has found three nominees for top management jobs at the Justice Department.
It's the nucleus of a team that can, if swiftly confirmed by the Senate, start to run the kind of department President Clinton ought to want.
The two months it took to install Janet Reno as Attorney General were costly to an Administration that needed to make a fast start and invigorate a department suffering from 12 years of ideology-driven misrule.
Then more weeks were squandered in a frustrating quest for a management both diverse and free of embarrassments over household employees, illegal aliens and unpaid Social Security taxes.


Gay Sailor's Colleagues Unsettled and Unheard
As the Senate Armed Services Committee considered whether to open the military to avowed homosexuals, a group of flight instructors at the Moffett Field Naval Air Station wondered last week why nobody had asked what they thought.
They were the test cases, after all, said these members of Patrol Squadron 31, a training unit that prepares students to fly submarine-hunting P-3 Orions, because they work side-by-side with Keith Meinhold, a gay sailor who successfully challenged the military ban and was reinstated last winter by a Federal judge.


G.M. Plans to Shift Officials, Fill Post Vacated By Lopez
Directors of the General Motors Corporation are expected to announce a series of top executive changes on Monday, prompted in part by the need to replace Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua as head of worldwide purchasing.
Mr.
Lopez is now the No. 2 executive at Volkswagen A.G.
Following Mr.
Lopez's lead, a number of key G.M. executives and managers have defected to VW in recent months, supposedly for higher pay.
Several more may follow unless a temporary injunction granted Friday in Frankfurt persuades Mr.
Lopez to stop raiding his former employer.


Public Space for the Public
In 1979 New York City and the developer of the Parker Meridien Hotel made a deal: the hotel got permission to build eight more floors than the zoning laws allowed, in return for creating a public arcade in the lobby that connects 56th and 57th Streets.
For several years the midtown Manhattan hotel kept its part of the bargain.
Its attractive arcade, complete with chairs and tables, became a popular spot in the neighborhood.
Unfortunately, says the hotel, it also became a haunt for troublemakers who preyed on guests, harassing and sometimes robbing them just outside the building.
So the Parker Meridien, on 57th Street between Sixth and Seventh Avenues, removed the tables and chairs.
The arcade is now just empty space.
In a decision the city is appealing, an administrative law judge says that's O.K.


SUMMIT IN VANCOUVER: Not Just Another East-West Face-Off; Welcome to the Lifestyle Summit
Vancouver may well be remembered as the first quality-of-life summit meeting -- a couple of world leaders up to their necks in debt, dwelling more on materialism than on the military, and on standards of living rather than life and death.
The meeting had all the drama of a bankrupt businessman applying for a bridge loan from the president of a failing S. &amp; L. In part, this was due to the fundamental change in the relationship between Moscow and Washington since the end of the cold war.
Before, Russian leaders presented their American counterparts with a threat.
Now, they just present them with a bill.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


A Forbidden Fruit in Europe: Latin Bananas Face Hurdles
The French Embassy in Ecuador has been pelted with bananas.
Workers in Colombia's principal banana-growing region have lost their jobs.
In Panama, the President was forced to announce that he could not close the canal to vessels with European flags, much as the people might like that.
Latin America is in revolt against Europe over bananas.
The European Community recently adopted a package of quotas and tariffs aimed at cutting by more than half Europe's banana imports from Latin America.


SUMMIT IN VANCOUVER: The Overview; Yeltsin Leaves Talks With Firm Support and More Aid
President Clinton today threw his full political support behind Boris N. Yeltsin in Russia's fateful political struggle and pledged a larger-than-expected $1.6 million in assistance intended to show "immediate and tangible" support for Russia's reforms.
"Mr. President, our nation will not stand on the sidelines when it comes to democracy in Russia," Mr.
Clinton pledged in a statement that drew on Walt Whitman to bolster the President's insistence that it was the "high duty" of the world's democracies to rise to Russia's support.


Books of The Times; If Romance Confronts Domesticity
For Love
By Sue Miller
301 pages. HarperCollins Publishers. $23.
In the italicized prologue of Sue Miller's absorbing new novel, "For Love," Lottie Gardner, the story's middle-aged protagonist, forces herself to reconstruct in her mind a horrifying accident that has just occurred.


Man Is Held In Shooting On East Side
A 19-year-old Mount Vernon man was arrested Saturday night after robbing a cabdriver, exchanging gunfire with a police officer, shooting and seriously wounding a motorist in a carjacking and then racing about 15 blocks up the Upper East Side in the wounded man's station wagon in an attempt to escape, the police said.
The shooting victim, a 36-year-old Queens man, was waiting in his car for his girlfriend to finish an automatic teller transaction at Third Avenue and East 64th Street when he was shot in the left jaw by a man identified as Charles Saunders, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland.


HA-LO Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Swoopes Cuts a Swath Through Title Game
By the time Sheryl Swoopes sank her first seven shots today, Ohio State understood that it had picked the wrong day to face the best player in women's basketball.
Swoopes played at a different level from anybody around her today, and arguably at a greater pace than any woman in history.
In the biggest game of her career, she scored more points, 47, than any player, male or female, ever managed in a National Collegiate Athletic Association final.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY  Central Vt Pub Svc Mercury Fin Co Oxford Inds Inc TUESDAY  Cummins Engine Inc Hillenbrand Inds Inc WEDNESDAY  Houston Inds Inc Murphy Oil Corp Southwestern Energy Co THURSDAY  Adams Express Co Excelsior Income Shs Inc Ford Mtr Co Del NWNL Cos Petroleum &amp; Res Corp Rite Aid Corp United Wtr Res Inc Universal Foods Corp UNUM Corp Wisconsin Pub Svc Corp FRIDAY  NY St Elec&amp;Gas Corp


Baltek Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The War in the Paint Will Color the Result
In their quest for the national collegiate basketball championship here Monday night, North Carolina and Michigan will first battle for supremacy in the paint.
North Carolina starts a front line that has an average height of 6 feet 8 inches and a total weight of 705 pounds.
Michigan's interior starters average nearly 6-8 and weigh a total of 704 pounds.


Carolyn Bean Publishing Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Morning News Programs Draw the Young and Mobile
Even if viewers don't think that early-morning television qualifies as breakfast for their heads, they are clearly demonstrating a bigger hunger for it.
Over the last year, the three network morning programs -- ABC's "Good Morning, America," NBC's "Today" and CBS's "This Morning" -- have all added viewers, and since the first of the year they have done particularly well.


New York City Readies 37 Specialized Schools
In the most sweeping expansion of New York City's public high school system in decades, school officials are rushing to sign up students and prepare classrooms for the inauguration of 37 small experimental schools this fall.
The dozens of new schools, each with a curriculum centered on a separate theme, represent an extraordinary effort to bring into the mainstream educational approaches that have been tested, until now, only in isolated pockets of the city's system.
The initiative, which involves starting up more high schools at one time than have opened altogether in the last half century, gained final school board approval in a series of recent meetings.


American Medical Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


G-I Holdings reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Israel Starts Planning to Replace Its Arab Workers
The Government took its first formal steps today to reduce permanently the number of Palestinians from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip who will be allowed to work in Israel after the closed territories are reopened.
At its weekly meeting, the Cabinet set up a special committee to offer ideas by next week about how to replace Arab laborers with Jews.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told his ministers that he wanted an end to employment opportunities in Israel for Palestinians, but he added that it would require developing jobs in the territories, where they are relatively scarce.


Market Place; TV Networks Show Strength, as Cable Concerns Weaken
REACTING to two rulings by the Federal Communications Commission, investors last week bid up the shares of broadcasting companies, which may not immediately benefit from the regulatory action, while pummeling the stocks of cable television providers, whose prospects remain uncertain.
In the short term, stockholders in these two sectors may expect more of the same.
On Thursday, the F.C.C. ruled that television networks should be allowed to own rerun rights to the prime-time shows they carry.
Separately, the commission ordered cuts of at least 10 percent in cable television prices.
The stringent rate controls could cost cable companies considerably more than $1 billion a year.


'Hey Prez!': Computers Offer New Line to Clinton
Want a full transcript of President Clinton's latest speech on housing or welfare?
Just tap in a command on your home computer.
Want the White House to know instantly what you think of Mr.
Clinton's economic plan?
Call the "White House comments line" and punch in a response on your touch-tone phone.


Details of Budget Emerge Slowly In Albany During a Long Night
State legislators worked until early this morning in what has become their annual ritual of meeting into the night to adopt a state budget, with the Assembly and the Senate each passing a number of budget bills.
The Assembly approved bills related to Medicaid spending, interest payments on the state debt, transportation financing and a bill that would put before the voters a constitutional change in the way the state borrows money.
The Senate passed the borrowing amendment bill late Sunday.


Dance in Review
"Rooted in Our Bones"
Davis Hall  City College
Donald Byrd, an experienced maker of dances, invited five up-and-coming choreographers to participate in a program titled "Rooted in Our Bones" on March 28.


Johannesburg Journal; Time to Laugh? The Beloved Country Thinks So
Gwen Anderson is a suburban matron, a white liberal who once darkened her skin with shoe polish to, as she put it, "truly experience what it means to be a black woman in South Africa," but who does not know her black maid's last name.
Eve Sisulu is her maid and her tutor in the mysteries of the black majority.
She takes mischievous delight in indulging her employer's preconceptions.


Sure, Prettify the Subway, but What About Safety and Service?
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's March 26 Critics Notebook on New York City's remodeled subway stations recalls the last time I was at the 18th Street Seventh Avenue IRT stop, downtown side.
I was walking nearby with a well-known Chelsea activist, who talked enthusiastically about the improvement in the subways.


Ireland's Troubled Sleep
Twenty thousand people thronged central Dublin two Sundays ago, calling on the Irish Republican Army to "Stop the Bloody Murder." They congregated in silence to hear Sinead O'Connor, the pop star who tore up a photo of the Pope on "Saturday Night Live," sing the Roman Catholic hymn, "Make Me a Channel of Your Peace." The rally made for compelling drama on TV news and on the front pages of American papers.
But like many Irish-Americans, I was ambivalent.
The media's fixation on the event reinforced misguided conventional wisdom about the Irish conflict.
The rally represented a repudiation of the shadowy organization that claims to represent the Irish soul, that proclaims its legacy of bloodshed and martyrdom to be entwined with the deepest Irish sense of self.


Software Chief Ousted
The Computervision Corporation said yesterday that it had dismissed its chief executive and president, John J. Shields, and handed his responsibilities to the chairman, Russell E. Planitzer.
The company, which makes engineering software, said the move was prompted by poor financial performance and a failure to communicate clearly the company's mission to clients, investors and employees.
"We don't share a consistent vision of what we do for our customers," Mr.
Planitzer said.


Awaiting Final Numbers for the State Budget


Davis Love Looks For Breakthrough In a Major Event
If romance can be put aside in golf's most romantic tournament, there could be no more relevant winner at the 1993 Masters than Davis Love 3d.
Without a doubt, other triumphs would carry more poetry: Greg Norman finally winning at Augusta would mean the restoration of the game's Job, while a triumphant Seve Ballesteros would become Prometheus unbound.
A third green jacket for Nick Faldo would represent another harpoon driven home by golf's Ahab, while an impossibly delicious seventh for 53-year-old Jack Nicklaus might redefine our conception of Zeus.


Vernitron Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ocean Bio-Chem Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Accounts
*
Diplomat Juvenile Corp., Stony Point, N.Y., to Wills &amp; Evans, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for the manufacturer of infant products under the Ecology Kids and Rosie's Babies brands.
The assignment, with combined billings estimated at $5 million, is for the United States and abroad.


In a Texas Senate Race, the Really Influential Parties Are Not on the Ballot
As a political spectator sport, the election to replace Lloyd Bentsen as Texas Senator has turned into the kind of wild free-for-all not seen here since 1961, when 71 people vied for the right to succeed Lyndon B. Johnson.
When the filing deadline for the May 1 open election passed last Thursday, 24 people had signed up, ranging from a candidate who gave his occupation as "honest lawyer" to a heart-transplant recipient who insists a vote for him is a vote for "automatic term limitation" because doctors have told him he has only eight years to live.


Muslim Officer Stops U.N. Evacuation of Srebrenica
The plight of the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica deepened today when a Bosnian commander ordered a United Nations convoy to leave the enclave without the Muslim civilians the trucks had come to evacuate.
United Nations officials said the Muslim officer commanding the Bosnian garrison in Srebrenica, Nasir Oric, surrounded the United Nations trucks with armed soldiers and announced that he would not permit the evacuation to continue because it threatened to empty Srebrenica and leave the town and outlying villages to be occupied by the besieging Serbian forces.


The Right Stuff: Hat Trick Under Fire
Jim Montgomery has one last hockey game to play at Maine.
This one will come on Saturday night in the Alfond Arena at Orono, home ice for the Black Bears, and it will be an all-star affair matching college hockey's best seniors on East and West teams.
The cheers for Montgomery are certain to be the loudest and longest, in acknowledgment of his four skating seasons at Maine and especially his last game.


A Twist on Ancient Holiday Traditions


Republicans Redux
The stalemate in the Senate is not really about whether spending $16.3 billion will save the economic recovery, as Democrats say.
Nor is it fundamentally about the national debt or the folly of taxing and spending, as Republicans maintain.
There is not enough money in the bill to explain the passion displayed on either side.


Fresenius USA reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Farmstead Telephone Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Eye Technology reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


United Stationers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Partners &amp; Shevack Wins KLM Account
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines said on Friday that it had selected Partners &amp; Shevack Inc. of New York to handle its account, which had been handled for six years by Angotti, Thomas, Hedge Inc. of New York.
Billings were estimated at $8 million.
Kelly Durcan, a spokesman for Partners &amp; Shevack, said his agency was awarded the account after a three-month review that began with 50 agencies.
He said three other New York-based agencies were finalists: Calet, Hirsh &amp; Ferrell Inc., Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, and Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano.


American Safety Closure reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


TV Viewing and Selling, by Race
In a development that may reflect the state of race relations or simply the greater number of viewing choices available, television watching patterns among blacks and whites appear to be growing further apart.
A new study by BBDO Worldwide, the advertising agency, finds that for the first half of the current season, not one of the top 10 rated shows among black audiences was also among the top 10 in overall ratings.
Of the top 20 shows among blacks, only four made the list of top 20 shows over all: NBC's "Fresh Prince of Bel-Air," and ABC's "Roseanne," "Monday Night Football" and "Hanging With Mr. Cooper."


Bridge
If you are the declarer, and the appearance of the dummy makes it clear that you should have bid more, it is quite easy to take your eye off the ball.
Instead of worrying about the auction, and wondering how in the post-mortem you can pin the blame for underbidding on your partner, you should concentrate on the task at hand.
Perhaps the cautious contract you have reached may not be quite as easy as it appears.
The diagramed deal was played at the Cavendish Club's Wednesday night imp duplicate, which attracted a strong field for many years until the club closed its doors in 1991.
The declarer was Roz Low of Manhattan, whose death last fall deprived the New York bridge scene of one of its most popular citizens.


Ball Drops, Year Starts: Time for Baseball '93
Remnants of the vitriolic 1992 baseball season and its equally histrionic off season still remain, like so much pollution-blackened snow that simply refuses to melt.
But for those who feared this day might not ever come, it is here, the opening day of baseball, 1993.
It brings with it more than enough hope that the business of baseball -- the game's evil twin -- will be swept away.
And there are players with enough star power, division races with enough intrigue and individual stories with enough poignant twists to do just that.


Atlanta Group Acts on Gouging
Olympic organizers have set aside most hotel rooms in the area for nonspectators as part of a plan to prevent price-gouging at the 1996 Summer Games.
The Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games has reserved 33,600 hotel rooms for official guests, such as sponsors, out-of-town contractors, vendors, security guards and the news media.


SUMMIT IN VANCOUVER: Reporter's Notebook; The Russian, at Dinner, Chokes on a Pronoun
The affable Boris and Bill Show nearly collapsed in a fit of hurt feelings at dinner on Saturday night over a misunderstood pronoun.
At a trendy nouvelle Vancouver restaurant called Seasons, overlooking the beautiful harbor, the two leaders sipped chardonnay, ate Dungeness crab ravioli and broiled salmon and talked business.


Fast, Yes, but Not Able To Outrun Controversy
His morning had been filled with classes and his afternoon had been spent running grueling sprints monitored by the Notre Dame assistant track coach John Miller, sprints he said had left him feeling as if "a Brillo pad had been placed on the end of a stick and rubbed up and down my throat." Now Raghib (Rocket) Ismail was sipping soothing cranberry juice before quickly sitting upright on a sofa, his eyes fixed on the television.
It was last Tuesday night and the TNT network broke from its Phoenix Suns-Chicago Bulls game to show clips of the Orlando Magic's Shaquille O'Neal.
O'Neal had just slugged Detroit Pistons guard Alvin Robertson.
A melee between the teams looked as if it was about to break out, but calm was restored.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Standly Holds On  Mike Standly shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday, then withstood final-hole challenges by Payne Stewart and Russ Cochran for a one-stroke victory in the Freeport-McMoRan Golf Classic in New Orleans.
Standly, who finished 72 holes at seven-under 281, missed a chance to close out his first PGA Tour title when a birdie putt stopped an inch short of the cup on the 18th hole of the 7,116-yard English Turn Golf and Country Club course.
That left the door open for Stewart and Cochran to force a playoff with birdies on the final hole.
But Stewart had a 25-foot birdie putt come up an inch short, and Cochran missed from 40 feet.
Each shot 69 yesterday to finish at 282.
Standly began play two strokes behind 54-hole leader Greg Kraft.
Standly had six birdies, five on the front nine despite rain and wind gusting to 25 miles an hour.
His only bogey of the day was on the 11th, but he birdied the 12th and then parred in.
Stewart, the 18- and 36-hole leader before falling a stroke behind on Saturday, threatened to play himself out of contention with bogeys on Nos. 4, 5 and 7.
But he turned in even-par 36 and shot 33 coming home.
The $180,000 winner's check is Standly's largest payoff ever. (AP) Johnson Beats the Wind: Trish Johnson of Wales shot a windblown five-under-par 67 to run away from the field for a four-shot victory in the $450,000 Las Vegas L.P.G.A. at Canyon Gate.
Johnson, three shots behind the second-round leader, Brandie Burton, when final-round play began, was one of just nine players to break par yesterday as wind gusts reached 40 mph.
She completed 54 holes at seven-under 209 for her first victory in six seasons on the L.P.G.A. tour.
Missie McGeorge, who was paired with Johnson, shot 71 to finish second at three-under 213.


Asta Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Memory Lane Is Near; After 43 Years On the Air, Joe Franklin Prepares to Sign Off
Once Joe Franklin had Bing Crosby on his talk show and asked: "Did Bing Crosby ever really go 'boo-boo-boo-boo-boo-boo-boo-BOO' when he sang?" (Yes, and Bing said it was classy.)
And then there was the time Mr.
Franklin's guests were the cast of the just-opened Tennessee Williams play "Small Craft Warnings."


A.C.L.U. Opposes Second Trial in Beating Case
The American Civil Liberties Union voted yesterday to oppose as unconstitutional the Federal civil rights trial of four Los Angeles police officers involved in the beating of Rodney G. King, saying it violates the officers' right not to be tried twice for the same offense.
In a close vote that followed a heated debate, the national board of the A.C.L.U. enacted a resolution opposing any exceptions to the Constitution's prohibition against double jeopardy, in which a defendant is tried twice for the same offense.
The debate within the organization started after the acquittal of the white police officers on state criminal charges last April 29.


American Complex Care reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Connecticut Seeks a Return Of Jobs as Well as Nature
The bleak and vacant industrial landscape that stretches along the Shetucket River will never be featured on a Sierra Club calendar, and rats are more likely to be seen than spotted owls.
But in Connecticut and a handful of other states, places like this represent a new environmental frontier.
The state wants to clean up the 90-odd years of accumulated pollutants here and in the process is engaged in an unusual example of industrial archeology.
But the driving force is not history or ecology; it is economics.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  WARNING ON TRADE CENTER BOMBING
President Mubarak of Egypt says the United States could have prevented the bombing of the World Trade Center if American officials had heeded his country's warnings about an Islamic fundamentalist network in the United States.
But he suggested that the information provided by Egypt related generally to activities by individuals in the United States, not that Egypt had passed on specific information foreshadowing the bombing.
Mr.
Mubarak called on the new Administration to take a more active role in stemming international terrorism, particularly activities inspired by Islamic fundamentalist groups.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  EXPANDING PUBLIC SCHOOLS


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton threw his full support to Boris Yeltsin, pledging $1.6 billion in assistance to show "immediate and tangible" support for the Russian President's programs.
The package amounts to $1.6 billion, not the $1 billion the Administration had been reporting.
The new element is $700 million in credits to enable Russia to start receiving American grain.  [ Page A1. ]
An international trade agreement is being delayed while the Clinton Administration devotes its energy to the North American Free Trade Agreement, the departing head of GATT says.  [ D1. ]


Dance in Review
'Drastic Cuts'  Majestic Theater  Brooklyn
Donald Byrd's new "Drastic Cuts," presented on Tuesday night, is said to refer to continuing reductions in private and public financial support for the arts in America.
Mr.
Byrd has choreographed a number of dances that comment directly and with cathartic vigor on social issues and themes.
But "Drastic Cuts" does not fit into this category.


Antitrust Signal Sent To Airlines
The Clinton Administration has signaled to the nation's airlines that it plans to vigorously enforce Federal antitrust laws, in contrast to the previous Republican administrations.
But Administration officials say they do not plan to reverse the course of deregulation under which carriers have operated since 1978.


CHRONICLE
"Next year in Jerusalem," Rabbi JOEL S. GOOR will intone at the close of the Passover seder he will conduct at the Metropolitan Synagogue of New York.
And then he will add, "Next year in Tibet."
Tonight, when 88 members of the synagogue gather for the seder in the building at 40 East 35th Street that is also home to the Community Church of New York, there will be 21 Tibetans in their midst.


Northwest Drug reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Telemundo reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eastover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TOP ADMIRAL BACKS FULL COMBAT ROLES FOR WOMEN IN NAVY
In a dramatic turnaround for a military service that has been plagued by sexual-harassment accusations in recent years, the Navy's top admiral wants to allow women to serve in combat eventually and has recommended immediately expanding the number of jobs on ships that are open to them, Pentagon officials said today.
The long-term objective is to open to women virtually every job in the service, including flying combat planes.
But that proposal has not been submitted to Defense Secretary Les Aspin, partly because top Navy officials and Mr.
Aspin believe the other military services would oppose it.


Abroad at Home; The Limit of Shame
How far can Serbian leaders go in their contempt for the rules of international order without provoking a meaningful reaction from the United States Government?
Is there a limit to the shame President Clinton will feel without acting?
Those questions are raised by Serbian conduct in recent days.
It has been increasingly brazen, increasingly contemptuous of United Nations orders and world hand-wringing.
The Serbs have stopped trying to conceal their belief that the U.N., and in particular the United States, are paper tigers.


Trans-Lux Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coscient Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


For a Major League Baseball Team, the Season's First Pitch Comes Well Before Opening Up
GIVEN the enormous appetite for all things baseball on this opening day of the season, here's a partial lineup of advertising campaigns from around the league:
LOCAL FAVORITES.
The New York Yankees' new agency, Landis &amp; Dygus of Deer Park, L.I., created the tagline "It's where the action is gonna be" for the 1993 season.


Patents
CAMPERS often sleep in tents as much to escape insect bites as to seek protection from the elements, but tents have proved to be imperfect bug barriers.
Last week, a patent for a tent fabric that incorporates a combination repellant-insecticide was issued to a division of the Graniteville Company, a South Carolina textile mill.


AutoImmune Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Evans and Thompson Win
Janet Evans and Jenny Thompson, both Olympic gold medalists and world-record holders, won their third titles tonight as the Phillips 66 United States Swimming spring championships ended.
In the Tracy Caulkins 50-meter pool, Evans won the women's 1,500-meter freestyle by 40 meters in 16 minutes 16.38 seconds.
Thompson took the women's 50-meter freestyle in 25.72 seconds.
Kristine Quance captured the women's 200-meter individual medley in 2:16.30 for her second title of the five-day meet.


Gynex Pharmaceuticals (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Investigative Reporters Win Goldsmith Prize
Reporters at The Los Angeles Times and The Seattle Times have won the annual Goldsmith Prize for investigative journalism awarded by the Joan Shorenstein Barone Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
Douglas Frantz and Murray Waas of The Los Angeles Times were cited for a series that detailed United States policy toward Iraq before the Persian Gulf war.
David Boardman, Susan Gilmore, Eric Nalder and Eric Pryne of The Seattle Times won for a series focusing on charges of sexual misconduct against former Senator Brock Adams, Democrat of Washington.


Credo Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


The Talk of Hollywood; Just What Does Michael Ovitz Want?
Michael Ovitz, the most powerful agent in Hollywood, who runs Creative Artists Agency, is not only fond of making deals but of making waves as well.
This time, though, the latest Ovitz wave has knocked over some rivals who have stood up and vowed to wage combat.
Even by Hollywood's shark-infested standards, the level of virtually open warfare among major talent agencies is unusually intense.
In recent days, rival agencies have even discussedasking the United States Justice Department to probe C.A.A.'s latest move.
In turn, C.A.A. says assertions that the agency has somehow done something wrong are outrageous and motivated, quite simply, by envy.


Home Savings (Fla.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Another Award to Cheaney
Calbert Cheaney took another step toward becoming a consensus national player of the year when he was honored by the United States Basketball Writers Association today with the Wooden Award as the top men's player.
Cheaney, an Indiana senior and the leading scorer in the history of the Big Ten conference, has been named to each of the major awards announced so far.


Arizona Instrument Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected during the week beginning today:
Cincinnati Milacron Inc., 4.5 million shares. First Boston.


Margate Industries (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tar Heels And Lynch: Greatness Together
As North Carolina prepared for the national championship game Monday night against Michigan, the Tar Heels' senior forward, George Lynch, planned to approach Dean Smith and make the boldest request of his career.
He was set to ask his coach for permission to wear a patch on his jersey or a symbol on his sneakers to show support for a controversial effort to build a black cultural center on the North Carolina campus.


Andrew Goodman, 86, Bergdorf's Innovator, Dies
Andrew Goodman, the owner of Bergdorf Goodman who greatly expanded its stature as one of Fifth Avenue's most elegant and lucrative fashion stores in the 1950's and 1960's, died on Saturday at his home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 86.
He had a long illness, a family spokeswoman said.


Sports of The Times; The Man Behind the Glare and the Trash Talk
CHRIS WEBBER says he does not like to talk.
He prefers to let his actions speak for him, and that's where the trouble starts.
His gestures on the basketball court include some finger pointing and elaborate scowling and overt celebrating, usually directed at his opponents, in the personal aggression currently in vogue.
"I look at films of myself sometimes and I don't recognize myself," he said.
Nor does he recognize the public image of the bad boy, the troublemaker, the surly and impudent kid from Detroit.
"I guess it's because we wear black sneakers and black socks," he said, leaving it at that.


In Russia, Employee Ownership Is Succeeding
To the Editor:
"Russia's Unnoticed Revolution" (editorial, March 25) applauds the rapidity of Russian privatization, but misinterprets Russia's main method of privatization, employee ownership.


Data for Discussions
To the Editor:
A March 29 news article labels the 1993 Kids Count Data Book "an example of the many public campaigns now selling a vision of activist government beneath the face of a child," adding: "The movement's thesis is that American children as a whole are imperiled and in need of special help, especially Federal help."


Williams-Sonoma (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Unitel Video Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Advantage Life reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Woodrow Swancutt, 77, General In Air Force and Atomic Test Pilot
Woodrow Swancutt, a retired major general in the Air Force who was a decorated World War II pilot and later flew the plane that dropped a test atomic bomb on Bikini Atoll, died on March 21 while walking near his at home in San Antonio.
He was 77.
He collapsed from cardiac failure, his family said.


Serbs' Strategy: War Gets More Than Diplomacy
In rejecting the peace plan for Bosnia negotiated by the international community, the Serbs have evidently concluded that they have enough military strength on the ground and enough stoicism to withstand whatever is coming.
Though the United Nations is still groping for a way to induce them to sign the draft accord, the Bosnian Serbs have opted for hard facts over diplomacy.
After a year of fighting they hold about 70 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their forces are much better armed than their Muslim and Croatian foes.
And any notion of Western military intervention is filled with potential pitfalls and could have explosive repercussions.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Consumer Credit . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Producer Prices March  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Price Index . . .
March


PDK Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sect's Lawyers Dispute Gunfight Details
Lawyers for David Koresh and his deputy have made assertions in interviews over the last few days that contradict the official version of the Feb. 28 gunfight at the Branch Davidian compound.
Among the assertions made by the religious sect's lawyers were: that four Federal agents were captured in the raid and later released and that agents flying in helicopters over the main compound building fired shots.
The authorities denied those assertions.


'Perfection' Not Enough To Impress Cavaliers
In a shoe commercial featuring Derrick Coleman, scientists create the perfect basketball player, and up from the ashes rises Coleman, larger than life.
The way Coleman has been playing recently, including today against the Cleveland Cavaliers, he has been as close to perfect as any mortal can be.
But there have been two problems: One, those same scientists forgot to create indestructable teammates, as injuries have left the Nets decimated.
And two, other things have taken some of the attention away from Coleman's latest exploits.


Graf Suffers the Injury, But Foe Feels the Pain
Wrapped in a psychedelic leotard, an Ace bandage and an air of invulnerability despite a stabbing pain in her left knee, a determined Steffi Graf powered her way past durable Arantxa Sanchez Vicario today, 7-6 (10-8), 6-1, in the final of the Family Circle Magazine Cup.
Eager to begin the clay-court season in a winning way, Graf, who accepted a last-minute wild card into this event as a replacement for flu-ridden Monica Seles, earned her second title of the year at the Spaniard's expense.


Herbert Fisher, 71, Jamesway Founder
Herbert Fisher, the founder and chairman of Jamesway Corporation, which operates 108 discount department stores, mainly in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, died on Saturday at his home in Oradell, N.J.
He was 71.
His daughter Meredith Fisher said the cause was cancer of the colon.


Lawmakers Resolve Unicef Bill Dispute
A political squabble over the sponsorship of a bill described as vital to keeping the United Nations Children's Fund in New York City ended today as legislators reached an agreement and everyone declared victory.
The bill, which easily passed the Assembly tonight and is expected to sail through the Senate by early Monday, would allow the United Nations Development Corporation, to obtain tax exemptions for a new building.


Review/Television; Factory Women Fight, Minus Gloves
What a difference a change in the political scene makes.
In the early years of the Ronald Reagan Administration, television was closely monitored and pointedly criticized for its negative images of corporations and business executives.
Various pollsters were corralled to compile the evidence.
Anyone objecting was summarily dismissed as, at the very least, a liberal, maybe even, as it came to be known during George Bush's 1988 campaign for the White House, a card-carrying member of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Different Presidents, different attitudes.
With the Clinton Administration, television entertainment is wasting little time in returning to skinning the fat cats.
Latest example: tonight's "For Their Own Good," on ABC at 9, an "inspired by an actual event" movie.
The event involves a West Texas chemicals factory that back in the late 1970's gave its female employees 30 days to choose, as one worker puts it, "between starving to death and having a child."


McKinney &amp; Silver Says No to Bahamas
Just three weeks after the Bahamas Ministry of Tourism placed its $15 million account in review, the incumbent of two and a half years, McKinney &amp; Silver Advertising of Raleigh, N.C., has decided to let the account go.
The account was placed in review after a change in the Bahamian Government last year.
"This is a review in which political imperatives will dictate the outcome," said Rick Myracle, McKinney's senior vice president and management supervisor.
"And we choose not to participate." Mr.
Myracle said his agency does not anticipate any layoffs.


Mize Has a New Son and a Tee Time
Now that his newest child has been born, LARRY MIZE says he expects to play in this week's Masters.
BONNIE MIZE gave birth to a baby boy -- their third -- in Columbus, Ga., on Friday night, a week earlier than expected.
A week ago, Mize said if the child, named Robert, had not arrived by now that he wouldn't play in the tournament.


GE Capital Agrees to Buy Pacific Life Insurance
GE Capital Services said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the United Pacific Life Insurance Company from Reliance Group Holdings for $550 million.
The deal marks GE Capital's second large move this year into the annuity business.
The purchase of United Pacific Life, which has nearly $6 billion in assets, follows GE Capital's purchase in January of the GNA Corporation, another seller of tax-deferred annuities, which has $6 billion in assets.
GE Capital said it hoped to capitalize on expected rapid increases in savings for retirement by baby boomers.


Braman Wants Labor Agreement Blocked
NORMAN BRAMAN, the Philadelphia Eagles' owner, has asked the courts to block the labor settlement reached between the National Football League owners and players.
Braman, apparently unhappy about compensation the Eagles would receive for losing free-agent REGGIE WHITE, filed an appeal late Friday in United States District Court of Judge DAVID DOTY in Minneapolis.
Doty presided over the N.F.L. antitrust case and has been monitoring the labor discussions.
He has scheduled hearings for April 16.


Chess
The strongest young player in the world is currently Vladimir Kramnik of Russia.
This protege of Gary Kasparov is the only 17-year-old listed by the International Chess Federation among its 10 top grandmasters.
In fact, Kramnik stands sixth in the official January ratings.
Kramnik clearly showed, in the Linares International Tournament in Spain, which ended on March 14, that his high rank is fully deserved.
He took fifth prize in a 14-player field that included most of the world's top grandmasters.


How One National Health System Collapsed; Rationing's No Panacea
To the Editor:
Readers of "Those Who Pay Health Costs Think About Drawing Lines" (The Week in Review, March 28) will get the impression that rationing medical care is a realistic health policy option.
It is not.
"Rationing" is a buzzword, a provocative idea -- not a realistic or workable proposal.
Rationing would not save money without a fixed budgetary limit on total spending for health.
Otherwise, any saving from a prohibition on the use of a particular technology would easily be offset by increased use of other technologies that were not prohibited.
Furthermore, there are almost always cases in which a proscribed procedure would be unequivocally helpful and cost-effective, although it might be only marginally helpful in most other cases.


CHRONICLE
The Off Broadway show "Another Time" opened on March 13, the night of the blizzard whose billing became "worst of the century."
Last week, STANLEY BRECHNER, director of the drama, was faced with the possibility of missing yet another performance when he realized that tonight's performance would coincide with the second night of Passover.


Italy's Scandal Spreads to 2 More Former Premiers
Accusations of wrongdoing against Italy's elder statesman, Giulio Andreotti, widened significantly today when magistrates in Milan formally notified him that he was under investigation in connection with the vast national bribery and corruption scandal.
At the same time, the Italian news agency reported that another former Christian Democratic Prime Minister, Arnaldo Forlani, a high-ranking party official who headed a short-lived administration in 1981, was also under investigation.
Whether to Lift Immunity
The charges deepened the impression that Italy's postwar political system is rapidly unraveling.
Even though the accusations today have yet to be judged in court, they mean that three former Prime Ministers -- Mr.
Andreotti, Mr.
Forlani and the former Socialist leader Bettino Craxi -- have been implicated, along with hundreds of other politicians and businessmen.


Fab Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Tank Parts, Off the Shelf
As the Pentagon slims down to fit a much diminished threat, it won't be buying weapons at the same expansive rate.
The resultant downsizing and consolidation in defense industries pose a tough puzzle for the Pentagon: how to preserve technological know-how and a skilled labor force against the possibility of resuming defense production.
The best answer is to try to turn defense and civilian producers into a single industrial base.
That can't be done without a long-overdue reform of Pentagon procurement practices.


Vestro Foods Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Leipzig Journal; A City of Two Tales: The Robust and the Bleak
It was on the streets of this historic city that the movement to overthrow German Communism gathered force in the autumn of 1989.
And as dusk fell here one recent afternoon, angry residents gathered at a downtown plaza to protest what they see as new injustices.
"They threw me out of work like a piece of garbage," complained Werner Bottcher, a 55-year-old metal worker who is one of tens of thousands of Leipzigers who have lost their jobs since 1990.


BTR Realty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rocky Mountain First for an Old Familiar Voice
Charlie Jones slept only a few hours Sunday night.
In bed by midnight, up by 3 A.M.
The white-haired veteran of network television who has never really been anybody's marquee star was tense and exhilarated about making his debut as the play-by-play announcer for the expansion Colorado Rockies on KWGN-TV.
Jones had called baseball before, as a backup announcer on NBC, for the Cincinnati Reds in 1973 and 1974 and for the California Angels in 1991.
He has called Super Bowls and Olympic track and field.
He's worked with 144 partners.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Brad Pennington, pitcher, and John Voigt, outfielder, to Rochester of the International League.
Sent Anthony Telford, pitcher, outright to Rochester.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Jose Melendez, pitcher, and Tim Naehring and John Valentin, outfielders, on the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Brian Conroy and Nate Minchey, pitchers, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Ernest Riles, infielder, from Pawtucket.


No Headline
"Everything we believed in, all we thought we had created, has been washed away in a year." -- NADEZDE JEVDIC, a 72-year-old widow in Sarajevo.  [ A14:4. ]


China Applauds as Its Officials Plunge Into Profit
Happily married, his career flourishing, a 31-year-old midlevel city official named Lu Zhoukui abruptly decided last August to xia hai, or plunge into the sea.
Mr.
Lu was not feeling suicidal, and in fact it may have been the best decision he ever made.
"Plunging into the sea" is the new slang in China for going into business, and it is becoming a nationwide craze.


Sports of The Times; They Came and Saw And They Learned
ASIDE from debating who might be the new national champion, the multimillion dollar question here last night was whether Chris Webber of Michigan would turn pro this spring.
Would the Five X's be broken up?
There was a feeling among some that if Michigan had won, Webber was history; if the Wolverines lost, he might stay and try again until they won it.


Professional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Former Nanny Testifies Farrow Slapped Son
A former nanny for Mia Farrow's children testified yesterday that Ms.
Farrow had not always been a good mother and once slapped one of her adopted sons across the face because he could not find a dog leash.
Testifying in the custody dispute between Ms.
Farrow and Woody Allen, the nanny, Monica Thompson, acknowledged that she had told the police in Connecticut last year that Ms.
Farrow was a good mother who had never hit her children.
But she said she had lied at that time because she was working for Ms.
Farrow and feared she would lose her job.


CHRONICLE
For 20 years, ELLEN HAAS has been an outspoken advocate of the consumer's right to safe and nutritional food, often finding herself at odds with the Agriculture Department under the Reagan and Bush Administrations and with farm groups.
In 10 years, by her count, she testified at 76 Congressional hearings.
Now, she will have the chance to work from within.
President Clinton has nominated her to be Assistant Secretary for food and consumer services at the Agriculture Department.
If the Senate approves her nomination, she will be responsible for major Government programs like food stamps, school lunches and breakfasts, and WIC (for supplemental aid to women, infants and children).


Three-Goal Rally Sinks Rangers
Want to know why the Rangers will probably miss the playoffs this season?
Watch the tape of last night's game against the Hartford Whalers.
In a crucial game, on their home ice, the Rangers could not hold a lead against the fourth-worst team in the National Hockey League.
The fourth-worst team
.
This is supposed to be a playoff race.
This is supposed to be the time when the veterans showcase their cool and the rookies lift their level of play.
Instead, this has turned into one monstrous joke for the Rangers.
How low can they sink?
The level seems to drop every week.


Rich Man Who Profited Wins an Investing Case
It's called the rich man defense, and few arguments have been more popular for Wall Street firms in arbitration: All rich clients, the theory goes, are by definition sophisticated investors.
So, if they have losses in their accounts, the brokerage firms cannot be held liable.
But now an arbitration panel in Florida has ruled that's just not so.
Indeed, the panel opened up the door for complaints even further by ruling that customers can have valid complaints against a securities firm even if they made millions of dollars in profits.


Clinton Is Relying Less on Advisers In Finding Supreme Court Nominee
In a marked departure from his recent predecessors, President Clinton appears to be far more involved in the selection of a new Supreme Court Justice and is relying less heavily on the choices of White House aides.
White House officials say Mr.
Clinton, a former law professor and Attorney General in Arkansas, is largely thinking about candidates on his own, working from his years of building acquaintances with judges and politicans.
Aides say he has also been considering several people he approached to become Attorney General.


Budget Blur Leaves Some With Questions
After months of haggling, cajoling and deal-making, it all came to this: New York State's $32.08 billion budget was passed in a blur late Sunday and early Monday, so quickly that many legislators weren't quite sure what it said.
"It's impossible to know what's in here," groused State Senator Franz S. Leichter, a Manhattan Democrat who was sagging under the weight of the 500-plus-page local assistance budget.
He opened it up.
"Here's $30,000 for fair radio communication on Long Island. What does that mean?" (The money will be used to promote radio stories about Long Island).


Theater in Paris: Elan, Eclat and Assistance
Tonight the seventh annual Moliere awards, the Paris equivalent of the Tonys, will reward this season's theatrical excellence.
There is a lot of excellence to reward.
With far more government financing than is available in New York, Paris offers a dizzying range of theatrical possibilities.
This week, 173 active theaters are listed in the entertainment guides, some with more than one offering.
Right now, four productions, widely admired and likely to be acclaimed at tonight's ceremony, are playing at four of the city's most important and representative theaters.
Among the others are homages to Carlo Goldoni and Alfred de Musset, vehicles for several popular French stars and the second new work of the season from the ever-fecund Peter Brook.


Mercedes Still Shopping for U.S. Plant Site
Mercedes-Benz A.G. said today that it would decide within a few months where to build its first passenger vehicle plant in the United States, which would assemble a new model of a four-wheel-drive sport utility vehicle.
Werner Niefer, president and chief executive of Mercedes, said at a news conference here that the plant would be a step "in the strategic re-orientation of our passenger car business." Mercedes plans to develop premium models in market segments where it does not now compete, like sport-utility vehicles, rather than concentrate on sales of expensive luxury cars, Mr.
Niefer said.


Books of The Times; What a Millennium Hides at the Very End
Arc d'X  By Steve Erickson  298 pages. Poseidon Press. $20.
Steve Erickson's latest novel, "Arc d'X," is a phantasmagorical meditation on the coming millennium and the erosion of American dreams of freedom and independence.
It comes emblazoned with a ridiculously hyperbolic blurb from Thomas Pynchon.
The book, he rhapsodizes, is "as daring, crazy and passionate as any American writing since the Declaration of Independence."


Civil Rights Trial Is Likely to Leave a Long-Term Mark on Rochester Police
Although five former narcotics officers have been cleared of beating and threatening suspects, their civil rights trial will likely have long-term effects on police operations here.
In the short term, public safety officials say, there is a morale problem within the department: 12 officers testified against 5 colleagues, all former members of a special drug task force.
In addition, there are hard feelings because commanders referred the case to Federal prosecutors.


Fly-by of Jupiter Detects Puffs of Planetary Dust
WHEN the European-American spacecraft Ulysses flew by Jupiter in February 1992, the huge planet seemed to make some decidedly unwelcoming gestures.
It appeared to be blowing puffs of dust in the face of the passing spacecraft.
Six times an instrument on Ulysses recorded bursts of tiny dust grains striking the craft, coming at remarkably regular intervals of about 28 days.
They came in narrowly focused streams from the direction of the planet, suggesting a Jovian origin and thus presenting a puzzle.
It defied common sense, scientists said, that any material, much less the finest of dust, should be escaping the gravitational clutches of the most massive planet in the solar system.


Lexington Precision reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First H.I.V.-Positive Haitians Arrive From Guantanamo Bay Naval Station


Cornucopia Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Lasertechnics Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Time to Remember; Time Not to Forget
Opening day is supposed to epitomize a lot of things.
But seldom is it supposed to bring a well of tears, a lump to the throat.
Emotions usually course along shallower paths, caught in the pomp and circumstances, driven by the cadences pounded out by the feet of marching bands, blaring speakers and roaring crowds.
But things are not always as they are scripted in tidy baseball scripts, as was the case at Shea Stadium yesterday.


Benguet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Aid Recipe For Russia: Add a Ton Of Savvy
Charles Bennett, West Point class of 1962, trained as a navigator bombardier on a B-52, preparing to drop nuclear bombs on the Soviet Union.
Today, at 54, he is a Peace Corps volunteer in the small city of Kamyshin on the Volga River, teaching Russians how to create small businesses in a market economy.
"I had a military flavor to my life," he said, rubbing a hand over his graying mustache.
"The idea was to protect America, kill the enemy and not be friends. But now the big threat is over, and it's a hell of a reversal. Here I am now eating dinner at the tables of people I was willing to turn into dust."


Winds of Change Ruffle Fashion's Lull
Fashion indeed has reached a watershed.
Traditionalists and revolutionaries agree.
That is about all they agree on.
The style that has dominated fashion for about 15 years -- since Giorgio Armani gave it cachet -- is the suit.
Severely structured with broad football shoulders at the beginning, then made almost as simply as a sweater, with shoulder pads all but eliminated, the jacket was the alpha and omega of fashionable dressing.


COMPANY NEWS
GRANITE CONSTRUCTION INC., Watsonville, Calif., has been awarded a $32 million contract by the Airport Authority of Washoe County to build a new runway at Reno Cannon Airport in Reno.
PARKER HANNIFIN CORP., Cleveland, has acquired the United States and European operations of TRW Inc.'s Ross hydraulic motor and hydrostatic steering controls business for an undisclosed amount of cash.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Chronicle column on Saturday about the new acting president of Wellesley College misstated the role of a search committee.
It will seek candidates for the permanent presidency of Wellesley, not for the chairmanship.


Poll Says Public Favors Changes In Health Policy
Fired by a sense of crisis, a majority of Americans say they are willing to accept substantial changes in their health-care system, including government price controls, new taxes and longer waits for nonemergency appointments, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
They have high expectations for President Clinton's promised health-care plan, the poll found, and they consider changes in health care an issue at least as urgent as the Federal deficit, which is near the top of the public's agenda.


U.N. Plans to Evacuate 20,000 Trapped Muslims
The top United Nations relief official in what was Yugoslavia said today that United Nations convoys would try to evacuate up to 15,000 Muslims from Srebrenica, in eastern Bosnia, which is under siege by Serbian nationalists.
The evacuation, which is to get under way on Tuesday, would sharply reduce the number of people trying to survive the siege.


Caribbean Chill
Christmas is not supposed to end for Little Switzerland Inc., a chain of 19 duty-free shops in the Caribbean, until Easter Sunday.
But the holiday for its stock ended with a jolt yesterday.
Little Switzerland, which has prospered by selling luxury goods to tourists, reported third-quarter earnings of 32 cents a share; analysts had expected 52 cents.


Corrections
A chart on March 21 with an article about changes in state taxes for affluent people omitted the year on which the data were based.
It was 1991.
Thus the chart only partly reflected the effect of the 4.5 percent income tax phased in by Connecticut in 1991.
In later years, a typical Connecticut couple earning $200,000 a year would owe $9,000 -- not $3,000 -- in state and local taxes, close to what similar couples pay in Georgia, Kentucky and Virginia.


It's Michigan's Call, but It's Carolina's Title
No matter how successful his basketball career may be at the University of Michigan or beyond, Chris Webber will never be allowed to forget the moment tonight, with a national championship in the balance, when he called a timeout he did not possess.
Webber's error, with 11 seconds to play in the championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, resulted in a technical foul that ended the hope for a Michigan comeback and allowed North Carolina to secure a 77-71 victory.


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Joseph Bryan 3d, 88, an Author
Joseph Bryan 3d, an author and editorial writer, died on Saturday at his home, Brook Hill, in Richmond.
He was 88.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth Mayo Atkinson McIntosh.


Presidential Realty Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gary DeLoatch, Leading Dancer With Ailey Troupe, Is Dead at 40
Gary DeLoatch, a leading dancer with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, died on Friday night at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 40 and lived in Manhattan.
He had a long illness, said Michael Kaiser, the executive director of the Ailey company.


Reliance Group Holdings reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The Outlook Is Still Risky For New York Office Space
As the American economy heads into what appears to be an ever-more-solid recovery, the New York commercial real estate industry continues to reel from the shocks of the overbuilding of the 1980's and the job losses of the recession.
In a market characterized by vast swathes of empty office space and desperate owners seeking buyers or tenants for troubled buildings, each new report of a big lease, of an offer to buy a distressed building or of a dip in the vacancy rate is analyzed as perhaps the sign of the market's recovery.
Each time, anxious owners and other industry insiders ask: is this the crocus that signals the start of spring?


There's No Cause for Comfort As the Islanders Look Ahead
Practice was over and the Islanders skated quietly off the ice and into their dressing room this morning.
Rap music played from a radio, but few players spoke as they packed for a flight to Washington and a chance for 2 more points in the Patrick Division playoff race with the Rangers and Devils.
Sitting below the radio, Mick Vukota looked across the room, sensed the possible tension and tried to loosen a few mental screws.
"Pressure! Pressure!" Vukota shrieked above the music, pressing his hands over his ears and skaking his head wildly.
"Somebody help me! I can't take the pressure!"


Dow Gains 8.38 Although Consumer Stocks Are Battered
Investors continued to abandon consumer product stocks yesterday, extending a selloff begun Friday when Philip Morris announced it was cutting prices of its Marlboro and forgoing increases in its other cigarette brands in the face of competition from cheaper alternatives.
In what appeared to be a reassessment of the resilience of brand names, investors bid down the price of several famed consumer-products companies, including Procter &amp; Gamble, Colgate-Palmolive and Coca-Cola.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  MEMORIES OF A CITY DESTROYED  In Sarajevo, no building of any consequence reamins undamaged and few families have survived untouched by the fighting that began a year ago with an attack on a downtown hotel and has continued almost uninterrupted since.
A1  Daily convoys will go to Srebrenica to evacuate trapped Muslims.
A14


EUROPEANS URGED TO PRESSURE SERBS
Lord Owen, the European Community's mediator on the Balkans, called today for "relentless pressure" to be placed on Bosnian Serbs to make them accept a peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but he cautioned against lifting the arms embargo on Bosnian Muslims.
After briefing community foreign ministers meeting in Luxembourg, Lord Owen said a political solution was still possible in Bosnia, and he criticized a suggestion by Secretary of State Warren Christopher that the arms embargo on Bosnian Muslims might be lifted "quite soon."


Marlboro's 2-Fisted Pitch
Ever see a cowboy try to walk a tightrope?
Philip Morris is about to ask the Marlboro cowboy -- perhaps the world's best-known advertising icon -- to perform that daunting feat.
Philip Morris is trying to pull off two seemingly contradictory strategies for its best-selling but troubled Marlboro cigarette brand.
The company is promoting Marlboros with cents-off coupons, discounted pricing and merchandise giveaways, which tend to increase sales and market share in the short term at the expense of profitability.
At the same time, however, it will continue to run slick, image-building advertisements in the mainstream media to enhance the brand's personality over the long haul.
Like a Political Candidate
It's not unlike a candidate who tries to win an election by attacking his or her opponent in a fiery speech in the morning and then pays for warm and fuzzy, mom-and-apple-pie commercials to appear that evening.


AIDS Study Casts Doubt on Value Of Hastened Drug Approval in U.S.
A European study that found no benefit from early treatment of the virus that causes AIDS with the drug AZT has also cast doubt on the validity of certain tests that the United States Government has approved in the last few years to speed up licensing of new drugs against the disease.
The tests, measuring the efficacy of a drug by the way it affects what are known as surrogate markers, are intended as quick substitutes for the standard, time-consuming measures traditionally used in predicting the benefit of a drug.


Mayoral Rivals Debate Crime Fears and Statistics
Mayor David N. Dinkins, a mathematician by training, believes numbers do not lie.
So he paused during a recent campaign speech to explain at length, once again, the verity that to him is as plain as day: crime is down in New York.
"Look at the numbers," he implored the audience.
"Twenty-seven months of straight decline."


Now It's Bill Clinton's Package
Stepping out from the large foreign policy shadow of his predecessor, President Clinton now assumes the risks, and courts the dividends, of embracing a Russian leader who's in deep political trouble at home.
It's the right move -- an unstinting bid to encourage the best possible outcome, even while beginning to hedge against the worst.
"From here on in," Boris Yeltsin declared at the closing press conference in Vancouver Sunday, it's going to be called "Bill Clinton's economic package." Russia's first democratic politician appreciated the large political bet Mr.
Clinton had just placed on him and on the future of Russian reform.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering through various securities dealers $700 million of 6 5/8 percent debentures due in 2003 at a price of 99.953125 to yield 6.631 percent, or about 50.5 basis points more than a Treasury security with similar maturity.


CHRONICLE
The three children of PRINCESS CAROLINE of Monaco have been deemed legitimate by Pope John Paul II, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Among other things, this means they are now eligible to succeed to the throne of the principality.
They had not been considered legitimate before because their parents married outside the church.
The children -- two sons, Andrea and Pierre, and a daughter, Charlotte -- were born of Caroline's seven-year civil marriage to Stefano Casiraghi, an Italian financier who was killed in a boat-racing accident in 1990.
They were married in 1983, a year after her divorce from Philippe Junot, a French businessman.
The Vatican annulled her first marriage last year, after a 10-year wait.


Financial Times Says Chief Is Leaving Over 'Differences'
Pearson P.L.C., the parent of the Financial Times publishing group, announced today that David Palmer, the chief executive of the group, was leaving immediately over "differences in management style."
In a terse announcement that took publishing circles here by surprise, the company said that Mr.
Palmer, 52, who began his career at the Financial Times in 1964 as a trainee journalist, would be succeeded by David Bell, 46, currently advertising and marketing director of the Financial Times.
Mr.
Bell is the newspaper's former managing editor.


Expect Hensley to Drive Kulwicki's Car
JIMMY HENSLEY, the 1992 Winston Cup rookie of the year, is apparently the choice to assume the driving duties of Alan Kulwicki, the reigning Nascar champion who died last week in an airplane crash.
"Alan told me a year ago that if something happened to put Jimmy Hensley in the car," FELIX SABATES, a close friend of Kulwicki's, told The Richmond (Va.) Times-Dispatch.


Bridge
Beginners learn to play game in an eight-card major-suit fit if one is available, and otherwise in three no-trump.
But if no-trump is ruled out by a conspicuous weakness, the choice may between trying for 11 tricks in a minor suit or 10 in a shaky major suit.
An example is the diagramed deal from a Regional Swiss Teams in Houston last month.
One declarer arrived in the obvious five-diamond contract and played it in the obvious way: Play the top diamonds and if the queen does not fall, try the heart finesse.
This plan had good chances, but it failed.
An improvement would be to maneuver two spade ruffs in the closed hand, cash three club winners and the diamond ace.
Then finesse in trump, for if East began with a doubleton queen he would then endplayed.


How One National Health System Collapsed; Needs of Rural America
To the Editor:
In a few weeks time, recommendations on health-care legislation will be made by the Presidential task force, and more attention must be paid to rural health care.
There are distinctive differences between health-care policy that covers people who live in cities and people who live in rural areas, and these differences must be brought to the forefront of the health-care debate.
The needs of rural Americans cannot be overlooked.


How One National Health System Collapsed; Where Are the Doctors?
To the Editor:
I am an internist on the threshold of his career watching the machinations of the Clinton Administration's health reform efforts with increasing concern.
The list of 500 members of the Task Force on National Health Care Reform, which you published March 27, shows a serious dearth of physicians, nurses, physical therapists or any other representatives of the allied health professions.
The administrators, health consultants (a nebulous professional realm free of licensing and regulation), lawyers and members of Congress have likely never laid their hands on a patient, nursed a dying child or shared the joy and frustrations of a patient struggling to overcome a devastating stroke.
No health plan will work that does not include the ideas and suggestions of those who will ultimately deliver it.
JAMES FRANCIS MARION, M.D.
New York, March 30, 1993


Domestic Vehicle Sales Up 11.9% in Late March
Sales of domestically produced vehicles rose 11.9 percent in late March, a gain that may have reflected pent-up demand from earlier in the month, when harsh weather interrupted normal shopping patterns in many areas.
Sales of North American-built cars rose 8 percent, to 247,736. in the March 21-31 period.
Sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans, sport-utility vehicles and pickups, rose 17.8 percent, to 179,290.
Over all, domestic vehicle sales totaled 427,026.
For reporting purposes, vehicles made in Canada and Mexico, as well as in the United States, are considered domestic, regardless of where the manufacturer is based.


Classical Music in Review
Guild of Composers  Weill Recital Hall
The 12-tone and Serialist systems of composition fell like a thick fog over much American music after World War II.
Numberless works from the postwar era exhibit a gray, generalized surface, teeming with athematic gestures.
The urge to maximize contrasts, to superimpose multiple rhythms and competing harmonic structures, paradoxically led by its very thoroughness to an atmosphere of stasis.


Review/Television; An Unhealthy Hospital Stars in 'Titicut Follies'
"Titicut Follies" finally makes it to television tonight, a quarter of a century overdue.
Frederick Wiseman's remarkable first documentary, an unsparing visit to the Bridgewater State Hospital for the Criminally Insane, in Massachusetts, was banned by the state's Supreme Court on the grounds that it violated the privacy of inmates, several of whom were shown naked.
The ban was finally overturned in 1991.
Nakedness is an apt symbol for a work that bares the daily assaults of power against the powerless.
Little physical brutality is shown at Bridgewater; maybe the staff was on its best behavior.
The cruelty takes the form of verbal bullying by guards and the seeming indifference of doctors.
Although Mr.
Wiseman offers glimpses of affection by the warders for their wards, his camera mainly finds a dim hopelessness that infects everyone consigned to the place, whether as prisoner or caretaker.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.13
3.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.90
3.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.99
4.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.73
5.78
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.02
7.05
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.93
7.95
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.08
6.17
6.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


School Challenge From the Right
There is more reason than ever this year to lament the traditionally low turnout for New York City's community school board elections: the Christian right hopes to take advantage of apathy to pack the boards and advance its agenda.
Now more than ever, New Yorkers owe it to their children to vote.
At least 600 candidates are running for 288 seats at stake in the May 4 election.
The 32 local boards, each consisting of nine unsalaried members, run elementary and junior high schools.
Though ultimately accountable to the central Board of Education and the Chancellor, the local boards remain independent power bases.
Among other things, they approve and allocate district budgets, choose textbooks and help set academic priorities.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Thursday with an article about retrenchment in the airline industry referred incompletely to data on the growth of miles flown by paying passengers, as well as the decline in cents earned for each mile flown by a paying passenger.
The figures referred to domestic air travel only.


North Carolina Takes the Title
The Fab Five was fabulous, and the Tar Heels were terrific, but when 64 teams came down to the final game last night, it was the North Carolina five who stood alone in victory and the Michigan Wolverines who were left to wait yet another year.
The final score was 77-71, but the final game of the 1993 National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament was closer than that.


Crowley Milner &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


SENATE SUSPENDS EFFORT FOR ACCORD ON CLINTON'S PLAN
Nine days into a filibuster and miles from any hint of agreement, Senate Democrats and Republicans abandoned the hunt for a compromise on President Clinton's economic stimulus package tonight, and decided to try again in two weeks.
The Democratic majority leader, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, said he decided to stop talking and send the Senate on a long-postponed vacation after Republicans refused to make an opening offer to resolve differences.


The Russians Seem Agreed: Yeltsin Had a Good Meeting
Russian officials today began the process of selling the results of the Vancouver summit meeting at a Kamchatka fuel stop, even before landing in Moscow.
But the view here was that President Boris N. Yeltsin had done himself some good with a dignified, "presidential" summit organized to insure that he had to give few public concessions to President Clinton.
Still, Russian analysts and ordinary citizens interviewed today agreed that the meeting was unlikely to be a decisive factor on April 25, when Russians vote -- or decide not to vote -- in an plebiscite on Mr.
Yeltsin's performance as President and the possibility of early presidential and congressional elections.


When No Timeouts Became 'Timeout!'
The second time around for this Michigan bunch in the championship game ended in such a flurry of action, mistakes and then despair, that it took the Wolverines a few moments to accept this loss, a crushing 77-71 defeat to North Carolina that just didn't seem right.
Not losing this way.
There was simply nothing fabulous about it.


Please Don't Tell Knicks Playoffs Aren't in Session
The Knicks have already adopted a playoff mentality, although the playoffs are still several weeks away.
New York's late-season race with the Chicago Bulls has added a sense of urgency to every game.
The players sense it, evidenced by the quiet locker room before each game.
And Coach Pat Riley senses it, evidenced by the way he has substituted recently.


Solemn Celebration for Jews


Official Virtually Rules Out Taxing of Health Benefits
President Clinton will not try to help pay for his health-care program by taxing "in any significant way" the health insurance benefits that workers receive from their employers, one of his top health-care planners said today.
The official, Ira C. Magaziner, staff coordinator of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, said that taxing the benefits, frequently mentioned as a major source of financing for the program, would be "foolhardy" because it would make "a significant portion" of the public worse off, rather than better.


Divorce Is Final: Jets Ship O'Brien to Packers
Ken O'Brien's nine-year career with the Jets, which hit a rapid decline the past three years under Coach Bruce Coslet, ended yesterday when the team traded the quarterback to the Green Bay Packers for an undisclosed pick in the college draft later this month.
O'Brien's departure follows a season in which he was demoted to serving as a backup for second-year man Browning Nagle and comes just three weeks after the Jets made a trade with Cincinnati for veteran quarterback Boomer Esiason.
The Jets foreshadowed an ignominious end for O'Brien when they took his jersey number (7) and gave it to Esiason, who wore the same number for the Bengals.
When the Jets announced the trade for Esiason, they said O'Brien would be traded, so yesterday's deal came as no surprise.


Q&amp;A
Examination Dream
Q.
A common recurring dream, of signing up for a course, not attending class and then panicking when faced with the final exam, often persists decades after finishing school.
Why does this nightmare situation persist rather than the far more anxiety-provoking situations encountered in later life?
A.
This dream echoes the first time such an anxiety emerged in your thinking, said Dr.
Rosalind Cartwright, chairman of the department of psychology at Rush Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago and director of its sleep disorder service.


CHC Helicopters reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Leslie Fay Files for Chapter 11
The Leslie Fay Companies filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday after it found itself unable to get credit to buy the yarns, fabrics and trims used in its dresses, suits and sportswear.
The voluntary filing is the second big setback for the company this year, coming just two months after the disclosure of an accounting scandal that had made profits out of losses and had masked decreasing sales.


Executive Changes
APPLETON &amp; LANGE, New York, a unit of Paramount Communications Inc. that publishes medical texts and scientific journals, named Eric J. Newman president.
CELGENE CORP., Warren, N.J., a chemical and biotechnology company, named Thomas H. Odiorne president and chief operating officer.


Arkansas Rookie Makes Debut
Making the first opening-day pitch of his presidency, Bill Clinton threw it high, wide and very careful today -- and was booed for his efforts.
The tradition of a President throwing out a ceremonial first pitch is time-honored, but fraught with a special political peril -- namely that of introducing politics into an afternoon devoted to sports while attempting to appear the consumate athlete before thousands of spectators.


METRO DIGEST
After the most harmonious round of budget negotiations in four years, the State Legislature approved a $32.08 billion budget that many lawmakers proclaimed as the start of a fiscal recovery for New York State.
A1.
New York State's budget was passed in a blur, so quickly that many legislators weren't quite sure what it said.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  TRYING TO BUILD FUTURE
Ladeeta Smith, a Brooklyn teen-ager who lost her father to alcoholism and her mother to AIDS, has always sought to be more than just a survivor.
Her first job was holding drugs and cash for a neighborhood crack dealer, but now she is intent on finishing her education, which she hopes will take her far from her tattered neighborhood.
A1.


Supreme Court Roundup; No Review of Espionage Conviction
The Supreme Court today refused to review the espionage conviction of Clayton J. Lonetree, the marine convicted of spying for the Soviet Union while assigned to guard the American embassies in Moscow and Vienna in the mid-1980's.
The Court made no comment in letting the 1987 conviction stand.
Private Lonetree, who was reduced in rank from sergeant and sentenced to 25 years in prison, argued that he had been tricked into confessing by two intelligence agents who promised him confidentiality but then reported him to the authorities and testified against him at his court-martial.


Little Switzwerland (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Heaton Sits and Waits, Not Quite a Yankee Yet
Neal Heaton is the invisible Yankee.
Watch him take the team bus to today's game with the Indians, watch him get dressed at his locker, watch him work out with 25 other Yankees and then watch out because he is about to disappear.
Heaton is in limbo.
While the Yankees continue trying to juggle their roster by trading infielder Mike Gallego or acquiring another relief pitcher, they have asked Heaton, a non-roster player, to tag along because they might activate him.
This afternoon, he sat by himself in the clubhouse and watched the Yankees top the Indians, 9-1, on television because he cannot sit in the dugout -- but he is not planning to wait much longer.


Trader Quits At Salomon
Victor Haghani, one of Salomon Brother's elite cadre of quantitative bond traders, has resigned.
He said he did not have a new job but would like to continue to trade bonds at another company.
"I love the markets," he said.
"I love this kind of trading. I think I will end up doing the same thing in a smaller firm."





El Paso Electric (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Einar Steen-Nokleberg  Weill Recital Hall Pianist
Recordings have kept the piano music of Edvard Grieg from complete obscurity, yet with only a few exceptions these works rarely find their way to the concert stage.
Einar Steen-Nokleberg, a Norwegian pianist, did his part to remedy that in honor of the Grieg sesquicentennial, with a six-concert traversal of Grieg's complete piano works.


Recreating Concerts From the 19th Century
The music of 19th-century New York will be presented in two typical concerts of the period, this week and next month, by the early-music chamber group Vineyardmusicke.
"The Harp and the Horn," a program of works played in the small music halls, salons and music gardens that abounded near Union Square in the early 19th century, will be offered on Thursday at 8 P.M.
The second concert, "Songs From the Heart," recreates a recital by Carlotta Patti, a popular 19th-century soprano who sang frequently in Irving Hall on Union Square.
The concert will be given on May 2 at 3 P.M. and will feature Dana Hanchard, a soprano.


Beeba's Creations (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


College Student Fatally Stabbed
A college student was stabbed to death and his brother and a friend were wounded in a confrontation with a group of youths on a street in Ridgewood, Queens, yesterday, the police said.
The police identified the dead man as Kultos Sayaves, 21, a freshman studying criminal law at John Jay College of Criminal Justice.


3 Agencies Quit Race For Lottery Account
The New York State Lottery said yesterday that 3 of 10 finalists had withdrawn from the mandated review on its account, estimated to be $25 million to $30 million.
The account has been handled by DDB Needham New York since 1988.


Corrections
A listing of Easter oratorios and special choral works in Weekend on Friday misstated the date of a service featuring two versions of "Lamentations of Jeremiah" at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street.
It is tomorrow at 7:30 P.M., not on Sunday.


Biomechanics Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Fujimori Sees a Peaceful, and a Prosperous, Peru
Expressing "not the slightest regret" about seizing expanded powers one year ago today, President Alberto K. Fujimori says his authoritarian moves are rapidly pacifying Peru and setting the stage for a free-market economic boom here in the mid-1990's.
"Today we have 95 percent of the Shining Path leadership behind bars," the Peruvian leader said in an interview on Sunday night.
"By 1995, the Shining Path will be completely eradicated as an organized group."


Motor Club of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bells, Whistles and Alternatives
THE MICROSOFT CORPORATION's new DOS 6.0 operating system software upgrade package appears to be an attractive bargain at its introductory price of $50.
It includes several handy utility programs that address some of the common problems a typical PC user faces from time to time, including lack of hard disk space, the risk of viruses, the need for an easy way to make backup copies, the annoyance of out-of-memory messages and sluggish system performance.
In short, DOS 6.0 is great for most PC users, especially beginners and casual users.
The new utilities do their jobs well.
For computer hot-rodders, though, the DOS 6.0 utilities are just training wheels.
There are other utility programs on the market that work faster, offer more options or in other ways surpass their DOS counterparts.


Words With Aliens
THE MUTANOID WORD CHALLENGE pits a child, 7 or older, against a cast of satisfyingly disgusting-looking mutanoids, little garbage-loving extraterrestrials who have agreed to iron out their differences with Earthlings by playing a word game.
The game looks a lot like Scrabble or a crossword puzzle.
The player types in words from the letters available on the screen, trying for intersections of letters that earn bonuses and for other ways of building up points.
Scores can be kept for up to 40 children at a time; raises in rank, from private to commander, are awarded, and trophies given.


Appeals Panel Backs U.S. in King Trial
A Federal appeals court sided with the Government today in a dispute over a prosecution tactic that is threatening to undo the fragile alliance among the four officers on trial in the beating of Rodney G. King.
The ruling will allow prosecutors to show the jurors in the Federal civil rights trial an edited version of videotaped testimony from the state trial a year ago in which one defendant, Officer Theodore J. Briseno, described how another officer clubbed a defenseless Mr.
King in the head.


Stock Options: Bentsen's View
While the Clinton Administration has favored curbing excess executive compensation, its Treasury Secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, weighed in yesterday on the side of those who oppose forcing companies to take a charge for the stock options they give executives.
In a letter to the Financial Accounting Standards Board that is sure to please the business community, Mr.
Bentsen wrote that he had reservations about forcing companies to take what he considered "a highly debatable charge."


U.S. Confirms F.B.I. Alerted By Egyptians
The State Department acknowledged today that the Egyptian authorities had warned the American authorities repeatedly in the months preceding the World Trade Center bombing about an Islamic fundamentalist network in the United States.
But it sought to emphasize that Egypt had not relayed information about specific planned acts of terrorism.


Tourist Killing Casts Pall Over Miami
When Barbara Jensen Meller, a German tourist just off a plane from Berlin, headed out toward the warm ocean breezes of Miami Beach in a rented red Ford Taurus on Friday night, she did not know just how close one of the most alluring places in America could be to one of the most hellish.
The 39-year-old Mrs.
Jensen, traveling with her two young children and her mother, became lost on the way to her hotel and found herself in a blighted inner-city neighborhood just off Interstate 95.
When her car was bumped by another, she got out to inspect the damage.
The two men in the second car then robbed, beat and ran over her, leaving her dead.
The police say they have no suspects.


No Runs, Few Pluses: Slow Start for Rockies
Somewhere, the ghost of Casey Stengel must have been calling out to Don Baylor yesterday afternoon.
Only Stengel really knew how awful things can get during an expansion season.
Perhaps now it is Baylor's turn.


Life Medical Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Baseball's Self-Inflicted Sports Injury
A baseball fan need not possess too long a memory to recall $4.50 box seats, end-of-season salary drives by players to make $100,000 and talk that focused on home runs, trades and strikeouts, not arbitration, revenue-sharing and $7 million-a-year paychecks.
The baseball season is one day old, and it is nearly impossible to avoid the incessant talk about how fraught with problems baseball is, from greedy owners fighting avaricious players to the glut of games shown on television.


Nets' Petrovic Can Practice
Drazen Petrovic has been cleared by the Nets' medical staff to practice with the team tomorrow.
Petrovic, who was placed on the injured list with a torn ligament in his left knee on March 30, isn't eligible to play until April 8.


Luria (L.) &amp; Son Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Costly Bargain for Devils: How 1 Penalty Turns to 2
The Devils' recent misbehavior toward referees has helped to turn their push to gain second place in the Patrick Division into a desperate effort to hold on to a playoff spot.
New Jersey's 5-2 loss to Pittsburgh at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Sunday night, its third loss in a row after defeats at Buffalo and Toronto, could, in part, be attributed to childish behavior by Bill Guerin and Stephane Richer.


Reviews/Music; When a Dramatic Accent Shows an Intriguing Puzzle
In the beginning there is the music and in the end, the listener.
Between the two worlds lies a third: technique and interpretation intertwined, a system of mental gears and physical moving parts that bring composers and their audience together.
Somewhere in that purgatorial middle lies the art of Jessye Norman.
Ms.
Norman, with James Levine as pianist, sang Schumann, Berg, Ravel and Strauss at Carnegie Hall on Sunday night.
The American soprano brought her ringing power, many-colored range and meticulous attention to detail to all this music.
Some of it pushed her upper range to the point of discomfort.
"Fruhlingsnacht" was one example, with its moments of frail retreat and even suspect intonation.


'There's Just a Lot of Pressure'
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q What are the biggest problems facing young people?


How One National Health System Collapsed
To the Editor:
"As part of its health-care plan, the Clinton Administration is considering a proposal to dismantle the Medicaid program and integrate low-income people into the same networks of doctors, hospitals and private insurance companies that would serve more affluent people" (front page, March 29).
I held an engineering position with an American company in Sao Paulo, Brazil, from 1957 to 1961.
The Government of President Juscelino Kubitschek de Oliveira had set up a "one-for-all" health care system, supported by premiums paid into it by people with incomes above an established minimum.
The Government subsidized poor and low-income people.


Smith Just Won't Argue With New Orleans Odds
Dean Smith flinched a bit when the name Fred Brown was mentioned.
Needless to say, he will flinch in the future when the name Chris Webber is mentioned in connection with North Carolina's 77-71 victory over Michigan tonight.
Curious things happen in New Orleans every 11 years for the Tar Heels, but as Smith noted tonight, these odd happenings didn't necessarily win the game for North Carolina.


Planner's Vision of a People-Friendly Arts Plaza on the Passaic
SO many people suffer from so much unnecessary agita when they see the word Newark.
Larry Goldman knows everything there is to know about that one.
He is stepping carefully down Saybrook Place in his cordovan wing tips, dapper, restless, the irresistible force personified.
A visitor sharing that walk sees only the immovable object: a corner of downtown Newark.
It is a landscape of forlorn, weedy Park-Fast-All-Day lots ringed in razor wire.
There are boarded-up buildings and a doomed, gutted hotel.
But this Goldman fellow, his face radiating anticipation as he talks about his vision, sees none of it.
As he walks, he is crossing a gloriously verdant public square bordered by umbrella-topped cafe tables.
He is watching a polite crowd clustered around a string quartet near a sparkling fountain.
He is surrounded by concertgoers hastening toward a performance by Itzhak Perlman.


Bosnians in Besieged Sarajevo Look Back on Year of Horror
Determined to find something for her four young children to eat, Stanka Voloder set out one day last week and walked five miles to the barbed-wire perimeter of the United Nations headquarters here to rummage through the garbage.
After a while, she found three rotting potatoes and an onion, walked home to the Bistrik district in the city center, and cooked her treasures over a wood fire.
As she told her story later, Mrs.
Voloder broke down in tears.
"Oh help me, please help me," she said over and over as she stood in Sarajevo's central market, clutching a bedroll wrapped in plastic and stamped with the blue-and-yellow flag of the European Community.
The bedroll was part of a handout of relief supplies to families in Bistrik, and Mrs.
Voloder was hoping somebody would buy it for 10 German marks, about $6.50, so that she could buy more food.
Sniper Attack on Rally
On Tuesday, this besieged city will mark the first anniversary of the attack that most people regard as the first volley of the brutal war here, a burst of Serbian sniper fire from a third-floor window of the Holiday Inn that killed several people in a crowd demonstrating outside the Bosnian Parliament for peace and national unity.
The shots were aimed at destroying a society, just like the gunfire that cut down Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife on June 28, 1914, about a mile from where the Holiday Inn now stands.
Those shots set off the train of events that led to World War I. 'The City Is Destroyed'
But the Sarajevo that emerged from World War I and from World War II, when it was occupied by Nazi forces, suffered only mild physical damage in comparison with the cataclysm wrought by the Serbian siege of the last year.
In a city with a population of 380,000, estimates indicate that more than 11,000 Bosnians have been killed and 50,000 have been injured -- making one of every six residents a casualty.


When Day Care Turns Deadly; A Fire Kills 2 Boys and Stillness Now Unsettles Eleta Brown
Since the February afternoon when two little boys died in a fire in the basement of her house where she provided illegal day care, Eleta Brown, 82 years old, has stood at her window, lonely and bored, waiting wistfully for the day when authorities will allow her to tend children once more.
Pampers are stuffed behind the candy-apple red vinyl couch in the living room.
Stuffed animals have been put away in her bedroom dresser drawers.
"I thought it would clear my mind, but it doesn't," she said.


For Openers, Gooden and Key Close Down the Batters
On a chilly April day when emotions were intense because the Indians remembered two of their athletes who died young, it would have been possible to ignore the developments that unfolded for the Yankees as they started the 1993 baseball season.
Possible, but not probable.
Maybe the Yankees will gaze back on this opening day sometime in July or August and realize how perfectly their season started in an impressive 9-1 victory over the Indians.
But if they want to reminisce on this day with a smile, instead of a frown, the Yankees must continue getting performances like the bushel they received on this 36-degree day.


Finding a Way to Unite 2,280 Wayward Atoms
CHEMISTS at the University of Michigan have overcome formidable technical difficulties to create a gigantic ball-shaped molecule that they believe may offer clues to how proteins function in living organisms.
The molecule, synthesized by Dr.
Jeffrey S. Moore and a post-doctoral student, Dr.
Zhifu Xu, is the largest molecule ever created in a laboratory from carbon and hydrogen atoms alone.
It consists of 1,134 carbon atoms and 1,146 hydrogen atoms, and its interior is roomy enough to contain the equivalent of 1,000 carbon atoms.


Decision Is Appealed On Decency Standard
The United States Department of Justice has appealed the decision by a Federal judge in Los Angeles in June that declared unconstitutional the so-called decency standard, which required the National Endowment for the Arts to "take into consideration general standards of decency" when awarding grants.
The action took many arts groups by surprise.
Though the Bush Administration had filed a notice of intent to appeal the decision, it was generally believed that the election of Bill Clinton had effectively killed the issue.


Frances C. Boas, 83, A Foundation Founder
Frances Cullman Boas, a founder and trustee of the Gomez Foundation for Mill House, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


ISG International Software reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Braintree Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Time U.S. Recognized Angola's Government
To the Editor:
The suggestion by Congress that it is time the United States recognized the Government of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola and abandoned support for the rebels of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or Unita, is firmly supported by facts.
Angola's Government is moving away from Marxist policies, as Communism shrivels and dies.
It also accepted unequivocally the validity of last year's United Nations-supervised free election
before
that election took place.
Unita, by rejecting the results of probably the most free and fair election to take place in sub-Saharan Africa, has shown it can never be trusted to accept any fair and just election results, marking itself as nothing more than a terrorist organization.


Birds as Lyme Carrier
The sea bird can play the same role as the deer in the cycle of infection that causes Lyme disease, according to a new study.
Previously, scientists thought that mammals, like the deer, were essential to supporting the disease-causing bacteria and the bacteria-carrying ticks that allow Lyme disease to continue to infest areas year after year.
But a study published on March 25 in the journal Nature found that a type of sea bird, razorbills, isolated on a mammal-free island off the coast of Sweden in the Baltic Sea, was able to carry the bacteria and to communicate it to ticks, which then pass the disease to other birds.


Electro Rent (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Allcity Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Depositors Set Off a Run on a Shady Serbian Bank
Panic has set in among the depositors at Serbia's largest private bank, a mysterious institution run by a woman who has become known as the Balkan Rothschild and whose activities have been central to the survival of the hard-line Serbian government.
One man was shot dead and four others were wounded today by guards in the central office of the bank as enormous lines of anxious depositors formed outside the branches and chaos enveloped the headquarters.
The shooting involved a dispute between recently dismissed security guards and their replacements, witnesses said.


Observer; An Aposiopesis, Eh?
"We are not amused," said Queen Victoria.
She only said it to send Prince Albert right up the wall.
"You know I can't stand it when you lay that royal we on me," said Prince Albert.
"It is not our fault, dear Albert, that we are a royal we whilst you, being a mere Prince Consort, are but an I," observed Queen Victoria.


Redskins Fill Receiving Spot With McGee
The Washington Redskins yesterday signed free-agent receiver TIM McGEE, who had spent his entire career with the Cincinnati Bengals.


Florafax International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Accounts
*
The Daily News, New York, to Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, New York, to develop a campaign for the newspaper's sports section.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel and Waldorf Towers, New York, to AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, to handle its account, previously at Peter A. Mayer Advertising Inc., New Orleans.
Billings were estimated at $1 million to $1.5 million.


Scimed Life Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Bilingual Education Yields Good Results
To the Editor:
A March 27 article on the role of bilingual education in the integration of Hartford's Hispanic population fails to offer a fair and informed perspective.
You report without challenge the contention of bilingual education critics that teaching language-minority children their native language stands in the way of acquiring English.
You fail to mention that substantial research from around the world supports the opposite theory, that a high level of literacy in one's native language helps the learner achieve a high level of literacy in a second language.
Experiments in which middle-class, majority-language children receive instruction through a second language result in high levels of proficiency in both languages.
However, when lower-class, minority-language children receive instruction solely through the majority language, they generally fail to acquire a high degree of literacy in either language.


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Makers of brand-name products face some tough questions.
INVESTORS wanting to buy their favorite brand names at a discount could have had their pick in yesterday's stock market.
Colgate-Palmolive, Proctor &amp; Gamble, Clorox, Heinz, Kellogg and Coca-Cola each fell at least a point, while the rest of the market inched ahead.
It seems that after Philip Morris's collapse on Friday, when it announced it was cutting cigarette prices, no maker of fabled brands is entirely safe.
Such consumer growth stocks led the market higher for much of the last decade, but now investors are questioning whether these companies can continue to deliver huge profits.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Armen Takhtajan; Botanist Plans Survey of World's Flowers
BORN before the Soviet Union existed, Dr.
Armen Takhtajan has outlasted both it and the pall it cast over genetics to stand today among the small number of botanists at the top of their field.
Years ago, when biologists in the Soviet Union were commonly fired or even imprisoned if they taught classic genetics in defiance of an adviser to Stalin, T. D. Lysenko, Dr.
Takhtajan openly fought Lysenko's theories and supporters.
Both are long gone, while Dr.
Takhtajan has come to be regarded by his fellow botanists as perhaps the foremost living expert on the classification and family groupings of plants.
And now, at age 82, he is hard at work in a small guest office at the New York Botanical Garden, where he is on leave from his home laboratory at the Komarov Botanical Institute in St.
Petersburg, finishing up what he describes in softly spoken English as "my main life work."


Times and Printers Reach Tentative Accord
The New York Times said yesterday that it had reached a tentative agreement with the printers union, replacing a contract that expired on March 31.
Within the last week, three other unions -- representing electricians, plumbers, photoengravers and lithographers -- ratified long-term contracts with the paper, said Nancy Nielsen, a Times spokeswoman.
The latest agreement, with New York Typographical Union No. 6, is subject to ratification by its members.
The union's president, James Grottola, could not be reached for comment.


Review/Pop; A Musically Mad Scientist
Lindsey Buckingham might be described as the mad scientist of California pop.
The singer, songwriter and guitarist who masterminded the gossamer folk-rock harmonies of Fleetwood Mac's biggest hits is a notorious perfectionist in the recording studio.
And at Town Hall on Wednesday evening, in a concert that was part of his first solo tour, he worked with considerable success to recreate the layered textures that have made both his Fleetwood Mac and his solo albums models of a certain kind of meticulous craft.
Especially on his solo albums, Mr.
Buckingham has applied his wizardry to the creation of tortured psychodramas in which every sigh of pleasure is balanced by a primal scream or a Gothic nightmare.
His newest record, "Out of the Cradle," is an autobiographical song cycle describing a midlife crisis with many characteristics of a nervous breakdown.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Wheaton Advances  David Wheaton began his bid in the Japanese Open at Tokyo yesterday with a 6-4, 6-3 victory in the first round over a Japanese wild-card entrant, Ryuso Tsujino.
Wheaton is seeded 10th in the $1.2 million tournament, being played on hard courts in Tokyo.
Ninth-seeded Brett Steven of New Zealand, the highest-ranked man in action yesterday, beat Tommy Ho of the United States, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3.
Also advancing were No. 11 Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, No. 13 Christian Bergstrom of Sweden and No. 15 Guillaume Raoux of France.
Siemerink edged Stefano Pescosolido of Italy, 2-6, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5, Bergstrom ousted the American qualifier Kenny Thorne, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 7-5, and Raoux defeated Jeremy Bates of Britain, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3.
Patrick McEnroe, a qualifier, overcame a slow start to outlast his fellow American Chuck Adams, 0-6, 6-2, 6-2. (AP)


Computer Outsourcing Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Lassonde Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


It's All Sunshine In Florida Debut
After eight decades of watching major league teams head north at the end of spring training, Florida got its first taste of regular-season play today and found the result to its liking as the expansion Florida Marlins defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers, 6-3.
Playing under clear blue skies and amid temperatures in the mid-80's, the newest member of the National League East never trailed.
The Marlins knocked out 14 hits, at least one for every starter except the pitcher.
They cuffed Orel Hershiser, the Dodger starter, for 10 hits and 5 runs.
And they wrapped up their franchise debut with three innings of superb relief pitching by three different pitchers.


The Rains Left Floods for Some, Puddles for Others


For Openers, Gooden and Key Close Down the Batters
The pitch chart showed 101 entries, a document full of splendid explosions of power and deception.
It told a great story of Dwight Gooden's nine shutout innings yesterday, of a 3-0 triumph for the Mets in the season's first game.
It was a tale, however, held together by a single pitch, by a nugget of data that was inevitably buried beneath the ceremony and sentiment that always overwhelm opening day.
It was a 3-2 fastball to Andres Galarraga.
It came with the bases loaded in the third inning of a scoreless game, Gooden looking sound and strong, but suddenly vulnerable against the Colorado Rockies, playing their first game as a National League expansion team.


Abuse-Case Reversal Called Sign of Trend
The moment an appeals court overturned the 1988 conviction that sent Margaret Kelly Michaels to prison for sexually abusing 19 children, the case of the former day-care teacher became a symbol of legal questions larger than her fate.
In broad strokes, children's advocates and legal experts see the ruling of the three-judge panel -- which concluded that Ms.
Michaels did not receive a fair trial -- as an example of the legal system becoming more cautious in dealing with cases involving bizarre allegations of abuse.


G.M. Financial Chief Takes Lopez's Duties
The General Motors Corporation today appointed its chief financial officer to take over the duties of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the aggressive head of worldwide purchasing who abruptly resigned last month to join Volkswagen A.G.
After a meeting of G.M. directors in New York, the auto maker said that G. Richard Wagoner, who is also executive vice president, would expand his responsibilities to include those that had been Mr.
Lopez's.


Philadelphia Climbs Out of Fiscal Depths and Builds by Sharing Sacrifices
This city, long known for incompetent government, has made one of the most stunning turnarounds in recent urban history, experts say.
Last week, its leaders announced it would end the year with a balanced budget for the first time in seven years.
Almost as startling, urban specialists say, Philadelphia has ended its prolonged fiscal crisis in just 15 months and has done it with an unprecedented amount of political harmony and public support, in spite of asking voters to absorb a higher sales tax and public employees to agree to wage concessions.


Corrections
A chart on March 22 about the increase in reported AIDS cases in New York City misstated the percentage of increase in each category for this year's first two months, compared with last year's.
For all men, the figure was up 56.4 percent; for all women, up 82.3 percent; for men who had sex with men, up 40.8 percent; for intravenous drug users, up 80.54 percent; for all those who engaged in heterosexual sex, up 55.9 percent.


Baseball '93 Opens With Flurry of Firsts
On a day of renewal, when spring is suddenly suggestive of summer and hope springs eternal, at least until the bottom of the sixth, baseball began a new season yesterday with the usual fanfare and more: the debut of two teams and a lefty from Little Rock.
In Baltimore, where the Texas Rangers beat theOrioles, 7-4, Bill Clintopn threw his first Presidential pitch, and in New York the new Colorado Rockies fell to the Mets, 3-0.


CPI Aerostructures reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Banyan Mortgage Investors L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dundee Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Liquor Brands' Accounts in Review
The Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company in New York is rounding up agency finalists to pitch for its Johnnie Walker Black Scotch Whisky and Tanqueray Gin and Vodka brands account, with combined billings estimated at $15 million.


In Unmasking Anonymity of Crime, Victims Face Inmates
As Ralph H. Hubbard spoke of another commonplace murder in the city, the sidewalk slaying of his son, his face was a weathered, Jobian mask of tolerance that made his jailhouse visit all the more fascinating to the assembled convicts who listened and wondered about his feelings.
"Tragic as it is, I will never see the logic of it," Mr.
Hubbard said, recalling the "silly" circumstance -- a dispute over a videotape -- that led the killer later to ambush his 23-year-old son, Brett, in a hail of gunfire.
"I will never see the rationale. I will never see my son again."


Classical Music in Review
Russell Sherman  Pianist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
The pianist Russell Sherman can usually be counted on to toy with listeners' expectations, either in his juxtapositions of works or in the twists he brings to standard repertory.
Even when he is not entirely convincing, it is impossible to walk away from one of his performances without acknowledging that his readings are driven by a probing intellect and an unusually poetic kind of musicality.


Patterns
Europe, Yes, but When?
Calvin Klein says Italy and France are on the back burner.
Donna Karan's Patti Cohen, vice president of publicity and advertising, puts them on the front burner.
Either way, Europe is heating up as the designers seek further expansion after deluging the American market with lines for different age and income levels.
"Nothing is decided yet," Mr.
Klein said yesterday.
"A lot of people don't come here. Everyone goes to Paris, and not everyone goes to Milan. The first step I'm interested in making in Europe is setting up an office in Milan, and the last step is making a decision about showing."


Reviews/ Music; Reflection and Song From Christa Ludwig And Jessye Norman
Christa Ludwig sang her last words at the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday afternoon in "Die Walkure," with her back to the audience, telling Brunnhilde that Wotan had some news for her.
That delivery, forthright, even a bit spunky, gave a poignancy to Ms.
Ludwig's farewell to New York in this role of Fricka, the goddess of marriage.
It was as if Ms.
Ludwig, like her character, had completed her say.
Two weeks ago was Ms.
Ludwig's last New York recital; during the next year will be a string of farewells in other major cities.
She has, over the course of her career, swayed listeners with her strength of character and her highly principled musicianship; she is now prepared to move on.
Some of Ms.
Ludwig's appeal has, in fact, been the authority her mezzo voice has possessed.
Warm and supple and nuanced in its prime, occasionally wavery in later years, it has always had the impact of humane confidence heard, for example, in her Marschallin on the Sony label or in her lieder interpretations in the invaluable EMI collection.
Fricka demands this authority as well; it is the role Ms.
Ludwig has sung most often at the Met, in 19 out of the 117 performances since her debut with the company as Cherubino in "The Marriage of Figaro," in 1959; her New York opera career has thus made an intriguing passage from the part of an adolescent haunted by sexual desire to the stern, wounded voice of civilization's demands for control.


Corrections
The opening paragraph of the main front-page article yesterday about the summit meeting in Vancouver referred incorrectly in some editions to the amount of aid pledged to Russia by President Clinton.
As noted elsewhere in the article, it was $1.6 billion, not $1.6 million.


Samson Energy Co. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Head Start in Maine
To the Editor:
Urban programs may be in trouble, but here, in the upper-right-hand corner of the United States -- Washington County, Maine -- Head Start centers are a lifeline for preschool age kids.
In this area many families live in poverty, relying on seasonal industries -- fishing, logging, blueberries, wreathmaking -- and on tourism.
The teachers here are underpaid, and the centers aren't fancy, but the cooperative effort with parents gives everyone the feeling they're doing the right thing.
To close any of these centers would be criminal.


Alpine Meadows of Tahoe Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Drexler's Hamstring Has Him Out Again
CLYDE DREXLER will miss several games after straining his hamstring Saturday night in the Portland Trail Blazers' loss to the Washington Bullets.
The All-Star guard strained the same hamstring that forced him to miss 13 games last month, but the injury is to a different portion of the tendon, Dr.
ROBERT COOK said on Sunday.


A PLUTONIUM PACT WILL AID DISPOSAL
Seeking a new path to East-West disarmament, Russian and American experts have agreed to team up to develop and build a new type of reactor that can burn plutonium from nuclear warheads and turn the deadly bomb fuel into electricity.
The $1.5 billion nuclear reactor would be built in Russia and fueled at least partly by plutonium from Moscow's huge stockpile of scrapped nuclear arms.
The initiative, led by General Atomics of San Diego, requires up to $100 million over five years from the American Government, which is studying the general idea of burning plutonium and, separately, whether to support the East-West reactor plan.
The small reactor would be cooled by helium and is advertised as immune to meltdown.


Sharper Image Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Leslie Fay filed for bankruptcy protection, two months after the apparel maker disclosed an accounting scandal that had made profits out of losses and had masked declining sales.  [ Page D1. ]
General Motors appointed its chief financial officer to take over the duties of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the aggressive head of worldwide purchasing who left for Volkswagen.  [ D1. ]


On My Mind; America's Allies in Serbia
If you have any ideas about new options in Serbia and Bosnia, the President said on the phone after the summit talks, let me know.
So I did.
The answer popped out: Mr.
President, please get your Administration and the Western allies to pay a lot more attention to Serbian democrats.


Why Candidates Shouldn't Lend to Campaigns
To the Editor:
I am not particularly bothered that Andrew S. Eristoff, a Republican who won a special election for a New York City Council seat in February, injected $256,000 of his own money into his campaign (news article, March 27).
Personal wealth can sometimes protect a politician from special interest pressure, as Mr.
Eristoff maintains.
However, I am disturbed that he
lent
the money to his campaign, rather than making an outright donation.
Paradoxically, a politician who lends money to his own campaign is more, not less, susceptible to the influence of special interests.


Not All Solar Heating Has to Be Expensive
To the Editor:
Your March 25 article on a New Hampshire house with solar heating does a disservice by describing an active solar house -- expensive to build and heat.
Passive solar heating employs standard construction, except the south is mostly glass.
I have built five between 1947 and 1978 and still occupy the most recent.


New York Library Nears Start on Science Center
The New York Public Library's proposed $100 million Science, Industry and Business Library will provide computer access to worldwide information networks as well as books when it opens in 1995, library officials said yesterday.
At a briefing for contributors and potential contributors, the officials also announced that $59 million of the projected cost had already been raised, before the opening of a formal campaign later this year.
The library, which officials said would be the largest public information center devoted solely to science and business, is to be in part of the B. Altman building at East 34th Street between Fifth and Madison Avenues.


New Brain Scanning Technique Can Show Strokes in Progress
STROKES are responsible for killing or disabling half a million Americans every year and are the third leading cause of death in this country.
Until now, doctors have had neither a really safe and reliable method of diagnosing stroke, other than clinical observation, nor any way to treat the disabling effects.
Now neurologists and radiologists have discovered a new experimental way to see a stroke in progress, observing brain tissue that has died and surrounding tissue that is merely stunned but may be revived with treatment.
Though the visualization of a stroke is unlikely to help individual patients anytime soon, the technique should make it a lot more possible to develop drugs for protecting injured brain tissue.


Classical Music in Review
'The Piatigorsky Legacy'  Michael Tilson Thomas Conductor Carnegie Hall
There were just a few moments Friday night when the program, titled "The Piatigorsky Legacy," earned its name.
One was the showing of an unidentified film fragment from 1949, showing the great cellist playing Schubert.
The performance was theatrical yet without sentiment or artifice, combining a thrilling muscularity with an almost unassuming intelligence.


Rowe Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


With No Parents, Ladeeta, 18, Presses On
It was 3:30 on a Monday morning and Ladeeta Smith could not sleep.
Just hours earlier, she had visited her mother in a Bronx nursing home, and she was haunted by the image of her emaciated body covered with sores.
At 41, Patricia Bobo Smith was dying of AIDS and no longer recognized her daughter.
Later that day, Ladeeta would walk into Boys &amp; Girls High School in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, where its signs proclaim, "We Are Survivors." The 18-year-old senior would turn in final semester reports, lead an English class discussion and put finishing touches on the college applications that she hoped would take her far away from this tattered neighborhood.


Fundamentalism: the 20th Century's Last Ideology
Scholars used to dismiss fundamentalism as a fossilized form of old-time religion, destined to dissolve in the acids of science and skepticism.
But from the Iranian revolution and the rise of the religious right in the United States to the militancy of Jewish settlers on the West Bank and the riots that followed a Hindu-led destruction of a mosque in India, events of the past two decades make it clear that religious fundamentalism has done anything but dissolve.
As one scholar recently put it, fundamentalism is "dynamic, adaptive and modern," perhaps the last great ideological upsurge of the 20th century.


Healthplex reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


INSIDE
Reactor Would Derive Power From Plutonium
Russian and American experts have agreed to build a reactor that could burn plutonium from atomic weapons and use the fuel from discarded arms -- especially the stockpiles to be scrapped in the former Soviet Union -- to make electricity.
Page A11.
Peace Corps Aiding Russia
In a Russian town once viewed as a potential nuclear target, Americans are teaching their former foes how to set up small businesses.
Page A10.
Ex-Premiers Warned in Italy
In another jolt to their political system, Italians learned that Giulio Andreotti and Arnaldo Forlani both face a corruption inquiry.
Page A3.
Peru a Year Later
A year after he seized power, President Alberto K. Fujimori was looking ahead to economic success and a firm grip on his country.
Page A3.
More Trouble for Leslie Fay
Leslie Fay, the big clothing company, filed for bankruptcy protection after an accounting scandal.
Page D1.
New Tools to Fight Strokes
Doctors are working on snapshots of strokes as they happen and drugs to treat them.
Science Times, page C1.


Sports of The Times; The Man In the Gray Raincoat
WHILE the Yankees were taking batting practice before yesterday's opener with the Indians, a husky gray-haired man in a gray raincoat suddenly appeared in the Yankee dugout behind third base, hopped up the steps and strode toward left field.
George Steinbrenner had emerged from his silent spring.
Moving across the grass now with his back to the plate, the Yankees' principal owner suddenly ducked.


Studying the Secrets Of Childhood Memory
WHEN Rachel Hudson was 2, she recalled details about things she had done weeks and months before, prompted by her mother, a psychologist studying children's memories.
But by the time she was 8, the only episode Rachel could recall from her first couple of years was a trip to Disneyland.
The old mystery of just why most people are unable to dredge up memories from the first years of life has a new solution, thanks to research like that of Rachel's mother, Dr.
Judith Hudson of Rutgers University.


By Design; Dark Shadows
Come fall, the way to go will be in black from head to toe.
From a squishy brimmed cloche or close-fitting cap to platform-soled shoes or ankle-muffling boots, the idea is to be drenched in black.
No dibs or dabs of bright accessories should distract.
This look, once the province of widows and more recently the uniform of the avant-garde, has now been proclaimed the peak of chic.
Last week at the American designers' fall showings, it looked great on the runways.
Calvin Klein's collection was one magnificent obsession with black, from sporty pea coats to gossamer sheer evening silhouettes.
And he was only one of many.


Pacific Gateway Properties reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Alas, a Fond Bon Voyage to Texas Tech's Swoopes
The best female basketball player in the world will have to leave the country to score her next official point, but not everybody is feeling pangs of sympathy for Sheryl Swoopes of Texas Tech.
"Yeah, I'm going to feel sorry for her, making $200,000 a year and playing for as long as she wants," Nancy Lieberman-Cline said, about the record-breaking sensation of the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's Final Four.
"Green is green. Money is money. There are opportunities for her overseas that we never had."


Treasury Sales Abroad Set Record
Private investors overseas bought a record $31 billion of Treasury bonds and notes last year, with much of the demand coming from buyers in London and the return of the Japanese.
Private purchases in the fourth quarter, at $20 billion, also set a record.


Travel Agent Vanishes, But L.I. Student Trip Is On
A group of Long Island high school students were all smiles yesterday as they boarded a luxury motor coach, equipped with stereo system and VCR, and headed for Kennedy International Airport to begin a 13-day tour of London and Ireland.
The trip had been in jeopardy since last week when the students learned that they had no reservations, no money and no way to trace the travel agent who had been handling the arrangements.
"They are off and rolling, thanks to the generous donations of the community," said Lee Elwood, superintendent of schools for Mattituck.


Oilgear Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Theater in Review
The Cenci  Bouwerie Lane Theater 330 Bowery (at Second Street) Lower East Side Through May 21 By Percy Bysshe Shelley; direction and lighting by Eve Adamson; set by John Brown; costumes by Steven F. Graver; sound by Dennis Green; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg.
Presented by Jean Cocteau Repertory, Robert Hupp, artistic director; Scott Shattuck, producing director.
WITH: Harris Berlinsky, Christopher Black, Steve Chizmadia, John Lenartz, Joseph Menino, Jeff Seabaugh, Craig Smith, Elise Stone, Angela Vitale, Mark Waterman and the Company.
If the sordid story of "The Cenci" occurred today in some quiet community on Long Island, there would be three made-for-television movies out in time for the fall sweeps.
As it is, the telling of this lurid tale of incestuous rape and murder surrounding a vile 16th-century Roman noble is left to a "based on a true story" verse drama by Shelley.
The play is being given a surprisingly cogent staging by the Cocteau Repertory.


Rival Military Chiefs Meet in Bosnia, but Only Bicker
The United Nations failed today to consolidate the fragile cease-fire in the Bosnian war when face-to-face talks among military commanders of the three warring armies ran into deadlock over continuing Serbian nationalist attacks on the besieged Muslim enclave at Srebrenica.
The talks at Sarajevo Airport were the first attempt at a high-level meeting of the opposing armies in weeks, and United Nations commanders had hoped that the session would agree on the first steps toward turning the 10-day-old cease-fire into a lasting peace.


Campus Journal; Evolution of a Protester: From Gun to Governing
When more than 100 black students seized the student union at Cornell University early on the morning of April 19, 1969, it seemed just another example of the activism that was sweeping campuses across the country in that charged spring of antiwar protests and black power.
But that changed suddenly when the students brought in guns.
The armed occupation of Willard Straight Hall lasted 34 hours, ending only when the administration agreed to ask the faculty not to punish three students involved in an earlier demonstration.
And then, when the faculty defied the administration and voted to reprimand the students, more than 6,000 students rallied in protest at the campus gymnasium.


Blackman Expects Surgery on Back
Rolando Blackman confirmed tonight that he would most likely undergo back surgery when the season ends.
Blackman, who had a miserable 0-for-6 shooting performance tonight, said he has a herniated disk.
When a friend asked Blackman if he would have surgery after the season, Blackman nodded.
"I would think that would be the case," the Knicks guard said.
"I'm going to get a couple of other doctors' opinions. I've spoken to Moses Malone. I've spoken to Dale Ellis. I've talked to a couple of freinds from college who have had it. They're back jumping around. That's why I'm optimistic about it, because I know I'm not going to be forever in pain."


Fear Gives Los Angeles Race an Edge
Two weeks before Angelenos vote for a new mayor, an extraordinary possibility is emerging: the leading candidate in this heavily Democratic and liberal city is a New York-born Republican who vows to put more police officers on the streets, trim the rest of local government and turn over many city services to private enterprise.
He is Richard Riordan, a 62-year-old lawyer, self-made millionaire, philanthropist and long-time power broker here who has never held public office.
Mr.
Riordan, who lives alone in a book-cluttered mansion in the exclusive Brentwood section, says he wants the job because "all my life I've been a rescuer."


Review/Theater; Lacerating Greed and Decay, But Doing It With Humanity
"In a hotel nothing sticks," says Ken Hoyle, the international business executive played by Ron Rifkin in Jon Robin Baitz's "Three Hotels" at the Circle Repertory Company.
"It's all transitional, and you're never stuck with the vital you." The only trouble with Ken's view of hotels is that some things do stick to the conscience and cannot be escaped, even in the luxurious hotel rooms of Tangier, St.
Thomas and Oaxaca, Mexico, visited during Mr.
Baitz's play.
Marital breakdowns stick.
Ethical compromises stick.
So do the criminal deaths of children.
Running 75 minutes and told entirely in monologues -- two from Mr.
Rifkin sandwiched around one from Christine Lahti as Ken's wife, Barbara -- "Three Hotels" is another acrid Baitz work in which an articulate, privileged man takes the fall for the carnage and corruption of the 20th century.
Like the embattled New York publisher also played by Mr.
Rifkin in "The Substance of Fire" and the Los Angeles doctor played by Roger Rees in "The End of the Day," Ken Hoyle (ne Hershkovitz) has buried his past in pursuit of a success about to go up in flames.
A former Peace Corps volunteer and the child of leftist Russian Jews, he now works for an American company that sells "the Albert Speer of baby formulas" to third-world countries and is so notorious it once co-starred on "60 Minutes" with Union Carbide and the Dalkon Shield.


Rivalries Imperil Socialist Party's Future in France
A week after the Socialist Prime Minister handed over office to his conservative successor in a quiet and dignified ceremony, a far more bitter transfer of power took place today amid the ruins of France's once-powerful Socialist Party.
As Michel Rocard assumed his new post as party boss this afternoon, his predecessor, Laurent Fabius, was nowhere to be seen.
Ousted last weekend in what he denounced as a "putsch," Mr.
Fabius was in no mood to shake hands with a man whom he now accuses of untempered personal ambition.


Rivers in Right Place at the Right Time
The Knicks ran out of overtime heroics tonight.
They played hard enough to win, but not well enough.
Instead of making clutch plays, they made crucial mistakes.
Instead of making pressure shots, they made mental blunders.
Ending a six-game New York winning streak, the Atlanta Hawks dropped the Knicks, 109-104, at the Omni.
Fortunately for New York (51-21), the Chicago Bulls (50-22) also lost, to the Milwaukee Bucks, so New York still has a one-game lead over Chicago in their race for best record in the Eastern Conference.


Wine Talk
WHAT are the five varieties of grapes normally found in one combination or another in red Bordeaux wines?
What is the principal grape variety in the Ribera del Duero, in Spain?
What is the only D.O.C. wine in the Basilicata region, in Italy?


Kazakhstan And Chevron Start Venture
The Chevron Corporation and the Republic of Kazakhstan officially established a $20 billion joint oil venture yesterday that industry officials and analysts view as a a bellwether for other American oil companies wanting to do business in the former Soviet Union.
The 50-50 joint venture will generate modest revenues and profits for San Francisco-based Chevron in its first few years, analysts said.
"In the long term it will add more than $1 a share in earnings," said Eugene Nowak, a senior oil analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds.
"This is a mega-venture." Chevron earned $1.57 billion, or $4.63 a share, in 1992.


Ah, the First Foods of Spring, Just in Time for Easter Feasts
SPRING doesn't really burst on the scene in a blaze of daffodils and the sudden rise of wild asparagus so thin as to be taken for blades of grass.
The traditional feast of the season, Easter, doesn't signal a sudden quickening as much as it acknowledges the resurgence that begins cautiously when the groundhog ambles out of hibernation looking for its shadow.
The groundhog motivates people who, after months of battened hatches and the selfish appetite that looms in closed places, take a long, bored look at their own darker sides.
Change becomes a pleasant concept.
Change of setting.
Change of clothes.
Change of menu.


Douglas Marland Services
Two memorial services are to be held for Douglas Marland, a writer on major television soap operas including "As the World Turns." In Manhattan, the service will be on Monday at 7 P.M. at the Virginia Theater at 245 West 52d Street.
A Los Angeles service will be on April 17 at 11 A.M. at the First Christian Church, 4390 Colfax Avenue in North Hollywood.
Mr.
Marland, who was 58, died on March 6.


More Consumer Stocks Fall; Dow Dips 1.62
Investors widened their selloff of consumer-related stocks yesterday to retailers like Wal-Mart Stores and Home Depot.
Investors appeared to be focusing on the coming reports of March retail sales, which are expected to be hurt by the late-winter cold snap, as well as fears that these stocks have been too high all along.


Corning Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Rangers Turn to Rookie to Save Season
To quote Neil Smith, desperate situations call for desperate measures.
And so the Rangers have summoned Corey Hirsch from Binghamton, hoping the star goaltender in their farm system can do for them what no one else on the team seems capable of doing of late.
That is, win games.
Immediately after the Rangers' ugly 5-4 loss to the Hartford Whalers on Monday night, Smith, the team president and general manager, met with his coaching staff to discuss what they could do to try to salvage a season that seems to grow more dismal each day.
What they realized is this: The Rangers have but one hope left.
And that hope happens to be Hirsch.


American to Be Head of Economist's Parent
Directors of the Economist Newspaper Ltd. will today promote Marjorie M. Scardino, currently the president of its North American operations, to chief executive of the parent company in London, the publication said yesterday.
Mrs.
Scardino, 46, is the first American, as well as the first woman, to head the company that publishes the 150-year old Economist.


Suit Accuses Big Landlord Of Barring Some Families
One of Long Island's largest landlords is being charged with illegally barring some families with children from living in its buildings, according to a lawsuit to be filed on Wednesday in Federal court by a housing civil rights organization.
Long Island Housing Services, a nonprofit fair housing agency, announced today that a yearlong investigation showed that Holiday Management Associates Inc. in Old Westbury "knowingly and intentionally discriminated against families with children" in several of its apartment complexes, in violation of the Fair Housing Act.


Racing Bill in Chiles's Hands
The three major thoroughbred tracks in south Florida, which have been feuding over racing dates for most of the last 20 years, were waiting yesterday for Gov.
Lawton Chiles to sign a peace-treaty bill that would fix dates and provide tax breaks and television simulcasts for the next five years.
Under the terms of the bill, which cleared the Florida Legislature over the weekend and would take effect in 1994, Gulfstream Park would continue to get the prime dates during the tourist season, operating from Jan. 3 through March 16 and paying the state a tax of 3 percent on every dollar wagered.
Hialeah Park would run from March 17 through May 22, but would be compensated for the off-season dates by paying a tax of only 1.15 percent.
Calder would run for the rest of the year and would pay 2.4 percent.


William B. Crist, 81, Public-Relations Aide
William B. Crist, a retired public-relations counselor to schools and colleges, died on Thursday at Kingston Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He lived in Manhattan and Woodstock, N.Y., and was 81.
He had a heart attack, his family said.


Sex and Consequences
A country with one of the world's highest standards of living is not a country in which one expects to find a remarkable number of people afflicted with sexually transmitted diseases.
But according to a study by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, 56 million Americans are infected with them, and at least one of every four can expect to be.
Such age-old scourges as gonorrhea and syphilis do significant damage, but the widest impact comes from incurable viral diseases, which get far less public health attention.
Some 31 million Americans are believed to have genital herpes, while 24 to 40 million are infected with the virus that causes genital warts.


Medalist Wins Appeal to Compete
VALERY BELENKY, gold medalist under the flag of the Soviet Union two years ago, has won the right to defend his title as an individual in next week's world gymnastics championships at Birmingham, England.
Belenky had appealed to the International Gymnastic Federation for special permission to compete in the championships after his country, the newly independent Azerbaijan, missed the deadline for recognition by the world body.
The federation's ruling allows Belenky, the pommel horse titleholder in 1991, to compete under the federation's banner rather than his national flag.
The championships begin in Birmingham, England, on April 13. (AP)


The New York Observer takes a New York tone of voice in its new outdoor campaign.
A PEACH-COLORED newspaper is seeking more advertisers and readers in the Big Apple with new advertising that gives the raspberry to some of New York's plummiest institutions.
The New York Observer this week is introducing an outdoor campaign designating itself as "the insider's underground newspaper." The theme of the ads, by Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano in New York, is meant to convey the tack taken by the cheeky weekly -- say that three times fast -- as it focuses, somewhat relentlessly, on core topics of interest to upper-income, professional readers.
Those include the arts, the media, Wall Street, politics and, of course, real estate.


Computer Glitch
The Caere Corporation teaches computers to read.
Its software converts written documents into data that computers can manipulate.
But Caere's once-thriving stock fell yesterday after the company said first-quarter net dropped to 2 cents a share from 14 cents last year.
Caere said it would not know why until more data came in from retailers.


Viscountess Rothermere, Socialite, Is Dead
Mary, Viscountess Rothermere, a philanthropist and socialite, died last Thursday at a hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., at the age of 62.
She had homes in Palm Beach, Manhattan, Monte Carlo and Newport, R.I.
The cause was heart failure, her family said.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chrysler Financial Corp., a unit of Chrysler Corp., is offering $250 million of 6 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.775 to yield 6.083 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Ba-1 by Moody's, BBB- by Duff &amp; Phelps and BB+ by S.&amp; P.


Executive Changes
CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES, Los Angeles, the department store chain, named Edwin J. Holman vice chairman and chief operating officer.
FINGERMATRIX INC., North White Plains, N.Y., a manufacturer of image processing systems, appointed Raymond R. Norat president.


Trial Takes an Odd Turn As Testimony Is Rerun
In one of the strangest moments of the trial of four officers in the beating of Rodney G. King, the jury today watched a videotape of the famous videotape of the beating along with taped testimony from a defendant who had declined to take the stand.
On the final day of testimony, prosecutors played the tape in an attempt to dismantle the carefully constructed unity presented by the defendants.
Closing arguments were scheduled for Thursday, and the case was expected to go to the jury by the end of the week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  FRENCH FILES ON WAR INTERNMENT  A 72-year-old Frenchman smuggled out of the Toulouse office of France's National Archives thousands of files detailing French involvement in the internment and deportation of Jews and non-Jews in World War II.
The files illustrate how the French administration routinely went about carrying out arrests, seizing the property of detainees and, when necessary, selecting them for deportation to death camps or labor camps in Germany or Poland.
A1  EGYPTIAN PLAN REJECTED  President Clinton rejected a suggestion from President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt that the United States ask Israel to further accelerate the return of 400 Palestinians deported from Israel to Lebanon last December.
A10


60-Minute Gourmet
MUCH confusion exists over the wonderfully distinctive and healthful vegetable called broccoli rape.
For many years, I have been cooking with this dark green plant that can be identified by its broccoli-like buds.
It can be added to bean dishes, pastas and stews and soups.
I also like it cooked and tossed with garlic and vinaigrette as part of an antipasto platter.
My longtime friend, Ed Giobbi, an authority on Italian cooking, explained in one of his cookbooks that many people confuse broccoli rape with turnip greens.
Unlike turnip greens, though, broccoli rape has those distinctive little buds.
And turnip greens sprout from a bulb in the ground; broccoli rape has no bulb.


Dinkins Moves To Block Foes In School Vote
Trying to outmaneuver conservative groups seeking to win dozens of seats on New York City's school boards in elections next month, Mayor David N. Dinkins mounted a huge city-financed campaign yesterday to encourage voters to turn out in large numbers.
Mr.
Dinkins said his administration would mail cards on Monday to all of the city's 3.4 million registered voters urging them to take part in the elections on May 4.
It will also place advertisements in newspapers, on radio and on television, city officials said, and provide information about candidates over a special telephone line.
The campaign, unprecedented in city politics, will cost about $635,000.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Skin Cancer Treatment Center, New York, to Jerry Inc., New York, the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were not disclosed. *
American Express Group Travel Management Service, New York, to DMTG Inc., New York, to handle its account, previously divided among various agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.


Drop Seen in Old-Age Disability, Challenging Idea of Fading Health
The common assumption that old age in America brings with it unremitting deterioration is being challenged by a new study that shows disability rates among the elderly decreasing during the 1980's.
Findings by three Duke University researchers, Kenneth G. Manton, Larry S. Corder and Eric Stallard, being published in the forthcoming issue of the Journal of Gerontology, have generated a whirlwind of discussion.
Demographers were taken aback by the extent to which the disability rates had shifted.


Boitano Turns Amateur After Whirl With Pros
Brian Boitano gave out a most peculiar autograph today.
He was plopped in a chair, with an icepack over his finicky right knee, when a woman who used to give him a headache handed him a pen and paper.
"CoCo?" Boitano said. "Is that you?"


COMPANY NEWS
FOREST OIL CORP.
Bradford, Pa., has agreed to buy the Atlantic Richfield Company's interest in six offshore blocks in the Gulf of Mexico for more than $40 million.
MURPHY OIL CORP.
El Dorado, Ark., said its British unit had completed the $100 million acquisition of an 8.52 percent interest in a North Sea oil parcel from Lasmo P.L.C. of Britain.


Cult's Lawyers Seek Raid Videotape
A videotape of the Federal raid on a religious cult near here became a legal football today, as lawyers for cult members asked a Federal magistrate to impound it from the agency that conducted the raid.
But the agency said it had already turned the videotape over to law-enforcement authorities in Texas.
The Texas authorities referred all questions to the United States Attorney, whose office declined to comment on the matter this evening.


German Bank's Chief Stresses Go-Slow Policy
Despite the recession that has gripped Germany and most of Europe, the German central bank will continue a policy of lowering key interest rates only when it is convinced that such action will not set off inflation or jeopardize the strong position of the mark, the bank's president said today.
In an interview in his 12th-floor office at the Bundesbank's headquarters here, the official, Helmut Schlesinger, made clear that the bank would move cautiously in its policy of reducing short-term interest rates gradually.
A Matter of Credibility
"We have to be careful that we do not endanger the credibility of the Bundesbank's anti-inflationary policy," he said.


7 News Groups Ask U.S. Judge To Lift Ban
An order forbidding the prosecution and defense lawyers from communicating with news organizations reporting on the World Trade Center bombing was challenged yesterday by seven of the organizations and two of the defendants.
The order, issued April 1 by Judge Kevin T. Duffy of Federal District Court in Manhattan, imposes an initial fine of $200 for the first violation, then subsequent mathematical squares: $40,000 for a second and so on.


Young Women, Keep Your Own Name
To the Editor:
As Joan D., I graduated from high school, where I won honors and awards, including a scholarship.


Review/Television; The Met Production Of Wagner's 'Parsifal'
If Easter is near, it must be "Parsifal" time, at least as far as the Metropolitan Opera is concerned.
Richard Wagner's last opera, written in 1882, a year before he died, was first done at the Met in 1903, to the consternation of many Wagner disciples.
They argued, quite correctly, that the composer had stipulated that this particular work be performed only in his own theater at Bayreuth.
The Met won out and, perhaps in atonement for what some called sacrilege, made "Parsifal" an Eastertime tradition.
This particular production, conceived by Otto Schenk, was first staged at the Met in March 1991, and runs for four and a half hours.
Taped last year, it will be broadcast tonight on Channel 13 at 8 P.M., with a stereo simulcast on WQXR-FM (96.3).
James Levine conducts, and the cast includes Siegfried Jerusalem as Parsifal, Waltraud Meier as Kundry, Bernd Weikl as Amfortas, Franz Mazura as Klingsor and Kurt Moll as Gurnemanz.


In an Urban Version of Horse-Trading, Owner of Daily News Stands to Gain
New York City is trying to persuade Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the owner of The Daily News, to build a new printing plant in the Bronx, while at the same time Mr.
Zuckerman is pressing the city and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for changes in his plans to develop the Coliseum site at Columbus Circle.
While Mr.
Zuckerman and city officials say the printing plant and the Coliseum development are not connected, Dinkins administration officials are trying hard to persuade Mr.
Zuckerman to build his plant in the city.
Mr.
Zuckerman has said he would be interested in building in the Harlem River Rail Yards project in the South Bronx if he can get loan guarantees and other incentives from the city.


Sports of The Times; Michigan's Blundering: Team Effort
THERE are a few things Chris Webber should know.
A year ago, he came off the court cursing and crying after losing the championship game, but Monday night he tersely but politely explained why he called a timeout Michigan did not have.
His parents can be proud.
He should know that.
Another thing Chris Webber should know is that Fred Brown did not lose that game in 1982.
Georgetown lost that game, including a chap named Patrick Ewing, who was called for goaltending five times in the first six minutes.


Introducing Williams as Carolina's Star
The System demands precise efficiency.
You get it wrong, you run some more.
That's how Dean Smith's players play.
"Over and over; every practice," said Brian Reese, his voice tired at the memory at the end of North Carolina's championship season.


Benjamin Baldwin, an Architect And Interior Designer, Dies at 80
Benjamin Baldwin, an architect and designer known for his simple and timeless interiors, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 80 and had a winter home in Sarasota and also lived in East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was heart complications after a long illness, his family said.
Mr.
Baldwin was recognized internationally as a leading force in the modern movement of American design.
His work for cultural institutions and prominent Americans was featured in books and numerous magazines.
It also was displayed at the Museum of Modern Art, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Louvre.


Book Notes
In the Beginning
Not all the negotiating going on near Waco, Tex., has been to find an end to the face-off between Federal officials and heavily armed members of the Branch Davidian sect who have barricaded themselves inside their compound there.
Somehow in the midst of the shootings and occasional release of members and while enduring a bombardment of annoying music, David Koresh, the leader of the sect, has found time to authorize two New York City lawyers to act as his literary agents, and the lawyers say they expect to get their client a multi-million-dollar deal for his story.


Jones Intercable Investors L.P. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Around Windows on World, Clouds of Uncertainty Swirl
Diners hoping to celebrate Mother's Day at New York City's highest restaurant will be disappointed: Windows on the World, on the 107th floor of 1 World Trade Center, will not reopen until "later in the year," according to its operator, Hilton International.
Hilton yesterday acknowledged a report published by New York Newsday that the company had, as of Monday, tentatively scheduled the reopening of the restaurant for May 6.
But by yesterday afternoon it said it had changed its mind.


Bridge
On the face of it, an occupation that requires regular gentle exercise is more likely to promote longevity than one that is totally sedentary.
That may partly explain why tournament directors, who spend much of their working lives walking briskly to a table at which some misdemeanor has occurred, frequently become octogenarians and even nonagenarians.
A case in point is Jack Gordon of Detroit, who died last December at the age of 88.
His 30-year career as a director at tournament and club games continued until he was 81.
Like many directors, he started his bridge life as a successful player, as indicated by the diagramed deal that helped him win a title in 1954.
It was reported by his son, Robb Gordon of Manhattan, who is one of the most successful players in the New York metropolitan area.


Islanders Move Into A Tie For 3d
Now they are the third-place Islanders, tied for the position with New Jersey but really ahead because they have played one less game with very few left in this long, tense season.
By beating Washington, 3-2, tonight at the Capital Centre, the Islanders put themselves in position to flirt with thoughts of overtaking even the second-place Capitals in the Patrick Division race.
They trail them by only 5 points and have a game in hand on them as well.
The Islanders have six games left, a possible 12 points.


CHRONICLE
It is a heady moment in the life of a scholarly sleuth: finding a document of historic and literary significance -- when you aren't even looking.
That happened to DESMOND HAWKINS, 84, author of seven books about Thomas Hardy, and who, while researching his subject, stumbled onto a diary kept by Percy Bysshe Shelley.


Executive Stock Options: Is the Free Lunch Over?
Stock options have become the No. 1 way of feeding the executive sweet tooth.
Companies can issue as many as they like without inflating compensation expenses or harming earnings.
And they still get a tax deduction when the executive chases them in at a profit.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board is meeting today to decide whether it should change all that and consider making corporations take a charge against earnings for the value of the options they grant.


Lose-Lose Situation: Dudley Is Out, And Nets Fall
Bad news first: Nets center Chris Dudley, a relentless rebounder and key component for the team, will miss the remainder of the regular season and probably the playoffs because of a stress fracture in his right ankle.
Now the good news.
Well, actually, there is no good news.
With only eight games remaining, the Nets' situation couldn't be uglier.
New Jersey got the latest injury news before their horrific 98-85 loss to the Indiana Pacers tonight before 14,902 horrified fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Japan's Leader to Replace Foreign Minister
One week before Japan is to be host for a high-level international conference on providing aid to Russia, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa decided today to name a relative newcomer to international affairs to replace his ailing Foreign Minister, setting off an intense power struggle in the governing Liberal Democratic Party.
Some commentators said the decision to name Kabun Muto, who formerly held the posts of Minister of Agriculture and of International Trade and Industry, to replace Michio Watanabe, a plain-spoken political veteran, could make it more difficult for Japan to break from its policy of reluctantly providing aid to Russia and establish a new course as a leader in the industrial world's efforts to encourage change in the former Soviet Union.


Lincoln Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Japanese yen has been edging up to its highest level of the postwar era, sending waves of anxiety through the Government and the business world.
Some see a threat to Japan's fragile economic recovery, but others see benefits in cheaper imports.  [ Page D1. ]
Germany will lower interest rates only when it is convinced that such action will not set off inflation or jeopardize the mark's strength, the central bank president said in an interview.  [ D1. ]


Testing Service Plans Layoffs of 250 Employees
The Educational Testing Service in Princeton, N.J., has announced that 250 to 300 staff members will be laid off in the next few months because of new Federal rules governing student aid programs.
The staff reductions are to be completed by the end of June and will take place at every level of the testing service, which employs 3,000 people in Princeton and eight field offices.
The layoffs and other cost-saving measures were announced last week at a senior staff forum by Gregory R. Anrig, president of the Testing Service.


As No. 2, an Ebullient Point Person for Education
Madeleine M. Kunin is wasting no time mourning what could have been.
A transition team adviser who is widely believed to have narrowly lost the top spot at the Environmental Protection Agency, Ms.
Kunin is now Deputy Secretary of Education, talking with confidence and conviction about her new tasks.


American Medical Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Victor Silverio and Julian Vasquez, pitchers, on the 60-day emergency disabled list.
Placed Scott Lewis, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to April 1.
Purchased the minor-league contracts of Jerome Walton, outfielder, and Gene Nelson, pitcher.
Transferred the contract of Pete Janicki, pitcher, from the Cedar Rapids of the Midwest League to Palm Springs of the California League.


Falwell's Gospel Hour Fined for Political Activity
After a four-year examination of groups affiliated with the Rev.
Jerry Falwell, the conservative evangelist, the Internal Revenue Service has won agreement from his broadcast ministry to pay $50,000 in taxes for engaging in political activity in 1986 and 1987.
The agency found that the assets and personnel of the ministry, the Old Time Gospel Hour, were used to raise money for a political action committee in violation of laws prohibiting tax-exempt bodies from participating or intervening in political campaigns on behalf of candidates.
The I.R.S. did not identify the political action committee.


If It Came Down to Yeltsin or Democracy
To the Editor:
President Clinton seems to have succumbed to the contradictory ideas of supporting Boris N. Yeltsin as the only hope for democracy in Russia and of maintaining support even if President Yeltsin were to shut down the Russian Congress of Peoples' Deputies and rule as a dictator.
The contradiction also begets a historical contradiction in which we absolve Mr.
Yeltsin and condemn Lenin for the same offense.


Review/Film: Indecent Proposal; Who'd Have to Be Paid $1 Million To Spend a Night With Redford?
Maybe you'd do it and maybe you wouldn't.
Maybe you'd just like to think about it for a while.
The tease behind "Indecent Proposal," the surreally slick new daydream from Adrian Lyne, is that a lonely billionaire would offer a happily married young couple $1 million in exchange for one night's worth of companionship from the sultry wife.
Would the event mean anything?
Would it change the course of true love?
Have you ever bought a greeting card?
Then you probably know the answer.
The first and less useful way of looking at "Indecent Proposal" is as a story so crass and farfetched that it makes no real sense.
Of course it makes business sense -- which is something quite different -- within the context of other post-"Pretty Woman" romances about well-heeled lonely guys and sweet, innocent women who happen to be for sale.


People
*
Joanne Veloudos was named senior vice president and media director at Biederman, Kelly &amp; Shaffer, New York, assuming responsibilities from Monica Shaffer, executive vice president and media director, who left to open a Los Angeles office for the agency.
Ms.
Veloudos was previously a associate media director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York. *
Rick Kurz was named senior vice president and chief marketing officer at Advo Inc., Windsor, Conn., succeeding Randy Antik, who left to become chairman and chief executive at Multi-Local Media Information Group, Rockville Centre, L.I.
Mr.
Kurz was previously a managing partner of the management consulting group at Marketing Corporation of America, Westport, Conn.


Russia Reports Radiation Release in Blast at Plant
A steel tank containing uranium waste exploded and caused a fire Tuesday at a plutonium separating factory near the Siberian city of Tomsk, exposing firefighters to significant doses of radiation, Russian officials said today.
Sergei Yermakov, a spokesman for the Russian Atomic Energy Ministry, confirmed the explosion at the Tomsk-7 chemical complex, which processes spent nuclear fuel and is believed to be part of a nuclear-weapons plant.
He said there were no immediate casualties and said that some radioactivity had been released over an area of several hundred square yards around the plant.


40 People Are Left Homeless After Fire in Jersey City


Ketchum Honored In Public Relations
For the third consecutive year, Ketchum Public Relations has been named the top winner at the annual Silver Anvil Awards competition for excellence in public relations, sponsored by the Public Relations Society of America.
Ketchum's New York office won three awards while its Pittsburgh and San Francisco offices won one award each.
Fleishman-Hilliard Inc. came in second with a total of three Anvils won by its Chicago, St.
Louis and Washington offices.


Attacks in Caucasus Bring New Tide of Refugees
They looked like black dots on the snowfields, descending the north slope of the 9,000-foot mountain pass, -- three figures, trudging toward refuge in their own land.
Reaching the track that serves as a sort of logging road, the three turned out to be five -- an exhausted man in his early 30's and two women in their 20's carrying infant children.
All were snow-burned and in shock after a six-day trek through forests and mountains from Bashlibeli in the province of Kelbajar.


Ponce Federal Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
"When it comes to predicting violence, our crystal balls are terribly cloudy. -- DR. JOHN MONAHAN, who is studying violence in the mentally ill.  [ A1:2. ]


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Bruins Lead in Adams  Cam Neely had two goals and an assist as the Boston Bruins moved into first place in the Adams Division with a 7-1 victory over the Nordiques in Quebec.
The Bruins, who are on a four-game winning streak and have lost only once in their last eight games, hold a one-point lead over the Montreal Canadiens and are three points up on Quebec.
All three teams have four games to play.
Neely has 8 goals in 11 games since returning Feb. 25 from a knee injury. (AP) North Stars 3, Sabres 1: Brian Propp scored two goals, his first since Oct. 13, and Jon Casey made 31 saves as the Minnesota North Stars defeated Buffalo in Bloomington, Minn.
The victory was just the second in 11 games (2-8-1) for the North Stars, who moved within one point of St.
Louis for the fourth and final playoff spot in the Norris Division.
The Blues tied Tampa Bay, 2-2.
Propp's second goal was a centering pass that deflected into the net off the skate of Buffalo's Yuri Khmylev to break a 1-1 tie at 12:23 of the third period. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Javelin Mark for Zelezny  Jan Zelezny of the Czech Republic, the Olympic champion, set a world record in the javelin yesterday with a throw of 313 feet 5 1/2 inches.
His effort broke by more than 13 feet the mark of 300-1 set by Steve Backley of Britain at a meet in New Zealand on Jan. 25, 1992.
Zelezny set his mark on his first throw at the Sanlam Super Athletics Meet in Pietersburg, South Africa. (AP) TENNIS Eying Another Upset  Two weeks ago in Houston, Tatyana Ignatyva staged the upset of the decade by defeating Jennifer Capriati.
With a Kraft Tour resume that included just two previous victories, Ignatyva thumped away at Capriati from the baseline and stunned herself with a three-set victory.
Her ranking lurched from 330 to 120.
Today, she will have a rematch with Capriati at the Bausch and Lomb Championships at Amelia Island, Fla.
"Her father was there watching my match today," said the 18-year-old Ignatyva, who needed three sets to defeat 67th-ranked Manon Bollegraf yesterday in the first round.
"I'm sure she knows my game. She's waiting." In another match yesterday, top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario shook off a slight ankle sprain while facing Flora Perfetti of Italy and advanced to the third round, 6-1, 6-2.
Sampras Advances: Pete Sampras beat Jamie Morgan of Australia, 7-5, 6-3, yesterday in a battle of service aces at the $1.2 million Japan Open in Tokyo.
The second-seeded Sampras fired 15 aces against Morgan's 13 in the second-round match.
The Sampras-Morgan match went with service until Sampras broke in the 12th game, taking the first set with a forehand winner.
Sampras broke the 90th-ranked Morgan in the fourth game of the second set after four deuces.
In the seventh game, he blasted in three consecutive service aces. (AP)


Hansen Natural Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japanese Diplomat Puts Refugees Before Politics
When Sadako Ogata became the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees two years ago, she may have anticipated an uncontroversial tenure as a do-gooder struggling to draw the world's attention to humanitarian issues.
But Mrs.
Ogata was plunged almost immediately into bitter political disputes as fighting in the former Yugoslavia displaced more than two million Muslims, Croats and Serbs on the doorstep of Europe.
Along the way, she has been challenged to defend her actions at almost every turn.


INSIDE
Impasse in Haitian Crisis
Efforts to end Haiti's crisis reached an impasse when the exiled President refused amnesty to the military leaders who ousted him.
Page A11.
New Yugoslav Sanctions
The United States is seeking Security Council approval for new sanctions against the Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro.
Page A15.
German Caution on Rates
Germany will lower interest rates when it is convinced that it will not set off inflation or hurt the mark, the central bank president said.
Page D1.
Clinton Sells Jobs Plan
After the Senate recessed without acting on his jobs plan, the President sought a face-saving compromise to end Republican opposition.
Page A20.
Explosion in the Heavens
Astronomers are studying the brightest supernova visible in the Northern Hemisphere in decades.
Page D24.
Green Bay Lands Blue Chip
Reggie White, football's top free agent, chose the Packers in a four-year deal for $17 million.
Page B11.


Food Notes
Easter Cookies
Adorable iced Easter cookies are in abundant supply this year.
Cleaver Company, 229 West Broadway (at White Street), is packing 16 nicely sized barnyard-animal butter cookies in a box for $15.
Bakery Soutine, 106 West 70th Street, assembles five tiny chick and rabbit cookies in a box for $3 and is selling big Easter bonnet and rabbit cookies for $7 each.
Five-inch pastel-trimmed gingerbread birdhouses are $12.
Patti Paige, who regularly turns out seasonal enchantments, is offering Beatrix Potteresque bunny designs this year.
The cookies can be ordered from Baked Ideas, her company in SoHo, for $3 to $6.50, by calling (212) 925-9097.
They are also sold for $5 to $8 at Silver Palate, 274 Columbus Avenue (73d Street); Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (Prince Street); Marche Madison, 931 Madison Avenue (74th Street), and Taylors, 523 Hudson Street (near Charles Street).


Editor Shift at Meredith
The Meredith Magazine Group has named Jean LemMon, editor of its Country Home magazine, as vice president-editor in chief of its flagship publication, Better Homes and Gardens, effective May 1.
Ms.
LemMon, 60, who has headed Country Home since 1986, replaces David Jordan, who was appointed vice president-director of new product development at Meredith earlier this year.
Better Homes and Gardens has a monthly circulation of 7.6 million, the fourth-largest paid circulation among all magazines in the country.


Administration Calls the Principal Medicare Trust Fund Troubled
The Clinton Administration warned today that the principal trust fund for Medicare, which finances hospital care for 35 million elderly and disabled people, would run out of money in 1999 if Congress does not act.
The report by the Medicare trustees underlines a problem facing the Administration.
President Clinton is drafting an ambitious proposal to overhaul the nation's health-care system and guarantee coverage for all Americans, at an estimated cost of $30 billion to $90 billion a year.
Administration officials have said they want to expand coverage of long-term care and begin covering the costs of prescription drugs.


Political Memo; Clinton's Health-Care Plan: A Push to Sell Peace of Mind
The Clinton Administration's new health-care policy is still in development, but the packaging has already begun.
So far, the drive for health-care reform has been a discussion among policy makers, conducted in an arcane and highly theoretical language of "managed competition" and "global budgets." But sometime in May the plan will go public, and the President Clinton's political advisers are now deep in the world of focus groups and polling data, preparing for the day.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
There are three green, dome-shaped mailboxes standing side by side on the west side of Park Avenue between 57th and 58th streets that are not for dropping mail in.
Rather, they are reserved for something mysteriously called "Relay Mail."
I usually don't pay them any mind, but one recent afternoon I noticed the door of the middle box open like a kind of giant tongue, with no mail carrier in sight.
I passed by, expecting to see a mountain of unattended mail or mailbags within.
Instead, this is what I saw: a mail carrier sitting inside, legs crossed in the lotus position.
He didn't seem to notice me gawking at him; his peaceful gaze stared right through me.
Furthermore, nobody else was looking at him.
Now I ask you: are New Yorkers really so blase?
Simply nonobservant?
On the chance this might be a daily occurrence, I made it a point to pass by the same place, the same time, the next afternoon.
All three boxes were tightly shut.
Meanwhile, I'm keeping an eye on that middle box. -- BILL GALE
. . .
To be filed under "V" for Various Varmints with whom we share our transit system, a conversation overheard by S. Gannon on an Upper East Side sidewalk between two women, one of whom has just stepped off a crosstown bus and is wincing with disgust:
Woman One: What's wrong?
Woman Two, trying to bring her cringes under control: I just saw a bug on the bus.
I hate when I see a bug on the bus.
Have you ever seen a bug on the bus?
Woman One, thoughtfully: No, but I've seen the rats on the tracks.
. . .
MORNING STRANGERS
There are people I've seen for years
As they buy a buttered roll at the deli,
Walk a spaniel at the corner,
Board the 8:06 bus.
There's the girl who reads hardcover books,
The man who stares intently,
The woman who does the Sunday crossword
With a purple felt-tipped pen.
As they move through the morning routine,
Are they remembering scenes of passion,
Worrying about symptoms or their children,
Or planning the morning's phone calls?
And what do they think about me
When they see me in the morning? -- LEWIS GARDNER
. . .
Dear Diary:
Two women, friends from the hills -- one Short Hills, N.J., the other, Forest Hills, Queens -- met, as they often did on weekends or school vacations, to patrol the city in search of a cultural adventure.
The 50-block walk was invigorating and gave them a chance to catch up on each other's lives and make predictions for the coming baseball season.
As they approached the entrance to the Guggenheim, they spotted the large standing sign announcing that, for budgetary reasons, the museum would be closed on Thursdays.
The two women were disappointed, of course, but, undaunted, they did find some interesting art to examine in the museum's gift shop.
Their next plan was to stroll 14 blocks down to the Whitney.
The sign on the front doors was readable only at close range: the museum would be closed until the end of February.
The ladies' room, however, was open.
And the walls leading to it exhibited a small but impressive collection of Edward Hopper paintings.
As they were leaving, one woman asked the security guard to recommend another closed museum.
They were up for another New York City challenge. -- SUE GOLDBERG
. . .
Two-woman conversation, overheard by Hank Blaustein of Brooklyn in an elevator at the New School:
"Where are you going?"
"To the Memory course."
"Isn't it on 6?"
"No, on 5."
"Oh, am I glad I ran into you!"


DiMark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


I.B.F. Announces a Pension Plan
The International Boxing Federation announced a pension plan yesterday for its fighters, a move officials said was designed to erase the image of down-and-out former boxers.


The Yields at Banks Show a Slight Decline
Average yields at banks across the nation on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are down slightly from the previous reporting period and a little lower than those offered in the New York market.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, said deposit yields were down despite inflationary pressures indicated in the most recent economic numbers.


Samuel London, 79, A Government Lawyer
Samuel London, a lawyer who worked for New York City, New York State and the United States Justice Department, died on Friday at Albany Medical Center Hospital.
He was 79 and lived in Watervliet, N.Y., and New York City.
Mr.
London retired in 1981 after 20 years as a senior trial attorney in the antitrust division of the Justice Department's New York office, where he supervised a staff of attorneys, economists and investigators.


President Mubarak's Flawed Advice
Egypt's President, Hosni Mubarak, is one of America's most valued partners in the Middle East.
But on the subject of combating international terrorism, his prescriptions ought to be taken with a large grain of desert sand.
Mr.
Mubarak's primary concern, understandably, is to protect his embattled regime from an increasingly violent Islamic insurgency.
That sometimes leads to simplistic conspiracy theories.
Among these is Mr.
Mubarak's apparent belief that terrorism in the U.S. stems from the same Islamic challenge that besets his own regime.


Abortion Harassment Stalks Medical School; We Can Do Better
To the Editor:
"Congress and the Freedom to Choose" (editorial, March 29), endorsing the proposed Freedom of Choice Act, expresses concern for poor and young women, who, you say, often cannot exercise their right to an abortion as easily as more affluent women.
The proposed law, you imply, would remedy that.


Contract Dispute Deepens For New York Firefighters
The long and complicated contract dispute between the city and the union representing New York City's firefighters has escalated to the point that some municipal officials said yesterday that they suspected some firefighters were calling in sick to protest the absence of a new labor pact.
But the firefighters' union denies that, and some top officials in the Fire Department and the Mayor's Office of Labor Relations say they have not detected anything unusual.


FLAW IN SHUTTLE STOPS LAUNCHING
An attempt to launch the space shuttle Discovery was halted today with seconds to go because of a technical failure, the second time in two weeks that a liftoff was canceled at the last moment.
The space agency said it would try again on Thursday.
The effort to launch the Discovery early this morning was cut short when a safety computer aboard the spacecraft detected a possible problem with a valve in one of the three main engines.
But the mission's managers decided after meeting with engineers that the problem was actually in circuits that relay signals to the safety computer.


Abortion Harassment Stalks Medical School; Secret Surgery
To the Editor:
"Congress and the Freedom to Choose" (March 29) attempts to portray women seeking abortions in states with 24-hour waiting periods as hapless victims of antiabortion demonstrators.
We are to presume that you know the mental state of every woman in America contemplating an abortion.
What other basis could there be for your empirical observation that none of these women need or want an opportunity to reconsider or more fully inform themselves about the abortion procedure.
Unfortunately, it is because of such posturing by the mass media that millions of women are in the dark about abortion.


What Baseball? Trenton's Spring Sport Is Politics; With 2 Months Till Primary Day, Florio and His Foes are Looking for and Edge
Like crocuses and daffodils gathering energy to push through the last traces of snow, the race for governor in New Jersey is largely out of sight in these first weeks of spring.
But the campaign pops up in spots: a news release here, an endorsement there and fund-raisers blooming along the rubber chicken circuit.
With these early signs of life come glimpses of the weaknesses, strengths and strategies of the major candidates.
A variety of political professionals and other analysts with no official ties to the campaigns have found factors that will come into play as the contest heats up.


Clinton Rebuffs Mubarak on Pressuring Israelis


AT THE OFFICE WITH: Bruce Cutler; Even Mob Lawyers Get the Blues
OUT of court, Bruce Cutler, best known as the lawyer for John Gotti Sr., looks shorter, less intimidating.
That may be because on this night, rather than battling the Government, he is sitting in his corner office on the 34th floor of a building in lower Manhattan, battling the blues.
He smokes True cigarettes and splashes Absolut vodka into a coffee mug filled with ice.
As he talks about his cases, his image, his past, doubt creeps in.
The klaxon voice softens to a rasp, the bull-shaped chest slips southward.


U.S. Rebukes Armenia on New Drive in Caucasus
The United States sharply rebuked Armenia today for seizing territory in the northwest of neighboring Azerbaijan in an offensive that began 11 days ago.
In a statement by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the Administration called on the Yerevan Government to withdraw its forces immediately, saying "the United States Government condemns this offensive" and noting that a letter of protest had been delivered on Monday to the Armenian President, Levon Ter-Petrosyan.


A Dish So Good Even the Fat Is O.K.
SALMON and a warm potato salad suggest the arrival of warmer weather, even if it's as fickle as usual.
If this menu seems to have more fat in it than you might expect, it is because salmon is a naturally fat fish.
But it's the good kind of fat, containing omega-3 fatty acids, which may be useful in preventing heart attacks.


U.S. Seeks Tougher Sanctions on Yugoslavia
The Clinton Administration is seeking United Nations Security Council approval for three additional sanctions against the Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro to further tighten the economic embargo imposed last year.
It has suggested imposing a maritime exclusion zone along the Adriatic coast of Yugoslavia as part of its drive to strengthen the new and tighter trade embargo the Security Council is expected to approve next Monday.
The vote comes after Bosnian Serbs rejected the international plan for ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina last week.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.15
3.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.88
3.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.98
3.97
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.73
7.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.96
7.02
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.90
7.93
8.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.08
6.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Unison: The Making of a South African Meal
WHEN the nine members of Ladysmith Black Mambazo hunger for the food of their South African homeland, they get together to do the cooking.
Then, these Zulu singers, who are chorus and conscience in the new Broadway play "The Song of Jacob Zulu," share the meal with all the joyous resonance of voices raised in song.
Last week, the food the men made in a tiny apartment in the theater district, four simply prepared Zulu dishes, received rave reviews from the group.


Public &amp; Private; The Breast Ban
Just to save you a little time, the woman with her left breast partially exposed is in the upper right quadrant of the beach page of "Where's Waldo?" Waldo is, of course, the little man with the striped shirt and spectacles who wanders in the pages of his books through everything from track meets to Viking hordes, so lost in the crowd that it is a challenge for kids to find him in the illustrations.
It is difficult to find the woman with the bare breast, too.
But if you look real hard you can spot her just below the guys running on the beach and just above the man buried up to his neck in sand.
Where you can't find her is in the library at the Springs Public School on Long Island.
There the Waldo book has been banned because of the breast.


Islamic Sheik Says Mubarak Lies and Spies on Americans
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Islamic fundamentalist whose followers include the suspects in the World Trade Center bombing, accused Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak yesterday of deceiving the American public and of waging espionage against American citizens.
The often elusive Egyptian cleric appeared at a late afternoon news conference hastily switched to his fourth-floor Jersey City apartment after the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City refused to provide him with a meeting room.
His followers forbade cameramen from photographing anyone except the sheik.


Market Place; Buying Sallie Mae is a bet that Congress won't dismantle it
It's hardly a stock for the faint of heart, but several analysts are, oh-so-tentatively, looking favorably at the shares of the Student Loan Marketing Association, better known as Sallie Mae.
Sallie Mae's shares have been on a roller-coaster ride of late -- mostly down.
"I've aged two years in the last two months," said Gary Gordon, an analyst at Paine Webber.
Added David Hochstim, an analyst at Bear, Stearns, "This is the stock that gave me the flu."


Sportmart Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


RUSSIANS INVITED TO HELP IN DESIGN OF SPACE STATION
Seeking to cut the costs of the nation's most expensive space project, the White House has ordered NASA to work with the Russians in designing a smaller and cheaper space station.
The move could bring to a decisive end decades of cold war rivalry and signal a new era of cooperation in space.
In announcing the cooperative plan yesterday, NASA disclosed that the Clinton Administration had told the agency to cut the price tag for building the station by as much as two-thirds.


Harold M. Altshul, 83; Headed Drug Company
Harold M. Altshul, the former head of Ketchum &amp; Company, a leading drug wholesaler, died on March 29 at the Westerly Hospital in Westerly, R.I.
He was 83 and lived in Stonington, Conn.
The cause was respiratory failure, said his son, Dr. Victor Altshul of New Haven.


The Dance of the Cranes
Americans have learned to know two Bob Doles.
One is the churlish partisan who can belittle as a "Democrat war" the struggle against Hitler in which his own right arm was shattered.
Far more attractive is the other Bob Dole: the engaging Kansas Republican with an acerbic distaste for political cant.
Alas, it is Senator Churl who summoned a filibuster to delay or derail the Administration's economic stimulus legislation.
President Clinton agreed yesterday to hear out legitimate objections -- but he was right to needle Senate Republicans, "who all have jobs," for blocking a job-creating program.


Turner Shares Rise on Report of Breakup Talks
Shares of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. jumped yesterday on a report that two big shareholders, Time Warner Inc. and Tele-Communications Inc., were considering breaking up the company and buying out its flamboyant chairman, Ted Turner.
The share prices retreated later in the day.
A spokesman at Turner Broadcasting said it had no comment on the report, which appeared yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.
But Mr.
Turner has been exploring a number of options for the company's future, an executive close to Mr.
Turner said.


3 Years Later, Attack Haunts Youth Set Afire
Sometimes when David Opont is watching television at home or sitting in his math class at school he suddenly begins to shiver, reliving the horror of the morning three years ago that dramatically changed his life.
He says he cannot stop a recurring daydream: the youth who beat him and set him ablaze in a basement in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn is coming back to hurt him again.


Foyt Enters 5 Cars for Indianapolis 500
A.
J.
FOYT has entered five cars for the Indianapolis 500, none listing him as driver, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway said yesterday.
The five Foyt entries were among the latest batch of 27 submitted by 11 racing teams, increasing the total for the May 30 race to 96.
Foyt, 58 years old, who last year drove in a record 35th straight Indy 500, named a rookie, ROBBY GORDON, as his team driver, although he has not ruled out another effort at Indy himself. (AP)


Eastern German Strike Peril
A strike in eastern Germany's metalworking industry appeared more likely today after employers rejected a compromise wage proposal, and union leaders announced plans for widespread work stoppages in the economically distressed east starting next week.
Franz Steinkuhler, head of IG Metall, the powerful German metalworkers' union, said national leaders would decide on April 19 whether to call for a strike vote by the eastern membership.


Nicholls Offers His Apology to the Referees
Bernie Nicholls, who has become a strong voice for the New Jersey Devils, publicly apologized today for his criticism last Wednesday of Referee Denis Morel after New Jersey's 5-2 loss to the Sabres in Buffalo.
Nicholls was ejected by Morel for being the third man in on a fight late in the second period of that game, and afterward called Morel "a homer" and "an embarrassment to the referees association."


Four A's Awards
The American Association of Advertising Agencies has selected 3 advertisers from 15 nominees as finalists for its 1993 A+ Advertiser Award, honoring marketers for their outstanding advertising.
The finalists and their agencies are: the General Electric Company, BBDO New York; Hallmark Cards Inc., the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, and Little Caesars Pizza, Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York.
The winner will be announced at the 1993 annual meeting of the Four A's this month.


Personal Health
THE woman, a middle-aged New Yorker, was devastated.
After a lifetime of "wonderful skin," she had suddenly developed frequent and intense facial flushes, then white heads and finally "blotchy, ugly bumps on my face." Diagnosis: rosacea (pronounced rose-AY-sha), a mysterious, chronic and potentially disfiguring condition of the facial skin.
Most people have never even heard of it, though rosacea afflicts up to 5 percent of Americans, particularly those fair individuals of northern European descent.
The disorder typically strikes after the age of 35 and is expected to become increasingly prominent as the baby boom generation reaches middle age.
Women are more likely to develop rosacea, but men tend to have more severe cases.


Kimmins Environmental Services Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


With '92 Woes Behind Him, Saberhagen Is Ready to Sizzle
It's an assignment born of tradition and a bit of theory.
The pitcher next in the rotation keeps track of the previous game's starter, chronicling the number of pitches as well as the type and location.
And so Bret Saberhagen sat in the Shea Stadium dugout on opening day, clipboard in his lap, engaged in perhaps the emptiest exercise of an afternoon otherwise overloaded with excitement, nostalgia and a sense of history.
"I'd be fined if I didn't," Saberhagen said of his task.


Martin P. Levine, 42, A Sociologist, Is Dead
Martin P. Levine, a sociologist and educator who specialized in research on homosexuality and AIDS, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 42.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.
Dr.
Levine founded the Lesbian and Gay Caucus of the American Sociological Association and was its first chairman.
At his death he was on sick leave from the faculty of Florida Atlantic University.
From 1978 to 1990 he was an associate professor at Bloomfield College.


Simple Fungus Becomes Fashionable
GENERALLY speaking, New Yorkers don't know diddly about mushrooms, which is where Thierry Farges comes in.
Mr.
Farges, a 31-year-old native of the Perigord region of France, knows a great deal about them.
He hunts, eats and loves mushrooms.
Not only does he sell tons of them every week from his mushroom store in TriBeCa, he proselytizes eagerly, sharing his mushroom lore with all comers as a sort of earthly Carlos Castenada.


Health-Care Takeover A Test For Deal Makers
In a takeover battle reminiscent of the 1980's, two veteran merger and acquisition gunslingers are squaring off for a showdown.
The Lifetime Corporation, a Boston-based nursing concern, said yesterday that Gleacher &amp; Company, the boutique headed by Eric J. Gleacher, a former merger and acquisitions chief at the Morgan Stanley Group, would be its financial adviser in weighing a takeover offer by Abbey Healthcare Group Inc.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page of Business Day yesterday, about executive changes at the Financial Times publishing group, carried an incorrect byline in some editions.
The writer was William E. Schmidt.


ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES (N)
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reported essentially flat revenues and lower earnings, partly as a result of price wars that have eroded the profitability of Advanced Micro's clone of the Intel 386 chip.
In addition, Intel's legal action has so far blocked Advanced Micro's 486 clone from reaching the market.
Still the company said sales of memory devices and other chips helped increase its gross profit margins.
For the quarter, Advanced Micro had earnings of $61.5 million, or 63 cents a share, down 28 percent from a year earlier.


CLINTON IS SEEKING JOBS PLAN ACCORD
Bruised by a battering from Congressional Republicans, President Clinton cast about today for a face-saving compromise to rescue his job-creating spending plan while trying to shame his opponents into retreat.
As Senators and Representatives on spring recess tested their constituents' reaction to the Republican filibuster that blocked passage of the $19.5 billion economic stimulus package, Mr.
Clinton conceded he must now "address some of the legitimate expressed objections" to his plan.
But the President also stepped up his efforts to paint Republicans as politicians who prize partisan victory more than the national interest.


Albany Allocates Funds For Historical Society
The New York State Legislature has approved a $6.3 million appropriation for the New-York Historical Society, the first step in a plan to rescue that beleaguered institution.
The money, part of the state budget package approved by the Legislature on Monday, is contingent on several factors, one of which is an equal contribution from New York City.


Italian Star Faces Ban After Failing Test
CLAUDIO CANIGGIA, a good-scoring forward for AS Roma and Argentina's national team, failed a cocaine test after an Italian League match last month and will face a suspension of six months to two years, perhaps even missing next year's World Cup.
The Italian soccer federation announced the result yesterday after testing a second urine sample Caniggia gave after a March 21 game against Naples.


The Pop Life
Changes for David Bowie
David Bowie is always looking for surprises.
And in his "Black Tie White Noise" (Savage/BMG), his first solo album in six years, rock's man of a thousand faces takes a variety of genres -- including jazz, rock, alternative music, rhythm-and-blues and dance -- and pushes them in different directions.
"When I get to the point where things surprise and excite me in the recording studio," Mr.
Bowie said in a telephone interview from London, "I think I'm doing something worthwhile artistically. I'm not a lateral writer like Dylan with a specific point of view and who puts things forward in a pragmatic manner.


Haiti Talks Stall Over Amnesty for Coup Leaders
Intensive diplomatic efforts to settle the political crisis in Haiti have reached an impasse over the refusal by the country's exiled president to grant an amnesty to the military leaders who ousted him, diplomats and officials close to the talks say.
Diplomats said that several days of talks that began in Washington over the weekend had failed so far to convince Haiti's elected president, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to grant immunity from prosecution to the commanders, even though the amnesty is widely seen as the last major piece in a settlement that would restore Father Aristide to power after 18 months in exile.


Robert O'Bradovich, A Makeup Artist, 74
Robert E. O'Bradovich, a makeup artist and actor, who won the first Emmy Award in makeup for his work in the 1961 television play "Victoria Regina," died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 74.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his daughter, Tamara.


M-Corp Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 27


U.S. Urges Radon Curbs in New Houses
The Environmental Protection Agency today proposed voluntary guidelines calling on builders to install protective measures in hundreds of thousands of new houses in more than a third of the country to prevent radon, an invisible and odorless radioactive gas, from seeping in.
The E.P.A. also published a new information pamphlet warning people of radon's potential to cause lung cancer and urging buyers to require sellers to test houses for radon, just as they are for termite damage, before a sale can be completed.


Treasury Bonds Make Up Losses From Friday Plunge
The price of Treasury bonds jumped three-quarters of point yesterday and the yield dropped back below 7 percent.
Traders said the market was proving resilient after Friday's sharp selloff on inflationary fears, but they suspected that Treasury yields were still locked in a trading range and not headed to new lows.
"We're still squarely in a trading range, in a very confined trading range," said Michael Moran, a managing director at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


Mustard for Seders, Ire for Traditionalists
"TRADITION, tradition!" sings Tevye in "Fiddler on the Roof."
I guess I wasn't listening.


14-Year-Old Girl Charged With Murder in Melee
Kulvara Sayaves says he was sitting on the stoop of his house in Ridgewood, Queens, on Monday afternoon, talking with his brother and a friend, when he spotted the teen-ager who had tried to assault him the week before.
He confronted the teen-ager and his five or six friends.
They traded words and they traded shoves.
Mr.
Sayaves and the two other men chased the teen-agers off and assumed it was all over.


Barringer Laboratories reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Colleges Increase Student Fees Again, But at Lowest Percentage in Decades
The nation's leading colleges and universities have managed to hold next year's fees for tuition, room and board to their smallest average increase in two decades.
But even at that, the increase at many institutions will outstrip the rate of inflation.
And Yale University will be the first to break a barrier that symbolizes the upward spiral in college costs.
Next fall the university's total fees will come to $25,110 a year, or more than $100,000 for a four-year undergraduate career.


Wyoming Hires Wright of Miami (Ohio)
JOBY WRIGHT, coach at Miami of Ohio for the last three seasons, was hired as Wyoming's basketball coach yesterday.
Wright was an assistant for 10 years under BOB KNIGHT at Indiana after playing for the Hoosiers.
Wright succeeds BENNY DEES, who resigned last month after six seasons.
Wright's teams had a 61-29 record in his three years at Miami of Ohio. (AP)


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Perez's Sore Hip Keeps Yanks in a Quandary
In the emptiness of Cleveland Stadium, with no hitter at the plate and no spectators in the stands, Melido Perez tested his strained left hip flexor today by springing off the pitcher's mound to field bunts and cover first base.
He slipped and fell once during the workout, but did not aggravate his muscle injury.
Still, the right-handed pitcher's season remains on hold and the wait for his return might increase.


New Dispute Over Pickups
While Federal officials continue to review whether to order a recall of some 4.5 million older General Motors pickup trucks as fire hazards, a dispute broke out between consumer advocates and the car maker on the issue.
The Center for Auto Safety, a consumer group in Washington, contended yesterday that G.M. did not tell officials of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration that it had used steel cages to protect fuel tanks on utility vehicles made between 1978 and 1983 but not on pickups made at the same time.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Monday Night At the Temple Of Health
Dr.
John Harvey Kellogg, inventor of the corn flake and peanut butter, not to mention caramel-cereal coffee, Bromose, Nuttolene and some 75 other gastrically correct foods, paused to level his gaze at Mrs.
Tindermarsh, the heavyset woman in the front row.
He was having difficulty believing what he'd just heard.
As was the audience, judging from the gasp that arose after she'd raised her hand, stood shakily and demanded to know what was so sinful about a good porterhouse steak -- it had done for the pioneers, hadn't it?
And for her father and his father before him?
Dr.
Kellogg was a diminutive man himself.
It wasn't so much that he was short, he liked to say -- it was just that his legs weren't long enough.
Of course, as he'd grown into his 50's, he'd expanded a bit on the horizontal plane, but that was all right -- it gave him a glow of portly health and authority, an effect he enhanced by dressing entirely in white.
Tonight, as always, he was a marvel of whiteness, a Santa Claus of health, from his flawless white high-button shoes to the cusp of his Vandyke and the fine pale tenacious hair that clung to his scalp.


I.B.M. Sells First of New Computers
I.B.M. has sold its first parallel supercomputer, a type of machine that may eventually replace the mainframe.
The sale, to Cornell University, was helped by a big grant from New York State, which is increasingly concerned over job losses at the Armonk, N.Y., computer giant.
The purchase by the Cornell Theory Center, a research arm for advanced computing, will be announced today.
The new machine, called a Power Parallel system, uses a technique known as parallel computing in which a series of microprocessors are linked together.


A Mother's ID Card Exposes French World War II Secrets
Sitting in a corner of the Toulouse office of France's National Archives one spring morning in 1991, Kurt Werner Schaechter untied a batch of dusty files and was suddenly confronted with a 1939 photograph of his mother, Margarethe, attached to a refugee identity paper.
He had obtained special permission from local archival employees to study documents barred from public view since World War II on the off chance of learning more about his Austrian Jewish parents.
Though he knew they had been arrested in occupied France in 1942 and deported to Nazi death camps, he was not prepared for what he found.
A Question of Morality
"I am a mathematician, therefore not at all mystical," said Mr.
Schaechter, who is now 72.
"But when I came face to face with my mother after 50 years, it was a shock. It was a terrible experience. I put the identity paper in my pocket. It was the only document that I stole."


Student Work Programs Take Us in the Wrong Direction
To the Editor:
In a shocking March 27 editorial, "A Prudent Approach to Student Work," you declare, "There is much to recommend a New York State requirement" that high school students be required to work as a condition of receiving their high school diploma.


Clinton Rebuffs Mubarak on Pressing Israelis
President Clinton today rejected a suggestion from President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt that the United States ask Israel to further speed the return of 400 Palestinians deported from Israel to Lebanon last December.
In turning down Mr.
Mubarak, President Clinton said Israel had done "enough" on the deportee issue to get the stalled peace talks started again.


Triborough Costs Lowered
Strong investor demand for an $88.02 million debt offering by the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority yesterday allowed underwriters to reprice the issue and lower the costs of borrowing for the issuer.
For New Yorkers, the beneficial interest certificates are exceptionally attractive since their proceeds are exempt from city, state and Federal income taxes.


Books of The Times; What's to Complain About? Plenty, It Seems
Culture of Complaint  The Fraying of America  By Robert Hughes  210 pages.
New York Public Library/Oxford University Press. $19.95.
Lest you think after reading Robert Hughes's brilliant book of essays, "Culture of Complaint," that he is simply looking down his nose at American society, politics and culture, here is his affectionate though critical interpretation of the United States in the final decade of the 20th century:


Who Will Turn Violent? Hospitals Have to Guess
Early on a Monday morning in the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center emergency room, nine psychiatric patients with recent histories of violent behavior lounged on stretchers and armchairs, awaiting a doctor's decision about who would be committed and who discharged.
One man had threatened to murder his girlfriend and another, hearing voices urging him to kill a prostitute, had grazed a woman's neck with a knife.
A 51-year-old woman, while high on crack, had tried to place her young niece in the oven for being disobedient.
"The normal complement after a weekend," said Dr.
Ellen M. Stevenson, who is in charge of the hospital's psychiatric emergency services.
"The knife and gun club. The crack. The threats. The temper tantrums gone bad."


Tale of the Tape: More Telephone Recordings in the Allen-Farrow Fight
First, it was Mia Farrow's tapes -- the videotape of her daughter Dylan making allegations of abuse and the secret tapes of Ms.
Farrow's subsequent telephone conversations with Woody Allen.
Now, it turns out, Mr. Allen was busy with a tape recorder, too.


Slicing and Molding by Computer
If and when the space station is ever built, what will happen when the crew needs a replacement part?
In the absence of a fully stocked parts warehouse or astro-parcel post, the answer may lie in technology that is already making its way into the design studios of industrial companies.
Picture a part that exists only as data in a computer, but data that can be transmitted anywhere -- even to outer space, conceivably -- where a machine creates the part from raw materials.


Virco Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS FOCUSES ON SCHOOL ELECTIONS
Moving to outmaneuver conservative groups seeking to win dozens of seats on New York City's school boards, Mayor Dinkins has mounted a huge city-financed campaign to encourage voters to turn out.
Meanwhile, Gov.
Cuomo has proposed enlarging the Board of Education to 11 members, with the Mayor appointing 6 members.
A1.
HORSE-TRADING ON DEVELOPMENT PLANS
New York City is trying to persuade Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the owner of The Daily News, to build a new printing plant in the Bronx, while at the same time Mr.
Zuckerman is pressing the city and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for changes in his plans to develop the Coliseum site at Columbus Circle.
B3


Review/Film; A 1960's Coming-of-Age Baseball Story
"The Sandlot," a movie that is exceptionally fond of hyperbole, deserves a little hyperbole of its own.
This is the biggest, fanciest film about kiddie baseball that you will ever see, although why it happens to be so big is a serious question.
David Mickey Evans, whose screenplay for the disastrous "Radio Flyer" had a similarly inflated tone, has directed and co-written "The Sandlot" as if it were stunningly momentous, even though nothing about his modest coming-of-age comedy demands anything like this awestruck approach.
Mr.
Evans's technical talents appear to be wildly out of proportion to the subjects that interest him.
Summoning up a Salt Lake City boyhood, circa 1962, his screenplay (co-written by Robert Gunter) introduces a nostalgic adult narrator remembering a shadowy, sinister new stepfather, just as "Radio Flyer" did.
But this time the tone is lighter as Scotty Smalls (Tom Guiry) moves into a new neighborhood and tries to make new friends.
He immediately finds eight of them, kids who do everything together, from delivering wisecracks to worshipping baseball.
Scotty initially has trouble fitting in with these sandlot players, since he has only dimly heard of Babe Ruth and thinks the name must belong to a girl.


Astronomers Relish Chance to See Rare Supernova Blow Itself to Bits
Observatories around the world have turned their telescopes to the brightest stellar explosion to appear in the Northern Hemisphere in decades, a cosmic furnace of the kind that produces the raw materials of life itself.
The new supernova flared into view on March 28, when it was discovered by an amateur astronomer with a small telescope in Spain.
Several days elapsed before his observation could be officially confirmed and for the news to circulate among professional astronomers at leading observatories.


Fatal Stabbing Ends the Hopes Of One Family
Christian Abakpa's parents had a well-thought-out plan for him and his brothers.
Christian's parents, immigrants from Nigeria, had come to New York City more than 15 years ago to set the foundation for a better life, even though it meant leaving Christian and three of his brothers back home.
The father worked as a social worker, the mother as a nurse.
They put their money aside slowly.
After work and sacrifice, the family was finally reunited in August.
But on Monday, on a cool spring day, at a schoolyard playground in Brooklyn, it all came crashing down.


De la Hoya Goes Distance
The people around him seemed to think there was one thing Oscar de la Hoya needed most in the early part of his boxing career: rounds.
His first five fights ended in sudden knockouts.
Give him an opponent who would go the distance, they said, and de la Hoya would benefit.
He got it tonight.
De la Hoya scored two knockdowns and won a unanimous eight-round decision over Mike Grable at Rochester War Memorial, extending his record to 6-0.


Mesa May Miss Its May 1 Debt Payments
The precarious financial condition of Mesa Inc. took another bad turn today, when the big natural-gas company headed by T. Boone Pickens said it might not be able to make debt payments amounting to $29.2 million in cash by a May 1 deadline.
The news pushed the price of Mesa's common shares to a 12-month low of $3.50, before the price recovered to close at $4.125, down 87.5 cents, in active trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Abortion Harassment Stalks Medical School
To the Editor:
Days before the murder of Dr.
David Gunn in Pensacola, Fla., on March 10, several of my fellow medical students and I received unsolicited mail from Life Dynamics Inc. of Texas.
The envelopes contained copies of a 16-page comic book titled "Bottom Feeder." It was a compilation of jokes about abortionists.


HONG KONG LENDER SEIZES GITANO SUBSIDIARY
Gitano Group, the troubled New York apparel maker, said yesterday that a Hong Kong lender had seized its Dutton II subsidiary in Hong Kong.
Dutton II buys components for apparel, which is sold under the Gitano, Gloria Vanderbilt and Regatta Sport labels.
A Gitano spokesman, Roy Winnick, said that he did not know what portion of Gitano's $826.5 million in 1992 revenue the seizure might affect.
Mr.
Winnick declined to name the Hong Kong lender.


Who May Cast School Ballots
Any registered voter, or anyone registered as a parent voter, may vote in the community school board elections on May 4.
People at least 18 years old may register as parent voters if they have a child in a public elementary, intermediate or junior high school.
United States citizenship is not required.


4 People Are Injured in the Collapse of a Wall in Brooklyn


Alfred M. Butts, 93, Is Dead; Inventor of SCRABBLE
Alfred M. Butts, who as a jobless architect in the Depression invented the enduringly popular board game Scrabble, died on Sunday at a hospital in his hometown, Rhinebeck, N.Y.
He was 93.
Although its sales eventually approached 100 million sets, Scrabble languished for nearly two decades, rejected by major game manufacturers as unmarketable.


Bassett Furniture Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


For Arthur Clarke, Sri Lanka Is a Link to Space
Across the deep blue cosmos of his computer screen, a white pinpoint of light careered inexorably toward the plodding, elliptical path of another luminescent dot.
"Now, that there," said Arthur C. Clarke, his pink forefinger tracing along the slow ellipse, "that's earth. And this," his finger darted toward the oncoming glint of light, "is Toutatis, an asteroid named after a French astronomer." The two pricks of light swept toward each other, and then, in an instant, Toutatis was past and civilization as we know it was saved.


Circuit City Is Trying New Thing: Used Cars
Would you buy a used car from this retailer?
Circuit City Stores Inc., the giant home electronics chain, startled Wall Street, auto dealers and much of the retail world yesterday with an announcement that it was going into the used-car business.


The Skinny on Fat-Free Cookies
A GROUP of women in Florida have made a pact.
When any one of them finds Nabisco's fat-free devil's-food cookies in the store, she buys all of them and then divides them among those who have signed the pact.
The cookies are so popular that when they arrive at the supermarket, the scene is reminiscent of hordes of Soviet shoppers trampling one another for such basic ingredients as salt and sugar on the rare occasions they were for sale in state-owned stores.
Here, however, the operative words are fat free.


Seoul Journal; Without a Barricade, What Is a Student to Do?
The Rev.
Park Hong, a voluble Jesuit priest and president of Sogang University, was troubled as he looked out a dining room window across a sun-drenched campus, free of demonstrations against the military for the first time in years.
The problem, he said, was not the unaccustomed sense of peace, but the vacuum this peace seems to have brought by removing from the lives of young people the organizing force of a clearly defined enemy, a point on which to train the moral compass of a generation.


Silicon General Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York City Gets Setback From Albany
A day after the Legislature adopted this year's budget, one thing is clear: the average New York City resident can find more to like than the average City Hall official.
The new budget gives the city's schools an infusion of $145 million while averting broad new taxes and major cuts in services, but it offers few of the revenues and savings that Mayor David N. Dinkins had hoped to use to plug a projected gap of $2.1 billion in his own budget.


Packers Land White With $17 Million Deal
Reggie White's journey through pro football's new free-agent market concluded yesterday as the former Eagles defensive end turned down overtures from high-profile teams like the Washington Redskins and San Francisco 49ers for the simple charm, plain talk and hefty paycheck of the Green Bay Packers.
After making his decision Monday night, White verbally agreed to a four-year deal worth $17 million at about 1 P.M. yesterday in Knoxville, Tenn.
He arrived later in Green Bay, Wis., where he underwent a physical and spoke last night at a news conference.
He is expected to sign his contract today.


Quality Food Centers Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 20


Court Rules That Parents Can Sue for Emotional Distress
When JoAnn Carey was in the late stages of pregnancy in 1983, medical personnel told her the baby would be stillborn.
But she gave birth to a baby girl who lived 10 days before dying.
The woman and her husband, Gregory, were awarded $2.5 million after a malpractice trial, but an appeals court overturned the award against two doctors as excessive.
Relying on prior law, the Appellate Division of Superior Court said the parents had not met the test for suing for emotional distress.


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Friday, with an article about stocks that posted the biggest gains and losses in the first quarter, included an erroneous entry for Humana Inc. supplied by Media General Financial Services.
Humana split 2 for 1 in the first quarter when it spun off its hospital management company, Galen Health Care Inc.
Thus Humana was not the stock showing the largest percentage decline on the New York Stock Exchange in the quarter.
In addition, the three charts with the article, showing the biggest gainers and losers on the New York and American stock exchanges and the Nasdaq market, mislabeled the quarter covered.
It was the first.


Brooktree Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Rising Yen Rings Alarms in Tokyo
For most of the last two months, the Japanese yen has been edging up in value to its strongest level of the postwar era, sending waves of anxiety through the Government and the business world.
The dollar fell to 113.40 yen at one point here on Friday, closing at 114.
Some experts say it could plummet soon to 100 yen, less than half its value a decade ago.


CHRONICLE
Pay $1,000 and receive $1,500 worth of meals?
MICHAEL O'NEAL, an owner of O'Neals' restaurant at 49 West 64th Street, thinks that is a good way to raise money.
The previous restaurant on the site, the Ginger Man, had occupied two buildings until it lost one of its leases last year and went into bankruptcy.
Mr.
O'Neal reorganized with some new partners, changed the name and the chef and acquired more space.


Theater in Review
Krapp's Last Tape The Classic Stage Company 136 East 13th Street East Village Through April 17  By Samuel Beckett; designed and directed by David Esbjornson; costumes by Jessica Grace; lighting by Brian MacDevitt; sound by Dan Moses Schreier; production stage manager, Crystal Huntington.
Presented by the Classic Stage Company, Mr.
Esbjornson, artistic director; Patricia Taylor, managing director.
WITH: John Seitz.
In his production of "Krapp's Last Tape" at the CSC Theater, the director, David Esbjornson, recognizes two of Samuel Beckett's important directives.
The author felt that the monodrama should not be overplayed as a clown show.
He also stressed a recurrent theme of light and darkness in the narrative and in the physical aspects of the staging.


Quiet Revolution in Canadian Wine
CANADIAN wine was almost an oxymoron until a few years back.
A wine industry had been active since the mid-19th century but was best known for something called Baby Duck, a sweet, fizzy concoction that tasted like ginger ale with a kick and made the rounds surreptitiously at high school proms.


Injury to Finger Forces King to Rest
Derek King, one of the Islanders' top offensive threats, missed his team's game against the Capitals here tonight because of a broken bone in the little finger of his left hand.
He doesn't know when he will return, and his absence exposes the team's lack of depth at forward and could jeopardize the team's chances for a playoff berth.


Comarco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Lewis and Christie Set to Duel in Britain
CARL LEWIS and LINFORD CHRISTIE, the 100-meter champions from the last two Olympic Games, have agreed to race against each other in Britain twice this summer, a British promoter said yesterday.
ANDY NORMAN said Lewis and Christie will run at an invitation meet in Birmingham on July 16, and again on July 23 at a Grand Prix meet in London. (AP)


First Federal Savings-Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the television host Joe Franklin referred incorrectly to the longtime morning host on WOR-AM who retired in 1990.
He is John A. Gambling.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Container Corp. of America is offering $500 million of 9 3/4 percent senior notes due in 2003 at a price of 100 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes are not redeemable, but are guaranteed by Jefferson Smurfit Corp., which bought Container Corp. in 1986.
Underwriters note the issue is rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service and B+ by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Korea Electric Power Corp. is offering $350 million of 7 3/4 percent debentures due in 2013 at 99.353 to yield 7.814 percent through Lehman Brothers Inc.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Stock Option Rule Change Is Planned
The Financial Accounting Standards Board put corporations and their top executives on notice yesterday that starting in 1997 it plans to require companies to take a charge against earnings when they grant stock options.
But it left the door wide open for companies to continue issuing gargantuan option awards without harming earnings for three more years.
Through 1996, companies would only be expected to estimate in their footnotes what profits would look like if the charge was immediately taken.


Skippers Break Clipper's Sailing Record
Two New England yachtsmen, RICH WILSON of Boston and BILL BIEWENGA of Newport, R.I., arrived safely off Boston yesterday at 3:14 P.M. with a sailing record in hand.
The co-skippers of a 53-foot trimaran, Great American II, shaved 6 days 11 hours off the 140-year-old sailing record of the 200-foot clipper ship, Northern Light.
The 19th century vessel traveled the 15,000-mile route from San Francisco to Boston via Cape Horn in 76 days.


Salick Health Care (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Paul Laszlo, 93, Dies; Architect to Celebrities
Paul Laszlo, an architect and interior designer in the United States and Europe, died on March 27 at home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 93.
Mr.
Laszlo, who retired two years ago, was known for his ultra-modern, spacious designs for celebrities, luxury stores and casinos.


Alcoa reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Justice Department sought to dismiss bank fraud charges against Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman in the B.C.C.I. case.
The department said it seemed impossible for the Federal trial to begin on June 1 since Mr.
Clifford was recuperating from surgery and Mr.
Altman was on trial in Manhattan.  [ Page D1. ]
Accounting rule makers want companies to take charges against earnings when they grant stock options to executives starting in 1997.
But companies can still award huge options packages for three more years without the charge.  [ D1. ]


Brauns Fashions reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Tax-Exempt Yields Drop While Taxables Advance
The average yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were mixed in the latest week because of shifting investor interests, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
In the tax-exempt category, yields were down moderately in the week ended Tuesday.
Analysts noted that the volume of municipal issues, though down somewhat, remained heavy.
Strong investor demand pushed prices higher and yields lower in the latest week.


Total System Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tobacco Price Reductions Could Help the Bond Market
Philip Morris's 40-cent-a-pack cut in the price of its Marlboro cigarettes was bad news for the stock market, other cigarette companies and the idea of brand-name attraction.
But the news could turn out to be a help for the bond market.
Tobacco price increases over the last year have been a major factor in the increases in both the Producer Price Index and the Consumer Price Index.
In the 12 months through February, tobacco prices were the fastest-rising component of the consumer index, rising 10.4 percent.
For the producer index for the 12 months, the rise in tobacco prices has accounted for about three-tenths of a percentage point of the 1.8 percent increase.


Airline Stocks Capture Investors' Attention
Stock investors shifted their attention from the supermarket to the airport yesterday, bidding up shares of the major airlines.
As a result, the Dow Jones transportation average surged 36.67 points, to an all-time high of 1,617.82.
Meanwhile, the Dow industrials picked up 19.45 points, to 3,397.02.


Rangers Fading Away With Look of Losers
The Rangers had a lead at the start of the second period.
They had a lead, and they did not know what to do.
They took the ice, they faced off against the Devils, and from the first drop of the puck, they looked uncomfortable.
They have forgotten how to play with confidence.
They have forgotten how to play when they are ahead.
They have forgotten, quite simply, how to be winners.


No Headline
"I do not know whether you might indeed have nominated me, but because there has been public speculation concerning the possibility, I think I owe it to you to make clear now that I do not wish to be considered." -- GOVERNOR CUOMO, in a letter to President Clinton.  [ A1:6. ]


Uniquest Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ugly Kid Joe  The Academy
Ugly Kid Joe, a young rock group from Northern California, is a small, failed advertisement for the California dream.
The members wear shorts while they play, have a video taped on the beach and come across as a second-rate Red Hot Chili Peppers, a group essential to the modern California myth.
The band, which had a hit in 1991 called "Everything About You," is riding a new hit, "Cats In the Cradle"; oddly enough, the Academy, where the band performed on March 31, was far from full.


Radical Arabs Use Pakistan as Base for Holy War
It was a routine roadblock, the sort that the police in this Wild West border town have put up in recent weeks to try to stanch the flood of cars being stolen here and raced through the Khyber Pass into Afghanistan.
What the police found, though, were not run-of-the-mill car thieves, but four Libyans armed with pistols and hand grenades.
The next day, when the police raided the home of one of the Libyans, they were attacked by two men who threw a hand grenade as they tried to escape.
Both men were captured, and they too turned out to be Libyans.


Nets Activating Schintzius?
A week after the Nets portrayed their long-ailing center, Dwayne Schintzius, as in absolutely no shape to be taken off the injured list, the team was seeking the league's permission yesterday to activate him in time for tonight's game against the Detroit Pistons.
For Schintzius, who underwent back surgery last summer and has been on the injured list ever since, the magic remedy seems to have been the intervening injury to a fellow center, Chris Dudley, out for the season with a stress fracture to his right ankle.


Tough Talk Won't Help Trade With Japan
To the Editor:
"For Clinton, 'Managed Trade' Is Emerging as Policy Option" (front page, March 30) exposes the faulty thinking and naivete of "strategic trade" and "aggressive unilateralism." United States trade deficits are made by chronic budget deficits and low savings in the United States, not by Japan or other Asian countries.
United States trade deficits with Japan consist mainly of products Americans want eagerly but that are not made here -- fax machines, flat liquid-crystal panels, compact disk players, even quality cars, to name a few.
This situation is the same as Japan's unabated imports of Hollywood films and American pop music.
Can such imbalances be corrected by ill-conceived managed trade?


Ethics Committee Decides to Investigate Senator's Links to Bank
The Senate Ethics Committee opened a preliminary inquiry today into the relationship between the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, a Middle Eastern bank that collapsed two years ago amid spectacular instances of fraud, and Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah and his staff.
Separately, the Ethics Committee has decided not to pursue accusations, which arose in a 1992 election campaign, that Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, engaged in sexual misconduct with his hairdresser and other women, the panel's ranking officials said today.


Overtimes Put Knicks Under The Covers
The Knicks were fatigued today, feeling the effects of a three-game road trip and two consecutive overtime games.
Yet they don't have time for much rest.
New York (51-21) can clinch the Atlantic Division title by winning Thursday night's home game against the Boston Celtics.
But winning the division is secondary to finishing with the top record in the Eastern Conference.
So the Knicks, who lead the East by one game over the Chicago Bulls (50-22) with 10 regular-season games remaining, cannot afford to let up, no matter how they feel.
A Few Dollars More
Asked after today's practice if the Knicks would celebrate clinching the division title if they won Thursday, Coach Pat Riley said: "It's not my habit to do so. The only thing winning the division does is give you a second seed automatically. And you get a few dollars for it. But there's only two things you want. You want the best record in the East, or the best record in the whole league."


In Augusta, All Revolves About a Sun: Amen Corner
No other words in golf are quite as evocative as Amen Corner.
The three holes, the 11th, 12th and 13th, provide a spectacular apse of the "Cathedral in the Pines" that is the Augusta National Golf Club.
Particularly on Sunday afternoon of the Masters, they induce humble prayers -- of hope, thankfulness or surrender.
Per square yard, they produce more beauty, and more drama, than any other stretch in golf.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MANY older houses feature outdoor basement entrances covered by sloping wooden doors that heavy loads of snow and prolonged dampness eventually destroy.
Even if your doors survived the winter, you can virtually rid yourself of a maintenance task by replacing them with metal doors.
Building supply stores and large home centers carry or can order basement door kits.
Costs average $200 to $300 depending on size and on whether the kit includes sloping metal side walls that support the door.
If the existing entrance well has masonry side walls in good condition, metal side walls are not needed.
The largest maker of basement doors is the Bilco Company in New Haven (203) 934-6363.
The Gordon Corporation of Southington, Conn., (800) 333-4564, makes kits without side walls.


Calendar: History and Preservation
Preserving New York
The Barbizon, 140 East 63d Street, and Cooper Union
, 7 East Seventh Street; (518) 462-5658.
The Preservation League of New York State is holding a conference from April 23 to 25.
Workshops and seminars will include a meeting on preservation throughout the state, housing in historic buildings and public investment in historic preservation.
Advance registration is required.
Fee is $125; members, $100.


WHERE TO FIND IT
EMBROIDERY comes in many guises, from bathrobe monograms and evening-gown embellishments to the New York Knicks logo stitched on sweat shirts and caps.
"It can be very personal," said Dan Wiesner, publisher of Stitches magazine, a publication for the embroidery trade.
Oddly, custom embroidery is more widely available now than it was a decade ago.
Hand embroiderers still stitch with needle, thread and an embroidery hoop.
Machine embroiderers still create big, satiny monograms on special sewing machines.


INSIDE
B.C.C.I. Dismissals Sought
Denied a delay, prosecutors want to drop Federal charges against Clark Clifford and Robert Altman.
Page D1.
Hillary Clinton's Father Dies
Nearly three weeks after suffering a stroke, Hugh Rodham, 82, died in Little Rock, Ark.
Page D21.
NBC Picks News Chief
Andrew Lack, a CBS News producer, will replace Michael G. Gartner as head of NBC News.
Page C16.


Suffolk Moves to Abandon Plans To Buy Robins I. as Nature Area
Suffolk County took the first step today toward abandoning plans to buy Robins Island, one of the largest uninhabited islands on the East Coast, and turn it into a nature preserve.
The county legislature, in an 11-to-6 vote, agreed to consider a legal settlement that would allow luxury homes on the 445-acre island in Peconic Bay.


AT HOME WITH: Madeline Kahn; Funny? Yes, but Someone's Got to Be
MADELINE KAHN, who made a name for herself in "Young Frankenstein" by playing a Transylvanian American Princess who finds true love with an anatomically challenging monster, has never understood what's so fun about being funny.
The actress, who may be remembered best for her role as the half-dressed Teutonic torch temptress Lili Von Shtupp in "Blazing Saddles," wonders why everyone is always expecting her to amuse them.


Rabin and Mubarak to Discuss Mideast Talks
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt will meet next week, probably in Egypt, to explore ways to give the stalled Middle East peace talks a badly needed jump start, Israeli officials said today.
While it was not clear what the two men hoped to achieve, meetings between the Israeli and Egyptian leaders are hardly so common that that they can be dismissed as routine diplomatic maneuvers.


Bonn Asks a Court If Pilots Can Police Bosnian Flight Ban
Germany's divided coalition warned a constitutional court today that the Government could collapse over the issue of whether Germans help enforce a ban on Serbian flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and Defense Minister Volker Ruhe trooped to the Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe to plead for a quick ruling on Chancellor Helmut Kohl's decision to let Germans serve.


Shuttle Launched on the Second Try
The space shuttle Discovery roared into the early morning sky today on a mission to study the Earth's atmosphere and the things that influence it from above and below.
The shuttle, and the four men and one woman who make up its crew, painted a fiery yellow streak across a black satin sky as it blasted off from the Kennedy Space Center here at 1:29 A.M. to spend up to nine days in orbit.


Hubco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Philadanco's Tease and Payoff
Philadanco saved the best for last on Tuesday when it opened a weeklong season at the Joyce Theater.
There were moments of choreographic distinction throughout the evening.
But nobody does it quite like Talley Beatty.
And his recent "Morning Songs" ended the evening on a note of soaring triumph.
There was nothing terribly new or different about the group piece.
The elements of its jazz-dance style -- high, split-legged jumps, cross-stage runs and spinning turns -- have been seen on Broadway and on the concert dance stage for years.
But there was a magnificent weight and evocative power to "Morning Songs" and to its surging score by Charles Mingus that are rare in modern and jazz dance today.


Canadian Northstar reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Lucasfilm and Silicon Graphics Team Up
Industrial Light and Magic, the special-effects unit of Lucasfilm Ltd., and Silicon Graphics Inc. said today that they had entered an alliance to create the largest and most advanced production facility for the creation of digital imagery in entertainment.
The Joint Environment for Digital Imaging, or Jedi -- the name of a character from the "Star Wars" films of George Lucas, the chairman of Lucasfilm -- will be a production unit and a media laboratory for advancing technology.


CHRONICLE
Credit Dolley Madison with something more than making ice cream popular by serving it at the White House.
It was she who moved the Easter egg roll for children to the White House lawn in 1812, when she learned that it could not be held on its usual site -- the lawn of the Capitol -- because of construction under way there.
Or at least that is how MICHAEL BERMAN described the origins of the White House Easter egg roll and hunt, which he is going to produce on Monday.
He also was the impresario for the four Easter egg hunts of the Bush Administration.


Wisconsin Race Sees Democrats Vote for Basics
Congressional primary voters looking for a successor to Secretary of Defense Les Aspin gave an easy victory on Tuesday to a conventional Democrat, who had pushed jobs and health care, over a rival who had run against Congress as hard as he had run for it.
The Democratic winner, Peter Barca, a state legislator for eight years, will now face the Republican victor, Mark Neumann, a wealthy homebuilder who said today that the general election, on May 4, would focus on President Clinton's economic plans.


Executive Changes
ANN TAYLOR STORES CORP., New York, appointed Joseph Gromek senior vice president and general merchandise manager.
FLEET SERVICES CORP., Providence, a data processing unit of Fleet Financial Group, named David M. Sheppard chairman and chief executive and Robert P. Drum president.


Richard B. Stearns Jr., 54, Dies; Managed Real-Estate Investments
Richard B. Stearns Jr. a real-estate investment executive, died on Tuesday night at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 54 and lived on the East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was cancer of the bladder, said his brother-in-law Cecil Wray.


Worth mentioning: BMW's account makes Mullen a hot shop.
EVER since Mullen Advertising Inc. won the BMW of North America Inc. account two months ago, the iconoclastic agency has been the beneficiary of Madison Avenue's version of the "Great Mentioner."
As identified by the columnist Russell Baker, the Mentioner is that mysterious arbiter responsible for deciding who is mentioned as a major candidate for President.
The advertising equivalent is that Mullen has now become a so-called hot shop, mentioned frequently whenever anyone speculates about likely participants in the many reviews being conducted on large, prestigious accounts.


Abbey Healthcare Drops Bid for Lifetime
In a striking about-face, Abbey Healthcare Group Inc. yesterday abandoned its monthlong pursuit of the Lifetime Corporation.
Abbey made an unsolicited offer of $23.50 a share in March and raised the bid Friday to $27.50, or $261 million.
Lifetime rejected both offers as inadequate and on Tuesday hired Gleacher &amp; Company, a merger specialist, to assist in evaluating Abbey's proposals and considering other alternatives.


Cybernetics Products reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Shuttles Profit Despite Fewer Fares
Like the aerial acrobatics of hummingbirds, which seem to defy the laws of aerodynamics, the shuttle operations of Delta Air Lines and USAir seem to fly in the face of airline economics.
Despite falling ridership, the hourly flights between New York and Boston and New York and Washington continue to make money for the otherwise money-losing carriers, leading some industry analysts to nickname them Anomalous Air.
Their profitability stems in large part from the seeming immunity of the shuttles to the fare wars that have ruined margins in most other parts of the airlines' domestic service.
The ability of the shuttles to continue raising prices -- one-way fares from New York to Washington are now $138 -- was probably a consideration in Delta's promise last week to upgrade planes on these flights even while curtailing service elsewhere in the country as part of a sweeping cutback.
A 32-Year Run May Be Ending
But some analysts suggest the shuttles' days of coining money may be coming to an end, 32 years after Eastern Airlines started the service in the busy Northeast Corridor.
Even airline executives foresee an end to what has been the shuttle's defining characteristics -- namely, hourly service throughout the day and a seat for everyone who shows up at the gate.


In North Korea, Try Diplomacy First
North Korea's abrupt refusal to allow inspections of its nuclear sites has now led the International Atomic Energy Agency to take the unprecedented step of asking the United Nations Security Council to impose sanctions.
But diplomacy may still be the best way to keep North Korea from getting The Bomb.
The task is to persuade Pyongyang to reverse its rash renunciation of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and open all its nuclear sites to inspections.


Northern Ireland Needs New Thinking
To the Editor:
"The Real Crying Game" (editorial, March 29), which condemns the bombs in Warrington, England, displays the absence of imagination that lies behind 24 years of suffering and more than 3,000 dead littered across the scarred north of Ireland.
What is needed is leadership for a bold new direction, the onus for which falls on the British Government, with its failed policies in resolving the "Irish Question." Prime Minister John Major should reconvene the intergovernmental talks promptly with significant changes.


Narcotics Have Long Been Known Safe and Effective for Pain; Tale of Five Pharmacies
To the Editor:
Re your March 28 article on the medical use of narcotics for pain reduction: Seven weeks ago, my partner was diagnosed with myeloma, a cancer of the bone marrow.
Our oncologist prescribed narcotics to relieve the enormous pain associated with this disease and explained that we needn't worry about addiction.
You describe difficulties patients faced with doctors, family and friends; but our worst experiences have come at the hands of pharmacists.
We went to no fewer than five pharmacies trying to fill the prescription for dilaudid, a hydromorphone.
Three pharmacists told us that they don't keep dilaudid in stock.
A fourth told us that pharmacists routinely deny that they have dilaudid on hand, fearing they will be targeted by violent drug abusers.


Bronx Refuge for Doubly Troubled Addicts
It is a dreary day in a particularly mean corner of the South Bronx, and the rain and wind are rattling the windows of Harbor House, a special center for men afflicted with mental illness and drug addiction.
But inside the common room, where the residents sit in a circle before walls bearing stenciled words of inspiration and courage, the talk proceeds from stories of personal ruin upward to renewal and hope.


Capriati Evens Score With Rout of Russian
In the opinion of the loser, familiarity had apparently bred contempt.
This morning at the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships, third-seeded Jennifer Capriati exacted her revenge upon Tatyana Ignatyva and advanced to the third round by allowing the Russian just a single game in a 6-1, 6-0 rout.


Rockies' Baylor Frets Over Neophyte Errors
The Colorado Rockies have put it all together, and their manager isn't happy.
Perhaps it's to be expected from an expansion team, but Don Baylor has seen poor pitching, poor defense and poor hitting, and he doesn't like it.
"We haven't played to our expectations so far," Baylor said grumpily after the Rockies ran their rookie record to 0-2 with a 6-1 loss to the Mets yesterday.
"I don't want this to snowball. That's how you lose 8 out of 9, 9 out of 10. I want to stop it as soon as possible. We better change our approach Friday. If not, we'll have a different lineup Saturday."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Wingtip Sloat  CBGB
The endless, desolate suburbs of Washington spawned a cult of musical exactitude in the post-punk rock of the early 80's.
The movement, known as hardcore, was famous for its fearsomely precise attack, delivering barbed messages at breakneck speed.
Amid an ocean of nothing to do, bands rehearsed their discontent to perfection.


Giants and Taylor Near A 2-Year, $5 million Pact
Lawrence Taylor and the Giants seem headed for a two-year, $5 million contract that may be worked out in the next two days.
Steve Rosner, the agent for the 34-year-old outside linebacker, and George Young, the Giants' general manager, talked Monday and again yesterday.
Rosner sounded optimisic.
So did Young, in his controlled way.


Russia Orders American Reporter Questioned in State-Secrets Case
The Russian Ministry of Security, still known by its old initials as the K.G.B., has ordered a Baltimore Sun reporter to report back to Lefortovo prison here on Thursday for questioning, after informing him today that his American lawyer and a United States Embassy official will be barred from the meeting.
Will Englund has been summoned to answer questions in connection with a case brought against a Russian chemist, now awaiting trial on charges of revealing state secrets.
In an article published in a Russian newspaper last October, the chemist, Vil Mirzoyan, wrote that Russia was continuing to test and produce chemical weapons, in violation of its own promises.
Mr.
Mirzoyan was subsequently arrested, and held briefly in prison.


InterVoice Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


A TV Film Becomes a High Point In a Roller-Coaster Directing Career
By this town's standards, Michael Ritchie's prolific directorial career has been nothing less than a roller coaster, and he acknowledges it.
"You have to keep some perspective on your work," said the 54-year-old director.
"I was once working on an unsuccessful film with Michael Caine and he told me this Kipling line that has stayed with me for years: 'If you can treat success and failure as the twin imposters they are.' That's really what it's about."


Reflections on Spring: Cool Is No Longer Just a Temperature


Tandy Unit's Finances Not Too Bright
The Tandy Corporation provided investors today with a financial profile of its electronics manufacturing operations for the first time, and the picture was not inspiring.
The unit, which Tandy plans to transfer to shareholders this summer under the name TE Electronics Inc., would have lost $9 million in the six months ended Dec. 31 if it had operated independently.


Corrections
An article on March 20 about political considerations facing President Clinton in choosing a successor to Justice Byron R. White misstated the position of Judge Amalya Lyle Kearse.
She is a member of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, not the Federal District Court.


Grabbing Somebody Else's Wish When You're Down on Your Luck


JMAR Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


SHL Systemhouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Northwestern's Athletic Director Resigns
BRUCE CORRIE resigned yesterday as Northwestern's athletic director, effective May 31, and will be replaced on an interim basis by outgoing basketball coach BILL FOSTER, the school announced.
Corrie, 57 years old, has been athletic director since Jan. 4, 1988.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.97
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.90
3.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
2.98
3.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.68
5.69
7.11
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.96
7.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.90
7.90
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.05
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dallas Gold &amp; Silver Exchange (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economic Scene; Selling pollution rights isn't popular; neither are alternatives.
SHOULD polluters be allowed to buy their way out of cleaning up?
The idea of selling pollution indulgences does not go down easily among those steeped in the Puritan ethic.
Once understood, though, the concept of converting environmental sin into a commodity that can be traded like heating oil futures or I.B.M. stock looks like the cheapest way to solve some expensive problems.
But a first major test, a national auction of rights to emit sulfur from power plant smokestacks, was received with something less than enthusiasm last month.
And by no coincidence, the state regulators who can make or break the trading system are viewing its birth with deep suspicion.
Champions of "marketable emissions allowances" are now worried that their baby will be smothered in the crib.


First Charter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hearing of Appeal On Press-Leak Order
A Federal appeals court agreed yesterday to hear an appeal of a judge's order forbidding prosecutors and defense lawyers from discussing the World Trade Center bombing case with news organizations.
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan, acting on a request by Martin Garbus on behalf of Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima, suspects in the case, and their defense lawyers, ordered all sides in the case to file papers by Monday on the order issued by a Federal District Judge, Kevin T. Duffy.
"The court realizes that there is a significant constitutional case," said Mr.
Garbus, who had appealed the order arguing that it was unconstitutional prior restraint of speech.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the governorship race in New Jersey misstated the date of former State Senator James Wallwork's run for the Republican nomination.
It was 1981.


Scudamore, a Top British Jockey, to Retire
Jockey PETER SCUDAMORE, who rewrote British racing's record books without winning the Grand National, announced his retirement yestertday.
Scudamore, 34 years old, is Britain's most successful jump jockey in history, having won more than 1,600 steeplechase and hurdles races over an 18-year career.
Named champion jockey eight times, his last major victory was on Captain Dibble in last year's Scottish National. (AP)


Preparing for Womanhood Begins in Girlhood
To the Editor:
Three cheers for Anna Quindlen's contribution (column, March 28) to the Take Our Daughters to Work Day, set for April 28, when parents or others will bring girls along to workplaces to familiarize them with work settings and stimulate thought about life choices.
Ms.
Quindlen's support adds stature to the event.
April 28 is not an exercise in pretending that women don't need men; it is an acknowledgment that womanhood begins in girlhood, and attention must be paid to preparing girls for the future.
Seriously preparing them.
Consider the following;


Harry W. Jones, 82, A Professor Emeritus Of Law at Columbia
Harry Willmer Jones, Cardozo Professor emeritus at Columbia University School of Law, died on Tuesday at Del Webb Memorial Hospital in Sun City West, Ariz.
He was 82 and had homes in Sun City and Gaylordsville, Conn.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, the former Jean Brown.


Rebuilding a Brooklyn Zoo, Step by Agonizing Step; When the Residents Can't Complain, Why Rush a Much-Delayed City Project?
Ten buildings, including the three main exhibition halls, have been totally reconstructed.
Displays for animals from local pigeons to Southeast Asian jungle fowl have been completed, and a new sea lion pool has been fashioned in the center of the main concourse.
Early Monday morning, work crews will change all the locks at the zoo in Prospect Park, preparing to transfer it later that day from the city, which oversaw a rebuilding that took nearly five years, to the New York Zoological Society.


Give Special Schools a Chance
Many New York City students find high school an alienating experience.
In large buildings and classes they lose their way, become apathetic, perform poorly and eventually drop out.
To reach such students, Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez has pushed to create about 50 smaller high schools focused on themes ranging from the environment to community service.
This worthwhile experiment deserves a chance to prove itself, even after Mr.
Fernandez's departure and the inevitable infighting over the Board of Education's search for his successor.


Books of The Times; Joyce Is in the Details, Preferably Freshly Plowed
James Joyce The Years of Growth, 1882-1915 By Peter Costello Illustrated. 374 pages.
Pantheon Books. $30.
Why, after all that's been written about James Joyce (1882-1941), in particular Richard Ellmann's monumental 1959 biography, "James Joyce," and its 1982 revision, do we need another biography of the man who wrote "Dubliners," "A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man," "Ulysses" and "Finnegans Wake"?


New Hampshire Thrift Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Courts on Trial; Los Angeles Blacks Say Bias Is Issue In Riot Case and Retrial of 4 Officers
The discontent among many blacks that sets this city on edge has found a slogan, and it is emblazoned on red, black and green caps and T-shirts throughout South-Central Los Angeles: No Justice, No Peace.
In a nation where statistics show that more black men go to jail than to college, the slogan embodies a belief widely held by members of minorities in inner cities that they live in the shadow of a racially biased justice system.


Hugh Rodham Dies After Stroke; Father of Hillary Clinton Was 82
Hugh Rodham, the father of President Clinton's wife, Hillary, died last night in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 82 and lived in Little Rock.
Mr.
Rodham was hospitalized on March 19 at St.
Vincent Infirmary Medical Center after suffering what his doctor said was a stroke.
Carolyn Lindsey, the director of communications for the medical center, said Mr.
Rodham died at 8:35 P.M.


Narcotics Have Long Been Known Safe and Effective for Pain
To the Editor:
Re "Patients in Pain Find Relief, Not Addiction, in Narcotics" (front page, March 28): The effectiveness and safety of opioid analgesics for long-term suppression of severe pain not due to cancer has been known for more than a decade.
Some medical and social resistance to the use of these agents continues, however, causing patients deprived of them unnecessary suffering and increased risk, and increased cost to them and to society.
Opioid analgesics produce in general significant, but not complete, relief of pain for years without a significant decrease in effectiveness, without the need to increase the dose, without inducing addiction (the uncontrolled, nonmedical, use of the agent), without intolerable subjective physical or psychological side effects, without a decrease in motivation or function unrelated to illness and without organ toxicity.
They are intrinsically safe drugs; their effects are immediately reversible, and a spe
The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters must include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that we cannot acknowledge or return unpublished letters.
Those selected for publication may be shortened for space reasons. cific, antidote (naloxone) is widely available in case of accidental or deliberate overdose.


Clayton Homes reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Power Corp. of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rules Are Faulted on Nuclear Plant Security
When a former mental patient crashed his car into the Three Mile Island nuclear plant in February, the plant's owners and Government officials erred in failing to consider that he might have intended to release radioactive material, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said in a study.
But the report released Monday said that the man, who turned out to be unarmed, did not pose a significant threat to the reactor.


U.S. Asks Dismissal On B.C.C.I.
The Justice Department asked a Federal judge today to dismiss at least temporarily a series of criminal charges accusing Clark M. Clifford, an imposing Washington presence for half a century, and his protege, Robert A. Altman, of deceiving banking regulators.
The department said it had no choice because the judge had refused to postpone the trial, set for June 1.
The motion filed with Judge Joyce Hens Green asks that the Federal bank fraud charges against the two be dismissed.
But the department said it might bring even broader charges later in the case involving the scandal-ridden Bank of Credit and Commerce International and how it gained influence in the United States.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Melido Perez, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 1.
Purchased the contract of Neal Heaton, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
National League
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Signed Mike Simms, outfielder, to a minor-league contract.


Cecil B. Lyon, 89, Who Long Served As U.S. Diplomat
Cecil Burton Lyon, a retired career diplomat and former Ambassador to Chile and Sri Lanka, died on Tuesday at his home in Hancock, N.H.
He was 89.
The cause was pneumonia, after a brief illness, his family said.


'People Get Tired of the Runaround'
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q The dropout rate is incredibly high, especially among African-American and Latino people.
Why do you think the dropout rate is so high?
And what can be done to change it?
BERNARDO VASQUEZ , 17, Manhattan (A. Philip Randolph High School): I think one of the problems is that attention has to be given to the individual . . . and what's going on at home.


Log Mansion That Recalls Indian History
THE road south from Missoula, Mont., passes a 60-mile strip of ready-to-sell log homes, assembled in simple shapes, the way a child would fashion a set of Lincoln Logs.
The freshly built homes do little to prepare a visitor for the extraordinary log house down the road, the 76-year-old lodge at the Chief Joseph Ranch.
Indeed, this lodge is no log cabin.
A diverse combination of arches, cables and dormers, set off by logs placed vertically and horizontally, adds an elegance to log-home design that is seldom seen.
The house is a log mansion, really, but it is still cozy.
A 42-pound bobcat, which likes to snooze by the fire and sometimes leap onto the shoulders of unsuspecting guests, brings the wild surroundings indoors.
The ranch is nestled in the foothills of the Bitterroot mountain range along Montana's border with Idaho.


Campo Electronics, Appliances &amp; Computers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


U.N. Compromise Lets Macedonia Be a Member
The Security Council today approved United Nations membership for another former Yugoslav republic after a clumsy-looking compromise ended a controversy with Greece over its admission and injected a little more stability into the Balkan region.
The Council agreed to admit Macedonia under the provisional name of "the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia." It has been admitted to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund with that name.


Review/Theater; Rockettes And a Rabbit In a Tribute To Spring
Radio City Music Hall is doing its part to usher in spring with that hardy perennial of an entertainment that goes by the name "The Radio City Easter Show."
But the spirit of spring, with its evenly matched wealth of religious and secular inspiration, proves more elusive than the spirit of Christmas that animates that other seasonal favorite, the "Radio City Christmas Spectacular."


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Palm Pursuit
Q.
On a recent California vacation, I "rediscovered" palms and would like to learn more about them -- mostly for use as houseplants.
What would you suggest? -- Genevieve Eagleton, Washington.
A.
The palms are relatives of the grasses and bamboos.
Some, like the spiny, clump-forming saw palmetto (Serenoa repens), grow only a few feet high, while others, like the stately Florida royal palm (Roystonea elata), can reach nearly 100 feet.
This is a large and very fascinating group of tropical landscape plants, with many that are handsome for indoor use in cold climates.


Big Bills Coming Due at H.U.D., Crimping Expansion of Programs
Several old bills are coming due at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the costs are frustrating the Clinton Administration's hopes of rapidly expanding Federal housing aid.
A combination of new laws, old decisions, deferred expenses, poor management, and the quirks of Federal accounting are forcing the department to seek tens of billions of dollars in expanded budget authority over the next few years just to house the families it is now assisting.


Solving the Day-Care Puzzle
HERE is the bottom line of the child-care chase: parents want to find someone to care for their children as well as, or better than, they can.
While that may be a fantasy, day-care centers can provide an enriching, educational experience for children.
Centers encourage "developmentally appropriate play to facilitate learning," said Dr.
Dana Friedman, co-president of the Families and Work Institute, a nonprofit policy-research organization in New York.


Foreman to Retire After June 7 Match
Six years after stepping out of retirement and back into the boxing ring, GEORGE FOREMAN, the lovable preacher-boxer, may soon be calling it quits again.
At the tender age of 44, Foreman remains the novelty of professional boxing.
At a news conference yesterday, Foreman announced that his June 7 bout against TOMMY MORRISON will be his last.
"This is probably the last fight I'll ever have," Foreman said.
"I can't stay around forever."


Networks and the Hollywood Monster
Pressured by a court order, the Federal Communications Commission wisely reversed some of the out-of-date rules that have kept the major television networks out of the lucrative rerun business.
The rules have allowed Hollywood movie studios to dominate programming to the detriment of networks and viewers.
The Financial Interest and Syndication Rules were adopted 20 years ago when the three major networks controlled more than 90 percent of prime-time viewing.
Fearing that big networks would swallow small producers, the F.C.C. prevented ABC, NBC and CBS from owning syndication rights -- a $5 billion market.


Foreign Affairs; No Peace Without Keepers
A joke about Bosnia is running through the Clinton Administration.
What's the only thing worse than the Serbs saying "No" to the Vance-Owen peace plan?
The Serbs saying "Yes."
Behind the dark humor lies a still darker truth: If the Serbs were to say yes, the U.S. and others would have to put up the 100,000 or so peacekeepers necessary to carry out the plan -- and they won't.
No peacekeepers, no peace.


Prime Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Dinkins Halts Parking Deal For an Inquiry
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday suspended negotiations with a company selected to run many of the operations in New York City's Parking Violations Bureau until investigators determine whether company executives were implicated in a bribery scandal in the mid-1980's.
Former officials of the company, Lockheed Information Management Services Company, admitted at trials in 1987 that they had paid off city officials to land multimillion-dollar contracts with the Parking Violations Bureau.
Those contracts with the company, then called the Datacom Corporation, were awarded to collect overdue fines.


CHRONICLE
After years of an on-again, off-again romance, MARLA MAPLES and DONALD J. TRUMP are expecting a child in October.
"Tell your producer a secret and look what happens," a beaming Ms.
Maples said at a crowded news conference the couple held last night as they arrived at the Palace Theater.
Ms.
Maples is appearing there in "Will Rogers Follies."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
April 2
Mar. 26
April 3
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.7
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
228.7
231.1
219.2
Distillate stocks
98.0
98.7
93.4
Crude imports, daily
5.7
7.0
5.3
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.3
1.7
Crude stocks
342.7
338.9
337.4
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
88.7
86.5
86.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


CU Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jack Damlos; Production Manager, 44
Jack Damlos, senior production manager for annual events at Macy's, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
His family said the cause was complications from AIDS-related pneumonia.


White House Trying to Trim Blocked Jobs Bill, Aides Say
Acknowledging that it has failed to win over any of the Senate Republicans who are blocking President Clinton's $19.5 billion economic stimulus plan, the White House is working on significantly scaling it back, senior Administration officials said today.
While no decision has been made on how much the plan could be cut, several proposals have been recommended to the White House, from a Republican suggestion to halve the plan and eliminate spending on community development, to a Democratic plan to delay putting it into effect.


Home Video
As movie directors tell it, in the beginning there was the rectangle.
Films are shot for movie screens with a width-to-height ratio of around 16 to 9.
Collectors of films on video tape or laser disk often want that rectangle retained when the movies are shown on the more nearly square television screen, with a ratio of about 4 to 3.
Thus some films are letter-boxed, which means black bands are placed across the top and bottom of the image to flatten it to movie-screen proportions.
This week, though, the square screen gets its due in a new disk release of James Cameron's underwater epic "The Abyss." Two versions of the film are available from Fox and Image Entertainment, Fox's disk distributor.
One version is letter-boxed; the other is panned and scanned, the term for squaring the image for the television screen.


Harleysville Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chinese Plane Makes Emergency Landing in Alaska


U.S. Oil Loan for Russia Faces Dispute and Delay
A White House plan to assemble $2 billion in Federal loans to the Russian oil and gas industry by next Wednesday is unrealistic, American and international financial officials said today.
For a year and a half, the deal has been mired in divisions within the Russian Government and in a squabble pitting the United States against the World Bank.
Some of the difficulties have been resolved, but Russia will not receive any money until later this year, a World Bank official said today.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WE imbue the first grade with special significance in a child's education.
It is the first year of "real" school, a far cry from kindergarten.
Like high-school or college entry, the transition represents a more profound shift than one between grades.
The measures of when a child is ready for the first grade have been debated for years.
Should a child who is intellectually ready but emotionally or socially immature be held back or pushed ahead?
Will an especially bright child be bored if she already knows how to read, while her classmates are learning their letters?
How ethical or helpful is "red-shirting," holding a child back for a year so that he will be stronger and faster than his peers in high-school football or basketball?


CUOMO ANNOUNCES HE IS NOT SEEKING SEAT ON HIGH COURT
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he had asked President Clinton to remove him from consideration for an appointment to the United States Supreme Court, saying he wished to continue serving New York while the state was on the cusp of economic recovery.
Many in the Cuomo administration interpreted the Governor's announcement as a virtual declaration that he will run for a fourth four-year term next year.
Mr.
Cuomo said in an interview today that he was preparing aggressively for a 1994 campaign but was not ready to make a declaration.


Day Before Meeting on Guns, Bridgeport Has a Fatal Shooting
A 31-year-old woman who was eight months pregnant when she was shot late Tuesday night died early this morning shortly after giving birth to a son.
The shooting death, which came one day before a statewide meeting here on gun-control legislation, prompted outrage from city officials, including Bridgeport's Mayor.
The police said the woman, Judy Grey had gone for a walk with a friend when she was the victim of a drive-by shooting.
It was Bridgeport's 19th homicide of the year.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Dinosaur Jr.  Roseland
If Dinosaur Jr. was having a good time at Roseland on Friday night, the band members did their best not to show it.
The three-man band from Amherst, Mass., bashed through about 90 minutes of terse, noisy songs: slow ones that thudded and blared like Neil Young with Crazy Horse and fast ones that, like the Replacements, coupled the tunefulness of the Beatles with the speed of the Ramones.
Every four or five songs, J Mascis expounded an extended guitar solo, with climbing triplets, wriggling sustained notes, a countryish twang or a growl of wah-wah pedal.
As Mike Johnson, on bass, played notes that were felt but not heard, Murph, on drums, set off rumbles and explosions and crashes of cymbal that turned the songs into elemental blasts.


9 Months Leaderless, Yale Still Seeks New President
After nine months without a president and no official word on when an appointment will be announced, Yale University is growing restless.
Some students and faculty members have begun speculating about whether Yale is having trouble finding someone to take the job, especially after several top candidates were snared by other universities, including Columbia and Duke.


Trial of 3 in Trucker's Beating Is Put Off Till July
A state judge today delayed until July the trial of three black men charged in the beating of a white truck driver at the outset of the rioting here last April.
The trial had been set to begin next week, about the time verdicts could be returned in the Federal civil rights trial of four white police officers for the 1991 beating of Rodney G. King, and the postponement brought a slight easing of tensions to Los Angeles.


IRAN IS REPORTED ACQUIRING MISSILES
Iran is close to concluding a deal with North Korea to buy a new intermediate-range missile that the Koreans are developing, United States officials said today.
The Central Intelligence Agency has said the new North Korean missile represents a threat to the stability of both Asia and the Middle East.
Although the missile has not yet been fully tested, a visit by a high-level Iranian military delegation to Pyongyang has prompted American concern that full-scale production of the missile may be closer than previously thought, the officials said.


Cotton as New as Today And as Old as Yesterday
IN Arizona and Texas, scattered among different farms, there are 10,000 acres producing field upon field of fluffy tan cotton.
The cotton is called Coyote Brown by Sally Fox, below right, an entomologist in Wasco, Calif.
Through crossbreeding she has developed what she calls Fox Fibre, a more durable, naturally colored cotton.
On April 19, Fieldcrest Cannon will introduce New World Cotton, a collection of sheets, towels and throw blankets made from Coyote Brown cotton (12 1/2 percent) and unbleached cotton (87 1/2 percent).
The collection will be available in stores in June.
Although clothing manufacturers like Levi Strauss use Fox Fibre, it will be used in home accessories for the first time in the Fieldcrest Cannon line, said Julian Tomchin, a vice president and the director of creative services.


Trade Center Blast Providing Economic Lift, Experts Find
In the first attempt at a comprehensive analysis of the economic damage caused by the bombing of the World Trade Center, Port Authority economists and consultants have concluded that the explosion has actually provided a lift to the local economy.
The attack -- which killed six people and injured 1,000 others -- wreaked havoc on the fabric of the city and authority officials did not suggest that news of economic benefit would undo the tragedy of it.


Imaging Management Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Bono's Reward Sends Message to Montana
The San Francisco 49ers made it easier for Joe Montana to say goodbye yesterday.
They virtually anointed Steve Bono as their backup quarterback to Steve Young.
Bono, who had a 5-1 record in his only starting season of 1991, was rewarded with a three-year contract worth at least $5.15 million.
As an unrestricted free agent, the 30-year-old Bono was free to negotiate with any other club.
Instead, his new salary makes him the second-highest-paid nonstarting quarterback in the National Football League, behind Cody Carlson of Houston.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  CLINTON SHIFTS GEARS ON BOSNIA  After coming into office proclaiming the need to take action against moral outrages in Bosnia, the Clinton Administration has shifted gears, and is now telling the American people that Bosnia is a quagmire about which very little can be done.
A1  U.N.
GENERAL ON THE MOVE  Resuming what has become a personal battle to save the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica, the French commander of the United Nations force in Bosnia set out by road to return to the town before it is overrun by Serbian troops.
A6


A Volley of Airline News Raises Industry Stocks
Bulls woke to the sound of planes booming overhead yesterday, and apparently liked what they heard.
Companies in the long-sputtering airline industry issued a number of announcements that spurred a broad rally in stocks.
The Standard &amp; Poor's airline index reached a 52-week high, while the Dow Jones transportation average surged to a record.  [ Page D8. ]


Pop and Jazz in Review
Quicksand, Therapy and Surgery  The Academy
Rock was a bashing, howling, clattering primal tantrum at the Academy on Saturday night.
The triple bill of Quicksand, Therapy and Surgery yelled their vocals amid power chords and feedback, occupying alternative rock's new loud zone between heavy metal and punk rock.
All three bands break generic borders, but none would be caught dead admitting to many emotions beyond frustration, disgust and rage.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Isn't Quite Dead Yet
AFTER reading about the abysmal state of baseball recently, I was surprised to find that games are still being played, that the players even bothered to show up at the ball parks and that the stands weren't empty.
I found this out firsthand.
I went out to the ball park.
It is called research.
I had read that baseball was falling apart at the seams, as it were.
I had read about the poky "rhythms" of a bygone pastoral era, and that fathers and sons aren't playing catch anymore.
I had read that baseball was Ragtime but that we were in the Age of Heavy Metal.


Word in Disfavor Survives
If a leopard is stuck with its spots and old dogs pose pedagogical problems, then the New York Zoological Society, like one of the pachyderms in its midst, seems unable to forget.
In February, after deciding that the word "zoo" had become a pejorative -- as in "this place is a . . ." -- the society announced that it was going to drop that word from four of its, well, establishments, around New York City.


Preparing for Womanhood Begins in Girlhood; Finding Self-Worth
To the Editor:
While reading your March 29 front-page article about the Lakewood, Calif., group of boys self-named the Spur Posse, I recalled with poignant horror my high school nicknames of "tease" and "slut." And the words, "I could make you if I wanted to," from my 18-year-old strapping boyfriend for the night still ring in my ears.
I did not have meaningful relationships, as many teen-agers do.
But I did not willingly "give" myself to these boys to become more popular; I participated in lots of unnecessary adolescent sex as a means of validation.
This was sex for the sake of physical contact and supposed pleasure, that, I believed, would bring me happiness.
These ultimately frustrating and demeaning events left me humiliated, unloved and demoralized.
Now as a 31-year-old mother of a 6-year-old son, I wonder what can we do?
How can we help these vulnerable young women realize that they do not need the physical attention of their male peers to make them popular, accepted or validated?
How can we show them there are other sources of healthy physical contact and pleasure?
And how can we teach them that they must discover their self-worth within themselves?


Back Spasm Threatens Kite's Masters
A sudden back problem has made Tom Kite a questionable starter for the first round of the 57th Masters on Thursday.
Kite, the winner of two events already this year and the PGA Tour's money leader with $518,564 in earnings, doubled over in pain with a back spasm after hitting an 8-iron on the practice range of the Augusta National on Tuesday.
He underwent several hours of therapy and today received an anti-inflammatory injection.


Suspicious Fire Destroys a Synagogue in Brooklyn


Calnetics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
Study the North-South cards shown in the diagram, with the East-West cards concealed, and consider the prospects in six no-trump.
On the face of it, there are 11 tricks and the declarer will need a winning diamond finesse to make 12.
In actuality, South's chances are decidedly better.
The deal was played in 1990 in a game at the home of George and Floris Nissan of North Hills, L.I.
The declarer was Diane Schuld of Glen Head, L.I., playing with George Nissan, and she landed appropriately in six no-trump.


Tribal Tax at Center of Dispute Among Onondaga Indians


Iowa Town Reaps Gold From Novel
Even people not partial to romance can enjoy the fact that hokum has become the latest cash crop to take root in the richness and ennui of Iowa's good earth.
"I don't know how you put a daydream up and just think of something that's not there," Sandy Thompson said skeptically of how the best-selling novel about a lyrical farmwife adulteress, "The Bridges of Madison County," has begun drawing crowds of enthralled reader-believers to poke about this Iowa hamlet that is its setting.


New Public Housing, French Vintage 1922
YOUNG architects are supposed to make a splash.
It's a letdown when their first building doesn't herald a new voice.
But Jean Dubus, 41, and Jean Pierre Lott, 31, have done something truly original.
Their first work, an apartment building in Paris, reverberates with the shock of the old.
They've dusted off an unbuilt 1922 design for public housing by Le Corbusier, one of the most influential voices in 20th-century architecture, and brought it startlingly to life.
What makes their debut even more stunning is that, after 70 years, the design still looks fresh.
Not a dim echo, it's the bold refrain of an idea whose time has come again.


Joseph Robbins, 71, Lay Catholic Official
Joseph G. Robbins, the first layman to serve as the Assistant Chancellor of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, died on Tuesday in Orlando, Fla., where he had retired.
He was 71.
His first career was at the Community Counseling Service, an international fund-raising and public-relations company in Manhattan, where he became the controller and corporate secretary.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


The Met Tries to Fill An Empty Summer
For the first time since it opened in 1966, New York's premier summer showcase for cultural attractions from abroad, the Metropolitan Opera House, has entered spring without any commitments to fill its 3,800 seats over the summer.
Booking difficulties and the high costs of producing at the Met have apparently led the major international ballet and opera companies that usually present summer seasons at the Met to stay away this year.
There is a likelihood that the opera house will instead be home to a concert presentation produced by the Walt Disney Company.


9th Ave. Fair's Survival Is Feared at Risk
For the handful of pioneers who promoted Ninth Avenue as a "must" destination on the city's gastronomical map, this is a year to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the first, the biggest and the most diverse food festival in New York City.
But critics say the festival's survival is at risk because it has lost its character as the city's premiere multi-ethnic food show.
Ninth Avenue merchants generally agree that the festival, on the Avenue between 37th and 57th Streets has helped revitalize the crumbling neighborhood and restored its image as a flourishing marketplace, once known as Paddy's Market.
But they also complain that the food festival has lost touch with the neighborhood and is becoming just another street fair, with too much sausage and even bras and girdles among the vendors' wares.


Classical Music in Review
'Sybil, Daughter of the American Revolution'  Abigail Adams Smith Museum
"Sybil, Daughter of the American Revolution," an opera by Ludmila Ulehla, was given its world premiere last Thursday night.
Susan Schefflein's libretto dramatized events of April 26, 1777, when a young woman named Sybil Ludington rode through Putnam County, N.Y., in order to warn American Revolutionaries of a British advance on Danbury, Conn.
Other characters in the drama are her father, a colonel; her boyfriend, son of British loyalists; an old hermit, and a neighbor, Mrs.
Tidd.


COMPANY NEWS
ALPINE GROUP INC., New York, has signed an agreement in principle allowing AVX Corp., the American unit of Kyocera Corp. of Japan, to manufacture and distribute Alpine's flat-panel displays, which are an alternative to liquid-crystal displays.


With Loss Possible, Jackson Ends Effort To Lead N.A.A.C.P.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson withdrew today as a candidate to be executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People amid indications that he could have suffered a humiliating defeat had he remained in the race.
Since he emerged as a candidate late last year, board members have been heatedly debating among themselves whether Mr.
Jackson would be a suitable person to lead the association.
The issue was whether his highly charged style would bring a needed jolt to a staid organization or overwhelm it.


Market Place; Why Stone Container's plan for refinancing left Wall St. cold.
THE Stone Container Corporation's announcement last week that it planned to raise $500 million through the sale of new equity this spring and to issue up to $300 million in debt to pay down bank loans has played poorly on Wall Street.
The refinancing plan more or less crushed the already threadbare hopes that the economic recovery would soon help generate enough cash to help Stone, the nation's No. 3 pulp and paper company, out of the huge hole of debt it dug in the 1980's.


F&amp;M Distributors Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Envirosource Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review at Huffy
The Huffy Bicycle Company in Dayton, Ohio, said yesterday that it had placed its account in review.
The account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million, has been handled by Lois U.S.A. in Chicago for 10 years.
Jeff Cox, the executive vice president at the Rojek Marketing Group in Cleveland, the marketing consulting company retained to manage the review, said that the incumbent and 15 other shops, primarily from the Midwest, were under consideration.
A final decision is expected by mid-June.


CBS Producer to Head NBC News
NBC has chosen Andrew Lack, a longtime news producer for CBS, to become president of the network's embattled news division.
Robert C. Wright, the president of NBC, said yesterday that he had chosen Mr.
Lack for his experience in television news, for his integrity and especially for his range of production work in prime-time news programs, which Mr.
Wright said would be "our main area of focus over the next few years."


Corrections
An article on Feb. 6 about Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, referred imprecisely to his childhood.
A letter dated March 22 from Fernando Ferrer, the Bronx Borough President, points out that the general was born in Harlem and reared in the South Bronx.


When Outdoor Rooms Need Furnishing
FOR some people, a garden is a wild place whose sole ornament is nature.
For others, the garden is an outdoor room that needs furnishing.
For this second group the New York Botanical Garden is holding a four-day Antique Garden Furniture and Ornament Show from April 15 to 18.


To Crystal, 12, School Serves No Purpose
Crystal Rossi wears two streaks of bright magenta in her hair.
They hang, stains of Kool-Aid, down her loose, long strands of blond like a seventh grader's twist of punk: Don't come too close.
Don't mess with me.
Don't tell me what to do.
I'm not like you.
At her Brooklyn public school, a kaleidoscope of teen-age rage, Crystal's teachers see a young girl with an attitude.
They focus on her slouch, her Kool-Aid streaks, her grunge clothes and sullen anger and see all the signs of trouble.
But those vivid slashes say the most, communicating a basic paradox of adolescence, the double-edged message: "bug off" and "LOOK AT ME."


Lead-Poisoning Harm Held to Be Partly Reversible
A large new study published yesterday suggests that the decline in intelligence caused by an accumulation of lead in children's blood can be at least partly reversed when steps are taken to reduce the blood levels of this toxic metal.
The study, by a research team at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, is the first to examine the benefits of reducing lead levels in children who have no obvious symptoms of lead poisoning.


Summarizing Two Decades Of Kips Bay Show Houses
IN April 1973, Chris Casson Madden, who was then working for Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, went to the first Kips Bay Decorator Show House on Park Avenue near 70th Street.
Along with 4,000 other visitors, she paid her $3 admission and gawked at rooms transformed by 16 designers.
She became a show-house groupie, returning to Kips Bay year after year.
On Tuesday, Bergdorf Goodman will celebrate the publication of Ms.
Madden's book "Rooms With a View" (PBC International, $45), which features rooms chosen from 20 years of Kips Bay watching.
In the 58th Street windows of the store, five designers, including Mario Buatta and Victoria Hagan, will recreate show-house rooms, which will be on display through April 27.
The book is scheduled to be available in the store on Wednesday.


Classical Music in Review
Music of Chou Wen-Chung  Merkin Concert Hall
Chou Wen-Chung, the distinguished composer and teacher, is 70 this year, and Speculum Musicae, Boston Music Viva and the New Music Consort offered five of his pieces last Thursday night.
Mr.
Chou is most of all a mediator between Eastern and Western ideas of art.
In "Yun," "Windswept Peaks," "Yu Ko," the Suite for Harp and Wind Quintet and "Echoes From the Gorge," European instruments mingled their own traits with the bending, sliding, color-conscious mannerisms of China.


Violence Leaves Scars on Life in a Small Town
JOHN T. MILLER did much more than kill four women in a welfare office here last year.
He also killed a way of life, a sense that small-town life provided sanctuary from a violent world.
"Externally, I don't think you're able to come right in and see it," said Peter Hansburger, the chairman of the Schuyler County Chamber of Commerce who owns a seasonal ice-cream parlor here.
"It's in people's heads, and it's in their thoughts. You'll hear people saying they don't feel safe."


Morada Nova Journal; In Brazil, Too, the Withered Land Cries for Rain
Standing in the doorway of her mud-and-wattle farmhouse, Maria de Lourdes Oliveira Lima surveyed rows of bean plants wilting under the noonday equatorial sun.
"Those clouds don't carry rain," said the 42-year-old sharecropper and mother of seven children, casting a practiced eye up toward a few frivolous tufts in a robin's-egg-blue sky.
"It hasn't rained here in 22 days. All our neighbors are talking of leaving."


Azerbaijan Says a Counterattack Is Successful


Just 1 Pitch and Poof! The Yankees Are Losers.
One pitch.
All it took tonight was one hanging slider to turn a tie score into an eventual Cleveland victory, to turn Jim Abbott's first start as a Yankee into a disappointing loss and to turn John Habyan's night into a nightmare.
With the score tied at 2-2 in the bottom of the eighth and Carlos Baerga dancing off second after his double opened the inning, Abbott tossed one ball to Albert Belle before Habyan was summoned to replace him.
One slider later and the frigid Cleveland fans were no longer sitting on their gloved hands because Belle drilled a two-run homer to left-center that helped vault the Indians to a 4-2 victory over the Yankees.


Novelist Enlisted For Literacy Drive
The Adolph Coors Company is teaming with a best-selling romance novelist, Judith McNaught, to introduce the second phase of its "Literacy. Pass it on" campaign, aimed at combating illiteracy among American women.
Last year representatives from the brewer approached Ms.
McNaught, who has made women's illiteracy a theme of her coming novel, "Perfect," published by Pocket Books.
They arranged that when the book comes out, it will be featured in print advertisements sponsored by Coors that will run in Hearst and Meredith magazines in June.


METRO DIGEST
A REBEL IN PERIL OF DROPPING OUT
Crystal Rossi wears two streaks of bright magenta in her hair like a seventh grader's twist of punk that conveys a message: Don't mess with me.
This is the time, this tender age of 12, when every major decision on the treacherous road to adulthood looms.
It is also the time when some students start a long, slow fall away from school.
A1.
CUOMO TAKES NAME OFF COURT LIST
Gov.
Cuomo confirmed that he had asked President Clinton to remove him from consideration for an appointment to the Supreme Court, saying that he wished to continue serving New York state.
A1.


Three Jazz Soloists Give a Rhythm Section The Starring Role
The rhythm section is the great overlooked engine of jazz, the power behind a performance.
A good one, interactive and swinging, sensitive and dynamic, can make a bad soloist sound good; a bad rhythm section can slaughter genius.
At the Village Vanguard this week and for the next two weeks, the pianist Kenny Barron is part of a rhythm section that includes two of his longtime associates, the bassist Buster Williams and the drummer Ben Riley.
The engagement is unusual both because of its length and its concept.


Times Agrees to Let U.S. Interview Staff On Bombing Letter
The New York Times agreed yesterday to comply with a Federal subpoena, saying investigators would be allowed to interview an assistant metropolitan editor and a news clerk who were the first to handle a letter that investigators said was mailed by suspects charged with the bombing of the World Trade Center.
The letter, signed by a group calling itself the Liberation Army Fifth Battalion, was received by The Times on March 2, four days after the bombing.
Law-enforcement officials said on March 27 that the letter was authentic and that it provided the first insight into what might have provoked the attack.


Gore Outlines Plans for Streamlining the Agriculture Department


AIDS Expert Fears an Epidemic In Central and East Europe Lands
The director of the World Health Organization's global program on AIDS, Dr.
Michael H. Merson, warned today that central and eastern Europe might soon face a major AIDS epidemic.
"We are very concerned about the situation," Dr.
Merson told reporters in Berlin.
"The risk factors are there, and they're there in a big way. We need to mount our control measures now, before the situation gets out of control."


Celebrating Millenniums Of Fiber Art
FIBER art originated about 20,000 B.C.
Some people call it a craft.
Others, like Cathryn Cootner, a research curator in the textile department at the M. H. de Young Memorial Museum in San Francisco, consider it an overlooked art form.
Historically, fiber art has been made by women whose traditions were passed from mother to daughter, generation after generation.
"Unraveling Yarns: The Art of Everyday Life," an exhibition organized by Ms.
Cootner, is a celebration of 66 examples of fiber art made to warm the body or to decorate floors and walls.
"In the 70's, no one was interested in reviewing a collection of tribal rugs as art," she said.


U.S. Proposing Move by Israelis To Revive Talks
Trying to persuade the Palestinians to resume the Middle East peace talks, the Clinton Administration has suggested to Israel that it accept a prominent Palestinian leader from East Jerusalem as head of the Palestinian delegation, United States officials said today.
But a senior Administration official said the proposal, as well as others currently under discussion, would be carried out only if the Palestinians agreed both in advance and in public to attend the talks, which are scheduled to resume in Washington on April 20.


Robert E. Lee, 81, F.C.C. Member And Telecommunications Leader
Robert E. Lee, who helped to mold national telecommunications policy as the longest-serving member of the Federal Communications Commission, died Monday at a hospital in Arlington, Va., his hometown.
He was 81.
He died of liver cancer, an F.C.C. spokesman said.


BEAR STEARNS COS. (N)
The Bear Stearns Companies yesterday announced record quarterly earnings of $110.4 million for the period ended March 26, nearly 50 percent higher than analysts' forecasts.
The strong profits resulted from the same favorable conditions that led to record profits at most Wall Street firms in 1992.
The volume of new stock and bond offerings -- an area where Bear Stearns was the eighth-leading firm in the first quar ter -- set a record in the first three months of the year.


Private Mortgage Insurers Are Facing New Competitor
Private mortgage insurers are facing competition from a new company, the Amerin Guaranty Corporation, which has pared costs sharply on policies that protect mortgage lenders if homeowners default, and charges premiums that are tax deductible to homeowners.
Amerin officials contend that their product is priced about 20 percent below similar policies offered by the four companies that now dominate the private mortgage-insurance market.
Norwest Mortgage, one of the nation's largest mortgage lenders, signaled its approval yesterday and began offering Amerin insurance along with other kinds of policies through its 467 offices around the country.
Low-Income Borrowers
Mortgage insurance is required by government agencies and most investors when a mortgage is 80 percent or more of a home's purchase price.
Such policies were written for more than a million of the 7.4 million mortgages issued last year.
The insurance and its cost are particularly important to banks that are trying to increase their lending to low-income families, which tend to make small down payments.


Aspin Is to Set Women's Role In All Services
With different branches of the armed services moving in different directions on the role of women, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today that he would establish a common policy governing women in combat in the next several months.
Mr.
Aspin made his remarks after Air Force officials gave details about a program to stop training female student pilots on high-performance training aircraft.
Women on active duty are not allowed to fly combat aircraft, but the high-performance training is an important step toward that goal.
The new restrictions were imposed in January at one of the Air Force's four training bases and will be introduced at the other three by 1996, Air Force officials said.


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


President Riverboat Casinos Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Essay; Not 'Ready to Go'
Bob Dole, the Republican leader in the Senate, chose Oregon's Mark Hatfield, a soft-spoken moderate, to talk to Pennsylvania's Arlen Specter about signing the filibuster letter.
Comes April 30, it will be seen as a critical moment in the first hundred days of the Clinton Administration.
To stop the Democratic legislative locomotive, solidarity on the part of the Republican minority was vital, and Hatfield and Specter have long been mavericks.


Installment Debt Rises $1.2 Billion
Consumers increased their installment debt by $1.2 billion in February, to $728.8 billion, the sixth straight monthly advance following an extended decline, the Federal Reserve reported today.
Credit card and other revolving debt jumped by $2.4 billion, or 11.4 percent at an annual rate, while loans to buy automobiles rose $1 billion, a 4.8 percent pace.


It's Not Double Jeopardy in L.A.
Are the four Los Angeles police officers now on trial for the Rodney King beating being subjected to unconstitutional double jeopardy?
After all, they were tried and acquitted in state court and are now being tried again for essentially the same acts in Federal court.
The American Civil Liberties Union, torn by internal disagreement, contends that the Federal prosecution is indeed a case of double jeopardy.
But the A.C.L.U.'s position is wrong as a matter of law, history and the nature of the national Union.


Corrections
A Reporter's Notebook article on Tuesday about the passage of this year's New York State budget misstated the political affiliation of Assemblyman Michael J. Bragman.
He is a Democrat.


Bowe Will Seek Custody if Boy Is His Son
RIDDICK BOWE will seek custody of a 7-year-old boy if a paternity test shows that the heavyweight champion is the boy's father, Bowe's manager said.
Bowe filed a lawsuit Monday seeking a blood test of the boy to determine whether the child is his, said Bowe's manager, ROCK NEWMAN of Washington.


Score Board Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Devils Snap Losing Streak, and Rangers
It didn't last long.
Ask Corey Hirsch, the goalie who was promoted a day earlier from the Ranger farm team in Binghamton.
He had a good first period and a 2-0 lead.
But that was before the Devils scored four times in the second period tonight, before the entire Ranger team seemed to vanish, before a sixth loss in seven games practically insured them they will not make the playoffs.
After goals by Esa Tikkanen and Tony Amonte tied the score in the second, the Devils scored three more times for a 5-2 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in a game that solidified both New Jersey's hold on third place in the Patrick Division race and New York's hold on fifth.


Dauphin Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dividend Play
The stock of Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. is usually tranquil.
But yesterday its trading volume was 17 times greater than normal, at 2.2 million shares.
Investors wanted the real estate investment trust's 25-cent-a-share quarterly dividend.
The shares, which closed yesterday at $8.625, yield more than 11 percent.


2 Health-Care Stocks Hit Lows
Worried about Clinton Administration proposals for changing health care, investors unloaded holdings of the United States Surgical Corporation and Medtronic Inc. yesterday, driving both stocks to 52-week lows.
In a statement it described as a "response to growing investor speculation," United States Surgical said yesterday that its earnings for the current year would be down from 1992.


U.N. General Plan to Defy Serbs Again
Resuming what has become a personal battle to save the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica, the French commander of the United Nations forces in Bosnia today set out by road from Sarajevo in an attempt to return to the town before it is overrun by Serbian nationalist troops.
"I have to go back," the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, told aides after receiving a radio report indicating that Serbian attacks on the town were increasing despite Serbian promises to observe a cease-fire and to allow United Nations convoys of food and medicine into the town.


Mets' Saberhagen Yields Only 2 Hits in 87 Pitches
Bret Saberhagen, seated at his locker at 12:40 P.M., wasn't interested in any strategy session.
An hour away from his first start of the season, the Mets' right-hander only smiled at Todd Hundley when the young and earnest catcher asked if Saberhagen wanted to talk about a game plan.
"Don't even think about it," Saberhagen said. "Just put the fingers down."


Industrial Acoustics Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Chorovaya Akademia  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater
Russian choruses, those that appear in the United States at least, are known more for a folkish ebullience and rough abandon than for any particular tonal refinement.
But Chorovaya Akademia, a four-year-old, 15-member male a cappella choir directed by Aleksandr Sedov, proved an exception last week.
The blend was superb, and individual singers showed wonderful qualities as they emerged from the mass or took solos.
Quicksilver dynamic shifts were beautifully controlled, and intonation remained rock-solid.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the politics of gun control in New Jersey misattributed a message sent to the State Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco, by one voter.
Eugene L. Brenycz of Irvington said it was not he who sent the Senator an application for a job at McDonald's, filled out in Mr.
DiFrancesco's name; he said he did mail Mr.
DiFrancesco a yellow turkey feather.


Bosnia Reconsidered; Where Candidate Clinton Saw a Challenge The President Sees an Insoluble Quagmire
After coming into office proclaiming the need to take action against moral outrages in Bosnia, the Clinton Administration has shifted gears, and is now telling the American people that Bosnia is a quagmire about which very little can be done.
In effect, the Administration has gone from shaking its fist at the Serbs to throwing up its hands.
And it has gone from describing Bosnia as a test case of America's ability to nurture democracy in the post-cold-war world to being the intractable "problem from hell" that no one can be expected to solve.


Livery Driver Is Slain
A livery cabdriver in the Bronx was shot four times in the back last night in a slaying that the police described as resulting from an apparent holdup.
The dead man, Sekou Kaba, 28, of Bolton Avenue, the Bronx, was found lying on the shoulder of a service road at the intersection of the Cross Bronx Expressway and the Bronx River Parkway in the West Farms section by a passing motorist shortly after 9 P.M., said Sgt.
John McClusky, a Police Department spokesman.
Mr.
Kaba's car was found about a half block away, said Sergeant McClusky.
He said that no weapon had been found and there were no suspects in the case.


More Than Schools; Dinkins's Drive for Big Local Turnout Risks Confronting the Religious Right
Mayor David N. Dinkins's drive to generate a big turnout in next month's school board elections suggests a larger political agenda.
Win or lose on May 4, he hopes to transform the mayoral campaign into a referendum on who controls public education.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Dinkins announced an unusual city-financed effort to alert New Yorkers to the elections in each of the city's 32 community school districts.
The Mayor said $635,000 would be spent to send postcards to registered voters and on advertisements to lift the turnout beyond what he termed the unacceptable 7.2 percent rate four years ago.
On request, voters will be sent copies of biographical statements submitted voluntarily by the school board candidates in their district.


Perez Goes on Disabled List
The Yankees placed Melido Perez on the disabled list with a strained left hip flexor today and finally rescued Neal Heaton from limbo by activating him to assume the roster spot.
The move with Perez was expected because he had already been bumped from two starts and continued feeling soreness in his hip during fielding drills on Tuesday.
Since the transaction is retroactive to April 1 and Perez is eligible to pitch on April 16, the Yankees did not want to risk aggravating the injury by allowing him to start Sunday in Chicago.
Scott Kamieniecki will start instead.


Liberty All-Star Equity Fund reports earnings for As of March 31


Aerosonic Corp.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Preparing for Womanhood Begins in Girlhood; A Day for All Ages
To the Editor:
As a young woman who was planning to participate in the first Take Our Daughters to Work Day, I read Anna Quindlen's "Take Her With You" (column, March 28) with interest.
There are aspects of the program that are questionable, however.
The program is geared toward girls between 9 and 15; it should be expanded for girls and young women of all ages.
The earlier a girl is exposed to the career possibilities available to her, the more confident she will be with herself and her gender.
There are also many young women older than 15 who went through girlhood and early adolescence never exposed to the multitude of available opportunities.


Webber Keeps Word and Luncheon Date
In the two days since he called the most inopportune timeout of his life, Chris Webber has not once shaved his head.
Stubble has grown on his scalp, and he said today he might leave it up there for a spell.
"Usually in the basketball season, I'm in the mood for no hair," he said.
"But now I think I'll grow long hair and a beard and move out to Arizona and live out in the desert somewhere -- until basketball season starts again."


Suspicious Fire Guts Brooklyn Synagogue, Damaging 2d
One Brooklyn synagogue was destroyed and a adjacent one was damaged yesterday afternoon in a blaze that Fire Department officials said was suspicious.
The fire, which took place on the second day of Passover, raged through the Congregation Jakov at 1260 51st Street in Borough Park and spread to the Wosikin Congregation next door.


CLINTON PRESSING UKRAINE ON A-ARMS
In an effort to put pressure on Ukraine to give up the nuclear weapons left on its soil by the Soviet Union, the Clinton Administration has rebuffed Ukraine's request for a meeting between the Prime Minister and President Clinton or Vice President Al Gore, senior Administration officials say.
The officials say the rebuff is part of an effort to get the Ukrainians to fulfill their promises to ratify the arms-reduction treaty and give up the nuclear weapons.


Mestek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russian Officials Say Little Radiation Is Released in Nuclear Plant Accident
Russian officials said today that the nuclear accident in the Siberian city of Tomsk-7 on Tuesday caused only minor contamination, but still qualified as the worst nuclear incident in the former Soviet Union since the Chernobyl explosion in 1986.
Radiation leaked after a stainless-steel tank containing uranium waste exploded, blowing a reinforced concrete lid through the roof of a nuclear-reprocessing plant, and causing a fire, officials of Russia's Atomic Energy Ministry confirmed.
Officials said that the tank exploded when nitric acid was added as a cleanser and that the blast itself caused no deaths or injuries, but firefighters were exposed to radiation.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eddie Bo  Tramps Cafe 45 West 21st Street Chelsea Through Saturday
Eddie Bo has syncopation in his bones.
He's an old-fashioned, house-rocking New Orleans pianist, which means he's a one-man orchestra.
His left hand trundles out steady-rolling bass lines, meshed with chords or splashed with barrelhouse triplets from his right; he stamps his feet in one more layer of rhythm.
At Tramps Cafe, the new, white-walled restaurant that replaced Tramps' rock annex, he also had the audience clapping along.


TELEVISION-FILM DEAL FOR HARLEQUIN ROMANCES
After publishing 16,000 titles, Harlequin Enterprises is adapting its romance novels for television.
Harlequin and the Alliance Communications Corporation, a film producer and distributor, said yesterday that they had formed a joint venture to produce made-for-television movies based on Harlequin's romance novels.


Review/Theater; To Grandmother's House They Go
When Leslie Ayvazian first played the title role in "Jenny Keeps Talking" last June in the one-act festival at the Ensemble Studio Theater, the author was Lise Erlich, who seemed to be a very promising playwright.
It turned out that this was a pseudonym for Richard Greenberg.
Now, under his own name, Mr.
Greenberg stands up for feminism and against the occupational battering suffered by women who dare to play the game by men's rules.
While polishing the play, he has also put it in context, having added a related one-act, followed by a brief epilogue.
The result is a pungent chamber trilogy of character sketches.
In the play, at Manhattan Theater Club's Stage II, the principal character is careering through a crisis.
Defeated by bureaucratic back-stabbing, she has been summarily fired from her job as an investigative journalist.
In a series of acerbic scenes, Jenny unveils her stored-up hostility.
Mr.
Greenberg uses his sharp tongue and literary wit to characterize a feisty "professional curmudgeon."


A Sexual Divide in Prison Searches
Although female guards may pat down male inmates, a Federal appeals court has ruled that male guards at a Washington state prison cannot conduct random searches of clothed female inmates.
In a 7-to-4 decision, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, ruled that the prison's policy violated the Eighth Amendment's bar against cruel and unusual punishment.
Lawyers for both sides said the ruling in Jordan v.
Gardner was the first in the country to prohibit such searches.


Restaurants
The neighborhood around Park Avenue South and 29th Street has become a bistro hub of sorts, with three respectable representatives clustered there.
The first was Park Bistro, an immensely popular spot; next was an offshoot across the street, Les Halles, with a butcher shop motif; the latest, not officially related but a kindred spirit, is Pigalle.
Pigalle is a comforting space, with French windows, a little bar up front, green banquettes and blackboard menus on the walls.
An interesting decor element is the remarkable laser-generated reproductions of paintings by Pissarro, Picasso and Toulouse-Lautrec.
The noise level in the dining room is generally low except when the piped-in accordion music gets too rambunctious.


Raphaelle Semmes, 46; Headed Panel for Bush
Raphaelle Jeanne Semmes, a senior civil servant who became executive director of the Bush Administration's Commission on Environmental Quality, died Tuesday at the Washington Home Hospice.
She was 46 and lived in Washington.
The cause was cancer, said her sister Walden S. Morton.


Odd's-N-End's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


'Empty Net' Scenario Starring the Rangers
This is a rehearsal for my pitch meeting at Paramount.
The television show will be called "Empty Net," and the star is the Vanrichter, a two-headed goalie with an ambivalent attitude toward teammates, coaches, media and the owner, who will be thawed out of suspended animation every so often to make crucial decisions.
So you've got the basic elements: fish out of water, odd couple, family and weird science.
It's a comedy.
Paramount gets first shot because it owns the Rangers, and after Wednesday night in Hell, the Devils' building, there is the faint possibility that the Rangers' season may end next week.
Of course, if they whip the Pittsburgh Penguins tonight, I will be more than happy to withdraw my proposal.


Movies Remind Us That Power Can Corrupt; A Striking Expose
To the Editor:
I am an Oscar-winning documentary film maker and a member of the Motion Picture Academy.
Ten years ago I co-founded the Video Project, a nonprofit organization that distributes social issue documentaries produced by more than 100 film makers.
This year's Oscar winner for documentary feature, "The Panana Deception," is among the films we distribute nontheatrically.


Books of The Times; An Antidote for Optimism After the Cold War
Out of Control
Global Turmoil on the Eve of the 21st Century
By Zbigniew Brzezinski
240 pages. A Robert Stewart Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $21.
As the 20th century slouches its weary way toward a close, an outpouring of books on the next century and the end of the cold war era has already begun.
The last three months alone have witnessed the publication of John Lukacs's provocative book "The End of the 20th Century and the End of the Modern Age," Paul Kennedy's much-awaited volume "Preparing for the 21st Century" and now Zbigniew Brzezinski's "Out of Control: Global Turmoil on the Eve of the 21st Century."


Questech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New York Area to Gain
The New York metropolitan region will benefit substantially from President Clinton's budget proposals for mass transit and social welfare, according to analyses by local officials.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Gov.
Jim Florio welcomed the proposals.
Article, page B1.


Movies Remind Us That Power Can Corrupt
To the Editor:
Hollywood does not, as A. M. Rosenthal maintains in "America the Terrorist" (column, March 30), portray "a decent government system as evil." What movies such as "J.F.K.," "Bob Roberts" and "Lethal Weapon" have in common is not a bias against government institutions, but against those corrupt individuals who seek to abuse the perks and powers of the offices that they hold.


Nicklaus Defies Age, Shares Lead At Masters
Against the tide of age, lackluster play and widespread skepticism, 53-year-old Jack Nicklaus once again turned back the clock at his favorite time tunnel, Augusta National, to tie for the lead today in the first round of the 57th Masters.
The only man to own six green jackets opened his 35th consecutive appearance at the Masters with a string of momentum-saving putts to bring home a five under par 67, tying 1987 champion Larry Mize, Corey Pavin, Lee Janzen and a first-time Masters invitee, Tom Lehman.


Researchers Find Genetic Defect That Causes Rare Immune Disease
Cells taken from a boy who lived for most of his 12 years inside a sterile protective environment have helped researchers locate the genetic defect that causes a rare immune system disease.
Severe combined immunodeficiency disease, which occurs about once in every 100,000 live births, cripples the body's immune system and prevents it from fighting off even the slightest infection, said Dr.
Warren Leonard, chief of pulmonary and molecular immunology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.
Dr.
Leonard is the lead author of the report, which appears today in the journal Cell.


Dynamics Research reports earnings for Qtr to March 20


Price Palpitations
Medtronic Inc. has prospered by selling its pacemakers and heart valves to surgeons at premium prices.
Yesterday, however, its stock price fluttered and fell sharply a day after a Hambrecht &amp; Quist analyst raised questions about whether Medtronic's profits would be hurt by the Clinton Administration's plans for curing health-care costs.


Topics of The Times; Spellbound
Alfred Butts, a New York architect who died this week, wasn't much of a speller.
That's surprising because it was he who invented Scrabble, an immensely popular spelling game.
"I was out of work," he recalled later, "and just decided I would invent an adult game." He had the idea in 1931, but it was not until two decades later that it finally caught on, and then it soared.
A national craze in the early 1950's, it is still popular to this day around the world in multiple languages and configurations.
Scrabble, as millions know, is a word game played with lettered tiles on a board with 225 squares.
Each letter has a point value, ranging from one point for A's, S's and several others up to 10 points for Q's and Z's, plus two precious blanks for use at will.
Mr.
Butts based the values on the frequency of each letter's use in words on the front page of The New York Times.


Palestinian Workers Say Ban Is Beginning to Hurt
As early as 6:30 A.M., they started massing today at the barbed wire fence, dozens of Palestinian men and women outside an Israeli Army compound.
Each of them was looking for one of the more treasured, and elusive, items these days in the occupied territories: a piece of paper from the army that would allow them to travel a few miles down the road to Jerusalem and surrounding towns where there are jobs, hospitals and relatives.


Federal Judges Blame Money Woes for Slowdown
Facing what they say is a severe budget shortfall, most Federal judges around the nation have stopped scheduling new civil jury trials.
While there is disagreement about whether the postponements are prompted by brinkmanship or depleted budgets, there is no question that thousands of civil trials are being delayed.
Most are commercial disputes, but the backlog also includes civil rights and copyright cases and other lawsuits filed under Federal law.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.89
2.93
3.76
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.92
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
3.04
3.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.59
5.68
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.85
6.95
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.90
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.00
6.04
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Audi of America Hires Jones-Lundin
Audi of America in Auburn Hills, Mich., said yesterday that had it retained the consulting company of Jones-Lundin Associates in Chicago to help manage the review on its estimated $23 million to $28 million account, which had been at DDB Needham Worldwide since 1969.
The account was placed in review on March 23 and DDB Needham was notified two days later that it would not be included in the review.
A decision is expected in early summer.


Tokyo Defends Big Stimulus Plan
The Government has begun a vigorous defense of a huge new spending package to jump-start the economy and ease political pressure from Washington, even though details of the plan will not be announced for another week.
No figures have been disclosed, but it has been widely reported that the Government will announce from 12 trillion to 13 trillion yen in supplemental public works spending this year, or $105 billion to $115 billion.
That follows a similar 10.7 trillion yen program begun last summer, which appears to have had little impact.


INSIDE
Problems in Technology Sale
Washington missed national security problems when it allowed a Japanese company to buy the only maker of some missile components.
Page D1.
U.S.
Judges Refusing Cases
Facing what they say is a severe budget shortage, most Federal judges have stopped scheduling new civil jury trials.
Law, page B16.
Security Force for Schools
The Chancellor of New York schools wants to model a safety force after big city police departments.
Page B1.
Humanities Chief Is Chosen
The University of Pennsylvania's president is to head the Federal humanities endowment.
Page C3.


Bill Rodgers Retires from Marathon
In his last marathon, BILL RODGERS wilted in the heat and humidity of Vietnam and walked the final three miles.
In that race, two weeks ago, he took such a pounding he still feels the effects.
So yesterday, at age 45, after 20 years of long-distance racing and victories in 21 major marathons, Rodgers announced his retirement from the sport he once dominated.


A Court for Real People
Mario Cuomo's withdrawal from consideration for the Supreme Court is another baffling event in his career but only a glitch in President Clinton's search to fill the impending vacancy.
We may never learn how well New York's Governor could fit Mr.
Clinton's description of him: "a legal scholar who also understands the impact of the law on real people's lives."
What's clear, however, is that the Court needs just those qualities.
Intellect and scholarship are always assumed to be important.
But of all the shortcomings of the current Court, the most glaring is its myopia about real situations in the real world.
This Court too often deals in abstract ideology with no appreciation of how people will actually behave under the force of its rulings.


Dinkins Proposes a 2-Year Freeze On New York City's Water Rates
Responding to fierce complaints of higher water bills in New York City, the Dinkins administration proposed a two-year freeze on water and sewer rates yesterday and a ceiling on those rates in the two years after that.
The Mayor said his proposal would cut water bills by $188 million during the next two years, or more than $100 for the average homeowner.
The city had forecast that water rates would increase by 7 percent in the next fiscal year and 10 percent in the following year.


Art in Review
Rochelle Feinstein
David Beitzel Gallery  102 Prince Street  SoHo  Through April 17
In her new paintings Rochelle Feinstein plays ironic games with familiar forms of abstraction.
Working with variations on the grid, Ms.
Feinstein makes pointed references to popular taste and to iconic achievements in modernist painting, with works that are both smart and quietly luscious.


E.D.S. Discusses Its Ogilvy Account
Electronic Data Systems, the Dallas-based data-processing and telecommunications division of the General Motors Corporation, said it had been discussing the status of its account now at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Houston.


Helping Friends in Prayer


Corrections
A news analysis article on Monday about the Bosnian Serbs' strategy referred incorrectly to their leader.
He is Radovan Karadzic.


Chicago's Mile of Retailing Magic
In an era when staying alive is a major feat for a downtown shopping district, North Michigan Avenue's "Magnificent Mile" of department stores and boutiques is a standout in that it has continued to live up to its name.
"I don't think there's another street like it in the country," said Robert Middlemas, general manager of Midwest operations for Nordstrom Inc., a high-end department store chain that has been unable, to its dismay, to find a store site on the broad stretch of the avenue north of the Chicago River.
"It's a Mecca for shopping."


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about Washington's efforts to restart the Middle East peace talks misidentified the forum in which Bill Clinton spoke about Jerusalem shortly before the November election.
It was in an interview with Middle East Insight, not the Middle East Institute.


Serbs Bar U.N. General From a Muslim Enclave
The French commander of the United Nations military force in Bosnia was halted by a crowd of angry Serbs and forced to turn back today as he tried to reach the besieged Muslim enclave at Srebrenica.
A United Nations spokesman said that Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon had abandoned his bid to reach Srebrenica after 300 Serbian demonstrators sat in the road and blocked his car while others clambered atop the vehicles in his entourage and ripped off radio aerials, fuel canisters, United Nations flags and other equipment.


Heritage Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


France Takes Tough Stance On Crime and Immigration
France's new conservative Government announced a major campaign today to combat urban crime and illegal immigration, but it is already under fire from human rights groups after three shootings this week in which the police killed two young men and wounded a third.
In his first address to the National Assembly, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur called on the police to exercise restraint in the light of these "tragic incidents," but he stressed that his Government would respond to growing public concern about insecurity and immigration.


Boitano Wins at Hershey's Pro-Am
BRIAN BOITANO, 10 months before the next winter Olympic Games, has again established himself as the United States' best male figure skater.
On Wednesday night, in his first competition since his Olympic gold medal year of 1988, he won the Hershey's Kisses Pro-Am in Los Angeles, finishing ahead of the 1984 gold medalist, SCOTT HAMILTON, and the 1992 Olympic silver medalist, PAUL WYLIE.
"I'm nowhere near ready for the Olympics," said Boitano, who still has sore tendons in his right knee.
"But I am on schedule. This was a shorter program than the Olympics, but this proved I could put out back-to-back nights on my knee. I was a little worried because my knee hurt a lot this morning."


Stocks Little Changed Despite Positive Data
In the last day of a trading week shortened by Good Friday, the stock market lurched downward for most of the session yesterday but ended with overall prices barely changed.
Good news from the Government on inflation did not seem to command many traders' attention.
There were some forceful exceptions.
Alcoa dropped 2 points, to 60 3/8, after its announcement Wednesday -- made after the markets closed -- that first-quarter earnings fell 50 percent.


Richard Sherwood, 64, Lawyer and Museum Chief
Richard E. Sherwood, a California lawyer and a former president and chairman of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, died yesterday at the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles.
He was 64 and lived in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Anthony Day, a friend of the Sherwood family, said Mr.
Sherwood suffered a cerebral hemorrhage last Friday.


Art in Review
Balla and Boccioni
Paolo Baldacci Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through May 1
This serious and rather remarkable show juxtaposes the very different works of two leading figures in Italian Futurism.
Although both Umberto Boccioni and Giacomo Balla, like all the Futurists, were concerned with how to depict movement and express what they considered the dynamism of modern life, the two of them arrived at divergent solutions to these problems.
Balla approached art analytically, his images -- often wiry, graphic and flat -- bringing to mind Muybridge's sequential photographs of figures in motion.
Balla's emphasis was on the speed and fluency of line, the abstract rhythm of forms that resulted from combining and reinterpreting multiple views of an object.


Producer Prices Rose 0.4% in March
In a report that calmed fears of resurgent inflation, prices received by American producers rose four-tenths of 1 percent in March, but scarcely at all when figures for the erratic energy and food sectors are removed.
So-called core inflation edged up just a tenth of 1 percent, according to the Labor Department, the best performance since December.


Investors Flee Metals After Aloca Report
Investors battered aluminum stocks yesterday, and analysts said the issues were likely to remain under pressure until huge inventories of the metal have been pared.
The selling was prompted by an unexpectedly poor first-quarter-earnings report from the Aluminum Company of America, the nation's largest aluminum producer.
Late Wednesday Alcoa said its first-quarter earnings fell by 50 percent from year-earlier levels, citing the aluminum glut and record-low prices for aluminum ingot.


Dreco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


A Superstar for the Nursery-School Set
THE fans were dancing in the aisles, clapping gaily, chomping on teething rings.
Not ordinary behavior for a Broadway audience, but then the main attraction was no ordinary Broadway performer.
A dark-eyed, cheery man with a gentle manner, he is either a thrilling luminary or nobody special, depending on whether you are old enough to tie your own shoes.
In the show-business cosmos, which is not the world that most interests him, Raffi Cavoukian occupies a unique position: baby's first superstar.


Review/Film; An American Boyhood Memoir of the 1950's
The opening sequence of "This Boy's Life" defines the style of almost everything that comes after in the film adaptation of Tobias Wolff's fine, spare boyhood memoir about growing up at loose ends in the 1950's.
As with the rest of the movie, the introduction is both a little too much and nowhere near enough:
The voice of Frank Sinatra ("Let's take a boat to Bermuda/Let's take a train to St. Paul") fills the soundtrack with a rich stereo fidelity that reminds you how great the Chairman of the Board once was.
The camera swoops in graceful arcs over, around and between huge, naturally formed stone sculptures in what looks to be Monument Valley.
The camera performs a kind of dance on its own before discovering 15-year-old Toby Wolff (Leonardo DiCaprio) and his mother, Caroline (Ellen Barkin), as they drive their Nash Rambler through this idealized Western landscape.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS PROPOSES WATER-RATE FREEZE
Responding to longstanding and fierce complaints of higher water bills, the Dinkins administration proposed a two-year freeze on water and sewer rates and a ceiling on those rates in the two years after that.
A1.


Government Set To Strip Army Of Vaccine Test
In an effort to resolve a bitter dispute over how to test an experimental AIDS vaccine, top Government researchers have tentatively agreed to shift the task of testing the vaccine from the Army to the National Institutes of Health.
The move, which still faces legal hurdles, would be a rebuke to Army officials who decided to proceed with a $20 million trial of the vaccine, GP-160, despite concern by scientists over the testing method.


With Chance To Advance, Nets Stay In Retreat
Seven games and counting, and as one former Net might have said, the ship be sinking.
Well, not exactly sinking but on a course to Cleveland for the playoffs.
At one point this season, the team was talking about maybe winning 50 games.
Now, Chuck Daly openly wonders when the next victory will come.
It certainly didn't come tonight against Detroit in a painful 100-98 loss before 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
New Jersey's fourth straight loss was made all the more painful because with Boston losing to New York, the Nets lost a chance to make up some ground on the Celtics.


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; Waking Up The Echoes At Augusta
AFTER the roar for a 12-foot birdie putt at the first hole, a red 1 slid into the Masters scoreboards next to Arnold Palmer's name.
After a louder roar for a 6-foot putt at the second, a red 2 for another birdie.
After an even louder roar for a 15-foot putt at the third, a red 3 for another birdie.
All over Augusta National yesterday, the azaleas were not yet in full bloom but the Masters reserve unit of Arnie's Army was in full cry.
If only the Masters had been stopped then and there, 63-year-old Arnold Palmer, his gray hair flowing above his leathery neck, would have been the winner.
Nobody else in yesterday's first round birdied the first three holes.


Reviews/Film; 'American Friends,' A Michael Palin Tale
Anyone who has ever underrated the wit, intelligence and sheer classiness of "Howards End," "A Room With a View" and other Ismail Merchant, James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala collaborations should be sentenced to sit through "American Friends" at least twice.
This new English film, made by people who have otherwise always seemed sane and talented, is a ghastly if unintentional parody of the sort of thing the Merchant-Ivory-Jhabvala team does successfully with such seemingly supreme ease.
"American Friends" stars Michael Palin, who also wrote the screenplay with Tristram Powell, the director.
E.
M.
Forster, unfortunately, had nothing to do with their original story.
Instead, the screenplay is said to have been inspired by an incident in the life of Mr.
Palin's great-grandfather, who as a middle-aged Oxford tutor on a hiking trip in Switzerland in 1861, met a young woman whom he later married.


TV Commercials for Stein Are First in Race for Mayor
Weeks before any other candidates seem likely to join him, City Council President Andrew J. Stein began the New York City mayoral race in earnest last night by broadcasting the campaign's first television commercials.
They are two biographical hymns that portray him as "standing up, fighting back for a better New York."
For months Mr.
Stein has been stuck in a double-digit deficit behind Mayor David N. Dinkins in the polls.
His commercials, which were promised weeks ago, are a clear effort to spark an upswing in the Democratic challenger's standing and to counter weeks of publicity about his sputtering efforts by reminding voters of his consumer advocacy in more than two decades in public office.


Diner's Journal
World Financial Center Discounts
Restaurateurs and merchants near the World Trade Center say they have suffered a significant loss of business in the last six weeks because of what they believe is a public perception that the area is potentially dangerous because of the terrorist bombing.
With both towers open again (though Windows on the World remains closed), some restaurants in the nearby World Financial Center are offering discounts to lure customers back.
Sfuzzi has a three-course dinner for $21.95 from 5 to 7 P.M. daily.
The Hudson River Club offers a $19.93 lunch and a $24.93 dinner.
Edward Moran Bar and Grill has a $10 three-course lunch, including a beverage, daily.
The Changing Scene
REOPENINGS: The space on Columbus Avenue at 81st Street that has housed several food operations since it opened as the DDL Foodshow is scheduled to reopen on May 1 as an American family-style restaurant called Main Street, (212) 873-5025.
The chef will be Paul Zweben, formerly of Chelsea Central.


Hugh Rodham Dies After Stroke; Father of Hillary Clinton Was 82
Hugh E. Rodham, the father of Hillary Rodham Clinton, died here Wednesday night, nearly three weeks after suffering a stroke.
He was 82.
President Clinton, Mrs.
Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea, returned to Little Rock today for a private memorial service on Friday.
The President cleared all but a morning visit to the Pentagon from today's schedule and canceled his weekly radio address, set for Saturday.


Surgery Scheduled for Reds' Morris
Cincinnati Reds first baseman HAL MORRIS is scheduled to have surgery today on his separated left shoulder.
He will be sidelined for 8 to 10 weeks.
Morris hurt the shoulder during a fight in a March 30 exhibition game against the Cleveland Indians.
He and an Indians pitcher, JOSE MESA, who touched off the fight by throwing a fastball behind Morris's head, have been assessed three-game suspensions. (AP)


The President's Budget Priorities
The budget presented yesterday by the Clinton Administration contained no big surprises.
The line-by-line details in its 1,300 pages mirrored the economic plan Mr.
Clinton outlined in February.
Still, the budget's release provides a good occasion to measure the progress and implications of President Clinton's assault on Reagan-Bush economics.
The basic numbers are familiar.
Mr.
Clinton proposes to cut the deficit over the next four years by about $450 billion, while increasing public investments in infrastructure, training and education by about $150 billion.
Spending in Commerce, Justice and many other departments is barely touched.
The big hits are few: cuts in spending on defense and agriculture, increases in energy taxes and income taxes on upper-income families.


Future Doctors Unsettled By Health-Care Changes
In the library, at home, even between cuts in the operating room, the prospect of dramatic change in the health-care system is the talk among medical students in this city known as a mecca for future doctors because of its concentration of teaching hospitals and medical schools.
"We'll be in the O.R. taking out an extra pair of gloves, and someone will say, 'You're wasting those gloves, Hillary wouldn't like that,' " said Mark Brown, a fourth-year student at Tufts University School of Medicine.
Expecting Less Freedom
Mr.
Brown and his fellow students say they know they will have less freedom in their practices than their predecessors in the profession, who earned an average of $170,600 in 1991, and they expect to earn less money, particularly if they go into specialties like ophthalmology, radiology or cardiac surgery, which have traditionally been among the highest paid.
They seem resigned to the end of what many refer to as the golden age of medicine.


Art in Review
Thomas Ruff
303 Gallery  89 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 24
Some of the most memorable images of the gulf war were the dramatic views of anti-aircraft fire in the night sky over Baghdad, captured by television cameras with night-scope attachments.
In making his latest pictures, the German photographer Thomas Ruff used a similar device to photograph industrial scenes around Dusseldorf, where he lives.


Murdoch Requests Waiver
Lawyers for Rupert Murdoch late Wednesday formally asked the Federal Communications Commission to allow him to buy The New York Post even though his ownership of a television station in New York City, WNYW-TV, Channel 5, would normally prohibit the acquisition.
In a 22-page request for a permanent waiver from a regulation barring an owner from holding a newspaper and a broadcast outlet in the same market, William S. Reyner Jr., of the firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson, argued that the bankrupt newspaper would go out of business if Mr.
Murdoch did not step in.
He asked the commission to rule by June 1.


Milwaukee's Water Suspected as Cause Of Intestinal Illness
An intestinal illness has stricken hundreds and perhaps thousands of people in the Milwaukee area during the last few weeks, and the city has now been seized with alarm by health officials' suspicion, first announced late Wednesday, that the cause may be contamination of the municipal water supply.
Although the authorities emphasize that the water system has not been conclusively implicated, they have cautioned Milwaukeeans not to drink tap water, or use it to brush their teeth or wash food, unless they first boil it for five minutes to kill the parasite that is now suspect.


Finevest Foods Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


At the Bar
When it comes to toll-free telephone lines, the law offices of Irwin Silbowitz keep getting the wrong number.
Or so critics say.
When he began advertising on 1010-WINS in June 1991, Mr.
Silbowitz, of Silbowitz, Garafola, Silbowitz &amp; Schatz in Manhattan, used 1-800-TH(E) JUDGE, reflecting his judicial service in the Bronx and Manhattan from 1973 to 1987.
"The Judge knows the system and he can put it to work for you!" the advertisement said.


Money Fund Assets Rise
The total assets of the nation's 628 retail money market mutual funds increased $3.85 billion, to $394.12 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 393 taxable retail money market funds grew $2.33 billion, to $310.46 billion, while the assets of the 235 retail tax-exempt funds increased $1.52 billion, to $83.66 billion.


Saatchi's Team One Shifts Management
Team One Advertising of El Segundo, Calif., said yesterday that it had restructured its top management.
John Hirschboeck, Team One's president, has been promoted to the new position of executive vice president at the agency's parent, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi North America.
Mr.
Hirschboeck, 46, will be based at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific in Torrance, Calif.


Clinton, in Gesture of Peace, Pops In on Pentagon
At the Pentagon early this morning, the alert was spreading by word of mouth and flashing messages on computer screens: The President is coming!
The President is coming!
In a hastily scheduled visit that was part substance and part symbolism, President Clinton went to the Pentagon today to hear the concerns of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and to pay his respects to dozens of ordinary soldiers, sailors and pilots.


DOW JONES &amp; CO. (N)
Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that its net income jumped more than 90 percent in the first quarter, primarily because the comparable 1992 results were depressed by a one- time accounting charge of $10.8 million.
Excluding that charge, earnings in the first quarter would have been up 14.8 percent, the company said.
It said the gain in earnings was primarily a result of increased advertising revenue at The Wall Street Journal.
Revenues rose 6.3 percent in the quarter.


The Guggenheim Foundation Awards Fellowships to 146
The John Simon Guggenheim Foundation has named 146 artists, scholars and scientists as recipients of its 69th annual competition for fellowships totaling $3,925,000.
The selection committee made its choices from 2,989 applicants.
Guggenheim fellowships are awarded on the basis of "unusually distinguished achievement" and "exceptional promise for future accomplishment" in a variety of fields, including poetry, acting, painting, sculpture, photography, biology and social science.


Dole Food Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27





Cyril F. O'Neil Jr., 60, Law Firm Co-Founder
Cyril Francis O'Neil Jr., the senior partner and a founder of Richards &amp; O'Neil, a New York City law firm, died yesterday at his home in Bedford, N.Y.
He was 60 years old.
The cause was cancer, said Hugh J. Freund, managing partner of the firm.


Movies Remind Us That Power Can Corrupt; Our Reputation Abroad
To the Editor:
In "America the Terrorist," (March 30) A. M. Rosenthal complains about movies that show American "military and intelligence agencies" giving orders to "shoot Americans and foreigners." Particularly irksome is that these movies dare to show it done on American soil.


Networks Don't Like Price of an Envelope
The networks have grown accustomed to bending to the will of the National Football League.
But in the bidding for the 1994 Super Bowl, the networks are fighting back.
Yesterday, CBS told the N.F.L.: Keep the Super Bowl if you want us to submit a sealed bid.
ABC has privately sent the same message.
"We are not going to negotiate in the press," said an ABC spokesman, Mark Mandel.


Police Aided Farrow Case, Lawyer Says
A lawyer for Woody Allen lashed out at the Connecticut authorities yesterday, asserting that law-enforcement officials investigating sex abuse allegations against Mr.
Allen were aiding Mia Farrow's custody case by giving her lawyers exclusive access to major pieces of evidence.
The lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, made the charges after he learned from Ms.
Farrow's lawyers that they had been allowed by the Connecticut State Police to take and examine the the videotape on which the couple's daughter, Dylan, is said to have described the alleged abuse.
Mr.
Abramowitz said he had asked the police to allow him to examine the videotape months ago, and had never received a reply.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13 RUSSIA REJECTS BELGRADE CURBS
Russia told the Security Council that it rejected the main points of a U.S.-sponsored plan that calls for seizing Yugoslav transport equipment, a ban on all ships entering Yugoslav waters, and stricter enforcement of an existing trade embargo.A1 The World Court urged Belgrade to control Bosnia Serbs.
A5


Torahs Rise From Rubble After Blaze At Synagogue
Members of a Jewish congregation in Brooklyn whose synagogue was destroyed by fire on Wednesday afternoon rejoiced last night when three Torahs -- the scrolls that Jews hold sacred -- were recovered, undamaged, from a safe in the rubble of the building.
For some members of Congregation Jakov in Borough Park, a branch of the Pupa Hasidim, the rescue of the Torahs eased some of the pain of witnessing, for the second time in their lives, the destruction of their temple.


TV Weekend; Travails of a Would-Be Cheerleader's Biggest Fan
A couple of years ago, the story of the Texas housewife who set out to advance her eighth-grade daughter's cheerleading ambitions by arranging to kill the mother of a rival classmate quickly snagged the public's fancy.
The news media wasted no time in descending on the town of Channelview with opportunities for interviews on national television and contracts for possible movies.
An earnest, typically solemn ABC "Movie of the Week" has already been broadcast.
Now, putting this slice of Americana in far more whacky and astute perspective, there is "The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom," directed by Michael Ritchie (who also directed the movie "Smile") and having its premiere on HBO tomorrow night.
Holly Hunter and Swoosie Kurtz give the most dazzling performances of their already formidable careers.


Rangers Must Turn to Wild Card Again
Corey Hirsch will be back in goal Friday night when the Rangers face the Pittsburgh Penguins.
He started Wednesday night, when New York played the New Jersey Devils, as a wild card played in goal by an all-but-beaten hockey club.
This time, Hirsch gets the nod partly out of desperation, but also partly out of necessity.
In what was the saddest announcement of this bad-news season, the team was informed before practice this morning that John Vanbiesbrouck's 35-year-old brother, Frank, had died unexpectedly and that Vanbiesbrouck would be leaving the team to be with his family in Detroit.
The family did not disclose any details about the death.


Students in Many States Raise Math Scores Steeply
Students' mathematics scores are substantially improving in half the states that took part in a national test, but 75 percent of students nationwide are still below standard, according to a Federal report released yesterday.
The report, which compared mathematics achievement in 1990 and 1992 for a nationally representative sample of 250,000 students, found that students showed the highest average proficiency in Maine, Iowa, New Hampshire, Wisconsin, North Dakota and Minnesota.
The lowest-scoring states or territories were the District of Columbia, Guam, Alabama and Mississippi.


Quiet Leader: Semak Is Devils' M.V.P.
Although Slava Fetisov is the most heralded and Aleksei Kasatonov the most vocal, it is Aleksandr Semak who is making the biggest impact among the Russians on the Devils this season.
Semak was voted the Devils' most valuable player award today at the team's annual awards luncheon, and it couldn't have come at a more appropriate time for the 27-year-old center from Moscow.


Pier 1 Imports reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Paulsons Are Sticking To Their Derby Dream
One year later, the high command of Allen Paulson's racing stable gathered for breakfast at the serene, green Keeneland Race Course today and plotted their return to Churchill Downs, 75 miles and many heartaches to the west along Interstate 64.
"You have to dream now," Madeleine Paulson said.
"Your dream may be broken, but this is the only time they're 3 years old, and you can dream for them."


Security Issue Overlooked In Computer Concern's Sale
A review by the Commerce Department has found that the Federal Government missed key national security problems when it allowed a Japanese company to buy the only American manufacturer of some computer components used in the Patriot and Trident missiles.
The transaction, involving a unit of the Applied Magnetics Corporation of Goleta, Calif., was approved by the Bush Administration in January.
The sale was the first foreign investment issue taken up by the Clinton Administration, which theoretically could still cancel it.


Review/Art; A New View of India's 'Decadent' Sculpture
"Gods, Guardians and Lovers: Temple Sculptures from North India, A.D. 700-1200" at the Asia Society Galleries is a visually glorious show that proposes a revisionist look at 500 years of a country's art.
India's long "medieval" period has had harsh treatment in the history books.
The era began with the close of the so-called Buddhist Golden Age, whose serene art has always found a fond reception in Western eyes trained in the Greek classical ideal.
By contrast, the Hindu sculptures of the medieval period, sometimes multi-armed, fierce and explicitly erotic, were taken by 19th-century scholars as evidence of an ancient culture's steep esthetic decline.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


China Police Have Gang Link In Hong Kong, Official Says
China's top law enforcement official said today that the police maintained links with Mafia-style gangs based in Hong Kong and once even used them to help protect a Chinese leader traveling abroad.
The statement was a startling admission of China's cooperation with the gangs, known as Triads, which engage in extortion, prostitution, bank robbery, smuggling, drug trafficking and murder.
Triad enforcers sometimes punish those who reveal secrets by hacking them with meat cleavers and leaving them to bleed to death.


Reviews/Film; Twins' Surreal Visions
The surreal visions of the film-making team known as the Brothers Quay have an angst-ridden intensity that can make watching a three-minute short feel like gobbling an exceedingly rich and exotic candy and wondering afterward what exactly has been consumed.
For those who have a taste for such things, Film Forum 2 is offering a program of six animated short films by the Quays, which opens today and plays through Thursday.
They range from a recent music video for the singer and songwriter Michael Penn, to "Anamorphosis," a formal examination of perspective in 16th- and 17th-century paintings.
Timothy and Stephen Quay, identical twins who were born in Philadelphia and now live in England, are masters of an eclectic Eastern European mode of Surrealism.
Their most experimental films re-imagine the world as a waking nightmare experienced in mysterious, frequently decrepit settings.
The puppet figures in a film like "Street of Crocodiles" (1986) bob and lurch through spaces so dingy and encrusted with age that they conjure up images of an anguished collective memory, buried but still stirring under a mountain of detritus.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL -- Named John Shelby manager; Tim Conroy pitching coach and Bob Zeihen coach at Butte of the Pioneer League and Phil Wellman manager; Bill Sizemore pitching coach and Juan Bustabad coach at Lethbridge, Canada of the Pioneer League.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Sent William Canate, outfielder, to Indianapolis of the American Association for medical rehabilitation.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Purchased the contract of Lou Frazier, infielder, from Ottawa of the American Association.
Optioned Matt Stairs, outfielder, to Ottawa.
Designated Mike Thomas, pitcher, for assignment.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW JERSEY NETS -- Placed Chris Dudley, center, on the injured list.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Placed Terry Catledge, forward, on the injured list.
Signed Howard Wright, forward, to a 10-day contract.
Football  National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Mark Carrier, wide receiver, to a three-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Bernie Kosar, quarterback, on a four-year contract extension through 1999.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Stacey Hairston, cornerback.
Canadian Football League  OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Announced that Lansdowne Park will be renamed Frank Clair Stadium.
Hockey  National Hockey League  THE MIGHTY DUCKS OF ANAHEIM -- Named Al Godfrey midwest regional scout.


Spring Training for Beach Sports


CHRONICLE
What better place for movie moguls to bunk down than above the Russian Tea Room, a habitue of the restaurant on West 57th Street remarked the other day.
What better place to order blinis and caviar from room service?
His ruminations may be more than a pipe dream.
FAITH STEWART-GORDON, owner of the restaurant where Hollywood and Broadway intersect, said yesterday: "We are in the early stages of discussion about this with architects and possible developers. It would be 64 suites, about 11 stories tall and would be a small jewel, or rather a Faberge egg of a hotel, a home for people in the arts, theater and film world."


Islanders Cooked Again At Home
The Chicago Blackhawks aren't pretty, but they certainly are gritty.
Tonight, they earned a 3-2 victory over the Islanders before 14,114 at the Nassau Coliseum, a performance that showed why Chicago reached the Stanley Cup finals last season and why the Hawks are tied with Detroit for the lead in the Norris Division.
They earn their money with body checking and obstruction tactics that always push the limits of legality and often cross the line.
They are the league's most penalized team and one of the best at killing penalties.


Improvements in School Security Force Proposed
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday called for changing New York City's force of 3,000 school safety officers into a better-trained, better-educated department modeled in many ways on big city police departments.
While the officers would not carry guns, they would be hired, trained and promoted in much the same way as New York City police officers are.


CHRONICLE
When KIRK DOUGLAS heard that MICHAEL JACKSON had paid $650,000 or so to set the poems of Robert Burns to music for a show, he thought, "What in in the world is this?" he said yesterday from Santa Barbara, Calif.
"I was intrigued."
Then about a month ago, Mr.
Douglas saw a condensed version of the show, "Red, Red Rose," whose music is by Paul Johnson, "and I was so touched by the performance that I decided to invest in it myself," he said.


On Stage, and Off
Kline in 'Measure'
The first bit of news from the new regime at the New York Shakespeare Festival emerged this week with the announcement that Kevin Kline, the festival's new artistic associate, will appear this summer as the Duke in "Measure for Measure," at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.
The play, No. 22 in the Shakespeare marathon begun in 1987 by Joseph Papp, is to run July 1 to 25, replacing "Henry VIII," which was canceled after JoAnne Akalaitis was dismissed as the festival's artistic director last month.
Ms.
Akalaitis had been scheduled to direct the play.
"Measure for Measure" is to be directed by Michael Rudman, a Texan who is now the artistic director of Sheffield Theaters Ltd. in England and whose notable work in New York includes the 1984 production of "Death of a Salesman" that starred Dustin Hoffman.
He was selected by Mr.
Kline and George C. Wolfe, the festival's new producer, for, among other things, his experience with the festival; in 1975, Mr.
Rudman directed Sam Waterston in "Hamlet" at the Delacorte.
The production moved to Lincoln Center and has been fixed in memory by the famous Paul Davis poster of the tormented prince in mid-scream.


COMPANY NEWS
CCB FINANCIAL CORP., Durham, N.C., and Citizens Savings, Lenoir, N.C., announced an agreement in principle under which Citizens Savings would convert into a stockholder-owned organization and merge into CCB Savings Bank of Lenoir, N.C.
CLINTON GAS SYSTEMS INC., Columbus, Ohio, has reached an agreement with Bill Blair Inc., New Springfield, Ohio, to purchase a majority interest in 158 producing oil and gas wells.


Sounds Around Town
Jimmy Heath's Saxophone
Jimmy Heath, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 17th Street, Union Square, (212) 533-7900.
One of the great be-bop saxophonists collaborates with Slide Hampton, one of the best trombonists working in jazz.
A few months ago, the two performed together in Mr.
Hampton's small big band; they mined a type of classicism, where the musical language they used became pliable and a help, not a limitation.
Shows are at 8, 10 and 12 tonight and tomorrow night and at 8 and 10 P.M. on Sunday.
There is a $20 cover and a $10 minimum.
Drums and Saxophone
Tony Williams and Jackie McLean, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
A great double bill, with the crushing drummer Tony Williams, who leads one of the tightest bands in jazz, paired with the acidic alto saxophonist Jackie McLean.
Mr.
McLean, who has been playing with extraordinary power recently, featured a teen-age Mr.
Williams in his ground-breaking early 1960's bands; with any luck, the two will perform together.
Shows are at 9 and 11:30 tonight, tomorrow and Sunday night.
There is a $30 cover and a $5 minimum.


Weather and Tax Fears Stall March Retail Sales
Cold, wet weather and the prospect of higher taxes put the brakes on retail sales in March.
And although the sun has finally decided to make more than a passing appearance, retailers say less ephemeral issues like job instability, taxes and consumers' doubts about their future prosperity will continue to inhibit sales.


Historic Day at Bar: Dodger Stays in Brooklyn; Judge Says, Among Other Things, That Los Angeles Club Has No Good Name to Lose
Nothing can heal the wound left when the Brooklyn Dodgers packed up their bats and balls and headed to Los Angeles after the 1957 season.
But yesterday, Brooklyn got a small measure of revenge.
A Federal judge in Manhattan ruled that the Brooklyn Dodger Sports Bar and Restaurant could keep its name in the face of a legal effort by the Los Angeles Dodger organization to take even that shred of identity away from Brooklyn.


Corrections
A heading on the front page of The Metro Section in some copies yesterday, in a contents reference to an article about the Yankees-Indians game, misidentified the Yankee pitcher who gave up a two-run homer that gave the Indians a 4-2 victory.
He was John Habayan, a relief pitcher.


Lewis, Bruno Agree to September Bout
The World Boxing Council champion, LENNOX LEWIS, and FRANK BRUNO, Britain's top two heavyweights, are tentatively lined up to fight each other in September.
Promoters agreed to the fight in principle yesterday.
It would be the richest fight in British boxing history, with gross revenues projected at $27 million.
But the agreement hinges on both fighters winning their next matches.
Bruno boxes CARL (THE TRUTH) WILLIAMS in Birmingham, England, on April 24, and Lewis has a title defense against TONY TUCKER in Las Vegas on May 8. (AP)


In a Rustic Barn, a Quest for Spiritual Simplicity
Jammed together in a pre-Civil War barn with the ambiance of a theater in the round, several hundred worshipers bow their heads in silent prayer.
A moment later, the silence is broken by singing, guitar playing and the soft beating of drums, and the people stand, raise flowers high above their heads and join in song.


Clintons Mourn Loss of Hugh Rodham


Health Care Property Inv reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In an Edgy Haitian Town, Civil Rights Monitors Ease the Fear a Bit
A week ago, residents of this seaside town say, flyers demanding the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide turned up mysteriously one morning, littering Jacmel's narrow streets.
Ever since, the gates of this small city have been guarded by heavily armed soldiers who stop every vehicle making the winding 40-mile drive over the mountains from the capital.
Only after a careful search, an austere nod allows entry.


Art in Review
Joan Mitchell
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through May 8
This is among the most beautiful gallery shows in a long while and a fitting tribute to one of the leading second-generation Abstract Expressionists.
Joan Mitchell died of lung cancer in Paris in October, at the age of 66.
These are her last, radiant paintings, remarkable in their diversity of touch, magisterial in their scale and authority.
In "Phyllis," the only work on view from 1991, not 1992, Mitchell paints in broad, almost blunt strokes that seem to be pushed and pulled across the canvas.
In other paintings, she draws in thin, elegant lines bunched like tangles of streamers, or in bold vertical lines that evoke tall grasses.
As free flowing as her paintings can appear, they have about them an extraordinary harmony and structural solidity; they are often in two panels joined together, each panel with its own character and yet inseparable from the other.
There is even, in what may be the most comprehensive and brilliant of these paintings, "Ici," a loose grid that binds together the complex jumble of lines and joyously colored patches.


Atmel Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hibernia Foods Plc reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE WIZ," Beacon Theater, 74th Street at Broadway.
A revival of the 1975 all-black musical adaptation of L. Frank Baum's "Wonderful Wizard of Oz." Directed by George Faison.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $37.50.
Cash only at the door.
Information: (212) 496-7070.
Closing Next Weekend
"JOEL PERLMAN," Emmerich Gallery, 41 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
Sculptures.
Through April 17.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 752-0124.


Driver Harris Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Paul Pagk
Thread Waxing Space  476 Broadway (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through April 17
The recent paintings of this young English-born artist make something eccentric and even winsome of a formidable style, namely grid-based geometric abstraction.
Each of Mr.
Pagk's very large paintings offers a monochromatic field divided by a few vertical or horizontal lines.
Usually painted a second color, these lines end either in a sharp angle or in a solid little bulge resembling the bottom of a musical note.


Hanoi Journal; Colonel Fights With His Pen, Defending the Poor
For a lieutenant colonel who retired only last year after 27 years of service, and a Communist Party member since 1970, Nguyen Khac Truong holds decidedly nonconformist views.
What's more, he has expressed them in a novel that not only was published but even shared the 1991 fiction prize of the Vietnamese Writers Association.
Mr.
Truong is a writer with a mission.
He stated it bluntly: "I want to remind everybody that 80 percent of the Vietnamese people are peasants.  If our country is built on a model that is not suitable to peasants, they will be poor forever. Why are our peasants still living in tatters?"


50,000 Applicants Are Expected For New York City Police Exam
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday that he expects that 50,000 people will have applied to take the exam to become a New York City police officer when the filing deadline arrives at midnight tonight, the largest number for any police test in 11 years.
He also said at a news conference yesterday that the largest number of minority candidates ever will have applied.
The test will be given on June 26.


Hearing on a Bill to Limit Sales of Museum Holdings
At a spirited and often testy public hearing in lower Manhattan yesterday, several members of the New York State Assembly vowed to enact legislation that would set tight restrictions on the ability of museums to sell off portions of their holdings.
The hearing was notable for the absence of representatives of most of the state's major museums, who refused to testify.
Many museum officials claimed that their policies regarding the sale of works from their collections were internal matters to be decided by their own staffs and trustees, not by the State Legislature.


On My Mind; Here We Go Again
Time after time in the past half-century the Western democracies strengthened dictatorships economically and militarily.
Then of course the dictatorships made war against the democracies.
Heaven help us, the West is at it again.
Before World War II, the West permitted Hitler to rearm.
It handed him Czechoslovakia.
Hitler and Mussolini were allowed to take Spain into the Fascist orbit.
After World War II, Central and Eastern Europe were delivered hogtied to Stalin.


Clinton Campaign Aide Leads Lobbying Group
The man who reviewed the work of the Federal Communications Commission as a member of the Clinton transition team is now coordinating a lobbying group trying to influence billion-dollar decisions by the agency.
Critics say those actions put the former aide, Ronald Plesser, in violation of the spirit of the transition team's ethics rules.
Mr.
Clinton had required transition officials to sign agreements promising not to lobby agencies they reviewed for at least six months.


Outing Ends in Tragedy As Three Brothers Drown
A sightseeing trip to Massachusetts by members of a large family from Brooklyn ended in the deaths Wednesday of three teen-age brothers who drowned in the deep end of an Andover hotel swimming pool.
Andover police officials said the three boys, the youngest of 12 children, did not know how to swim.


Right. Left. Baerga Knocks Out Yanks in 7th.
If the Yankees were unconcerned about their pitching, if they thought the fourth spot in the starting rotation and the vaunted bullpen were reliable, they were given enough evidence tonight to prove that maybe they should worry a bit.
Reams of evidence.
A game that started in an untidy manner with the Indians blasting Sam Militello for five runs in three innings became messier when Steve Howe took the mound and turned ugly when Steve Farr replaced him.
The Indians exploded for nine runs in the seventh off the Yankee closers, including home runs from each side of the plate by Carlos Baerga, and romped to a 15-5 victory.


No Headline
Rabbi Joseph Dov Soloveitchik, a major Jewish philosopher who shaped Orthodox Judaism in America through his writing and lectures and his ordination of more than 2,000 rabbis, died last night at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 90.
Sam Hartstein, a spokesman for Yeshiva University, where Rabbi Soloveitchik taught for more than four decades, said the cause was heart failure.


Yeltsin Acts to Sweeten Pot for Voters
Despite a new round of appeals and incentives from abroad to push for economic reform, President Boris N. Yeltsin is raising wages, increasing spending and issuing low-cost credits for bankrupt industries as part of a campaign to win a crucial referendum this month.
The steps being carried out by Mr.
Yeltsin include linking interest on savings to inflation, raising benefits for the military and maintaining price controls -- all of which economists say swell the Government deficit and aggravate inflation.


Markets Closed
All stock, commodities and Treasury securities markets in the United States will be closed today for Good Friday.
Currency markets will be open, but trading is expected to be abbreviated.


Wallace Decides to Attend North Carolina
RASHEED WALLACE, a 6-foot-11-inch center and one of the top high school basketball players in the country, said yesterday he will attend North Carolina.
"It was just where I wanted to go," said Wallace, who attends Simon Gratz High School in Philadelphia.
"I felt real comfortable down there." His honors include being named USA Today's national high school player of the year.


DISCOVERY'S CREW ATTEMPTS REPAIRS
After a night launching, the astronauts aboard the shuttle Discovery were busy today trying to repair minor equipment problems as the spacecraft began a mission to study the Earth's atmosphere, especially its ozone layer.
The shuttle and its crew of four men and one woman were launched from the Kennedy Space Center at 1:29 A.M.
Within hours, the astronauts had activated instruments to study the atmosphere and the Sun.
They then began trying to rectify problems, including a balky message printer and the failure of a key instrument to transmit data to ground stations.


Youth Stabbed in Brooklyn Robbery Is Third Teen-Ager Killed in Three Days


Sounds Around Town
Night of Flamencos
Misa Flamenca, the Paco Pena Flamenco Company and the Elmer Iseler Singers, Carnegie Hall, (212) 247-7800.
Mr.
Pena, a Spanish flamenco guitarist whose exceptional virtuosity is matched by his passion, will present his Gypsy folk Mass, Misa Flamenca, a work that melds the Roman Catholic liturgy with flamenco traditions.
In the work, which was created for the Wroclaw Music Festival in Poland, the Gloria has become a fandango and the Eucharist an alegria.
The concert will feature Mr.
Pena's Flamenco Company, an ensemble of guitarists, vocalists and percussionists, and the Andalusian flamenco dancer Javier Cruz.
The Elmer Iseler Singers, a Canadian group, serves as chorus.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M., and tickets cost from $23.50 to $25.50.
Dixie Carter Sings
Dixie Carter, Cafe Carlyle, Madison Avenue at 76th Street, (212) 744-1600.
No leading cabaret performer dares more and gets away with it than Ms.
Carter.
This star of "Designing Women" comes on as a mature southern belle with a flaming sense of humor and a fearless theatricality.
Among the high points of her new act are a rendition of Laura Nyro's "Sweet Blindness" in which she sprawls across the piano in a delirious fog of Southern moonshine and a version of Bob Dylan's "Don't Think Twice, It's All Right" that gets to the song's chilly, contemptuous essence like no one else's.
Shows are at 8:45 and 10:45 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $40 cover charge and no minimum.
Dave Frishberg's Touch
Dave Frishberg, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
Baseball trivia ("Van Lingle Mungo"), sharklike lawyers ("My Attorney Bernie") and being an expatriate New Yorker ("Do You Miss You Miss New York?") are three subjects about which the brilliant pop-jazz songwriter, pianist and singer has had what may be the last and definitive word.
Few contemporary writers have produced as many songs that have been embraced as standards by nightclub cognoscenti.
Expertly backing himself on piano, he performs them with dry acerbity that treats each witty apercu as a twist of the knife.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11:15.
Tickets are $20 and $25; there is a two-drink minimum.


Corrections
Charts on March 23 and 30 listing movie box-office figures misstated the number of theater screens on which the top 10 films were shown.
Correct figures appear today on page C19.


Corrections
The front page of Business Day yesterday carried a reprint of Monday's Business Digest in some copies in place of the correct one.
Readers wishing copies of yesterday's digest may write to the editor, Business Day, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Food Lion Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Arch Petroleum Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


BELGRADE IS URGED TO CONTROL SERBS
The International Court of Justice urged Yugoslavia today to assure that any forces it controls in Bosnia and Herzegovina do not violate the 1948 convention banning genocide.
The World Court suggested, but did not explicitly assert, that Yugoslavia has been supporting Serbian bands fighting in Bosnia.
Yugoslavia denies this, and a Yugoslav diplomat repeated the denial after the verdict today.


Bit of Hartford's Past Yields to Change and Chains
FOR 158 years, through the days of whale oil lamps and the brief flowering of a local literary culture around such luminaries as Mark Twain and Harriet Beecher Stowe, Huntington's Book Store knew Hartford well enough to survive just about anything.
Like Hartford, it was a little stuffy, perhaps, and unquestionably highbrow, but in a town of insurance actuaries and banking burghers, it was the right stuffy: the same endearing rectitude and seriousness, leavened at surprising times by a streak of prickly, assertive, even oddball independence of mind.


The Sex Market: Scourge on the World's Children
BRUSSELS -- Doctors, police officers and social workers accustomed to dealing with sexual abuse are reporting a troubling phenomenon: children and adolescents are increasingly in demand as prostitutes because clients see them as "safer" and likely to be free of AIDS.
In the brothels of Manila and Bangkok, the port district of Rio de Janeiro and the backrooms of Frankfurt, pimps hawk the services of children as young as 8 to 13 years old by emphasizing that they are "clean," experts reported here recently at a conference organized by Unesco on "the sex trade and human rights."


Penn President Chosen For Humanities Agency
The Clinton Administration has selected Sheldon Hackney, the president of the University of Pennsylvania, to be the chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, a White House official said today.
The choice of the 59-year-old Mr.
Hackney, an outspoken advocate of freedom of expression, had been expected for several weeks.
As the university president, he defended the decision of the university's Institute of Contemporary Art in 1989 to present an exhibition of the photographs of Robert Mapplethorpe, which had been called obscene by some members of Congress.


RUSSIA REBUFFS U.S. ON TOUGHER MOVES AGAINST BELGRADE
Underscoring the international community's problems in pushing through even modest measures to punish the Serbs for resisting a peace accord for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Russia refused today to accept a toughened set of American-sponsored sanctions against Belgrade.
In a threat to Washington's hopes for a positive vote on the new sanctions at the United Nations on Monday, Russia told the Security Council that it cannot agree to their main points: seizing Yugoslav transport equipment, banning all ships entering Yugoslav waters and more strictly enforcing an existing trade embargo.


CLINTON OUTLINES SPENDING PACKAGE OF $1.52 TRILLION
President Clinton today sent Congress a $1.52 trillion budget full of new details showing how he wants to reduce the Government's deficit while spending more money on public works, education and retraining jobless workers.
In presenting its 1994 budget, the Administration acknowledged that domestic spending under Mr.
Clinton's plan would exceed the limits that Congress set in 1990 and reaffirmed this year.
But Mr.
Clinton and his budget director, Leon E. Panetta, vowed to fight for their proposals.


Needed: Minority Lawyers for Big Job
Susan Davis, who has a new law practice in Columbia, S.C., had never thought of the Resolution Trust Corporation as a potential client.
But that changed after the agency pulled her name from a state bar association list and invited her to a conference this week on opportunities for minority and female lawyers.
"I had no idea there was any work to do for them," said Ms.
Davis, who was among more than a hundred lawyers who attended the workshop.
The corporation, which seizes bankrupt savings and loan associations and sells their assets, spends about $1 million a day for legal fees.
It expects to pay outside counsel more than $800 million on the work already assigned, making it the largest consumer of private legal services in the Federal Government.


Security Executive Is Guilty in Fraud
A former executive director of a security agency for airports in the New York region pleaded guilty in Manhattan yesterday to Federal charges of fraud and filing a false income-tax return.
William Stump, 41, who resigned his post at the Airport Security Council and reimbursed it for $44,000 after an audit in 1990, pleaded guilty to the two charges in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
He is scheduled to be sentenced on June 17, when he faces up to eight years in prison and a maximum fine of $500,000.


Limited U.S. Force Held Still an Option in Bosnia
As senior Administration officials prepared to meet on Friday to discuss American options in the face of the apparent collapse of peace talks in Bosnia, a senior Defense official insisted today that the use of limited force to stop Serbian attacks has not yet been ruled out.
In recent public remarks, President Clinton has backed away from his campaign position that air strikes could be used to curb Serb aggression.
And the weight of opinion within the Clinton Administration appears to be to rely on economic sanctions to try to slow the fighting.


My Lord, What a Morning!
She had a voice that dazzled Toscanini and a dedication that heartened the whole world.
Marian Anderson, who died yesterday at 96, sang compellingly that her Lord held the whole world in His hands.
With her gloriously quiet manner she, too, held multitudes in her hands.
When a benighted nation tried to keep her back because of her race, Marian Anderson replied with beautiful song, not loud rage.
She converted white bigots' hatred into artistic energy.
And she laid claim on the consciences of decent Americans, easing the way for recognition of other black Americans, artists and non-artists.


One Small Step for Knicks; One Banner for Garden
The Knicks have won the Atlantic Division.
They hope that accomplishment is just the start of bigger things.
Winning its 16th consecutive home game last night, New York (52-31) rolled to a division-clinching 110-88 victory over the Boston Celtics at Madison Square Garden.
It was the Knicks' seventh victory in their last eight games, and it moved them one and one-half games ahead of the idle Chicago Bulls in the race for the best record in the Eastern Conference.


Inflation News Heartens the Bond Market
After several weeks of nervousness and a heavy selloff in the bond market, traders and investors got some reassuring news on inflation yesterday and drove the yields on Treasury bonds and notes sharply lower.
Prices of bonds and notes spiked higher in the morning after the Labor Department reported that the core producer inflation rate, which excludes food and energy prices, rose just a tenth of 1 percent in March, well below the rate in February and January and below market expectations.


Cognos Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Review/Film; Postwar Western Gay Culture
Barbara Hammer's "Nitrate Kisses," opening today at the Cinema Village, is a passionate, very subjective meditation on what the film maker describes as the "repressed and marginalized history" of gay women and men in contemporary Western culture since World War I. Ms.
Hammer describes her work as "a post-modern constructivist collage," though it's difficult to hold her to that: the terms are vague at best.
"Nitrate Kisses" is a 63-minute black-and-white documentary in which material from earlier experimental features are intercut with new material in which gay women and men -- old and young, in this country and abroad -- talk about their lives today and yesterday.


The Lone Dissenter
To the Editor:
"Remembering Jeannette" (Op-Ed, April 2), on Jeannette Rankin, America's first woman member of Congress, omits critical information about her two terms in the House of Representatives.


Paris Affirms Its Links To Bonn on Economy
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said today that the new center-right French Government was committed to a strong franc whose exchange rate against the German mark should remain unchanged, and he reiterated that France would establish an independent central bank similar to the Bundesbank in Germany.
His statements, made in a speech to Parliament that outlined his Government's economic plans, amounted to a commitment to give priority to the French economic alliance with Germany.
He thus reinforced the troubled process of European political and monetary integration.


The Art Market
Whither 12 Warhols?
Andy Warhol was an artist who liked to think in multiples.
But what might he say if he knew that 12 of his works are being offered for sale at once at Sotheby's in New York on May 3?
Ten of the works are from the private collection of Fred W. Hughes, Warhol's business manager for 25 years and now the executor of the Warhol estate and chairman emeritus of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts.
Mr.
Hughes has amassed an extraordinary collection of Warhols from the early 1960's, which experts consider the cream of the crop for serious Pop Art collectors.
Mr.
Hughes said he was selling his Warhols because "I need the money."


2 Arrested in Tourist's Slaying


Two Resign High Posts At Synergen
Synergen Inc., the biotechnology company whose main drug has proved disappointing in tests, yesterday announced the resignations of its chief executive and a top research officer.
The company, based in Boulder, Colo., said Jon S. Saxe had resigned as president and chief executive because of differences over management philosophy.
It said Michael A. Catalano, vice president of clinical research, had also resigned but agreed to remain as a technical consultant.


CHANGE UNDER WAY AT ENERGY DEPT.
Seeking to streamline her department, the new Energy Secretary isreversing some organizational changes that her predecessor made to improve nuclear safety, provoking a vituperative fight and the resignation of a top official.
The reorganization of the department has also been hampered by a lack of bodies.
Of the top eight officials, only the Secretary herself, Hazel R. O'Leary, has been approved by the Senate.
Two others are awaiting confirmation.
The five other top positions lack even a nominee, although people close to the department say two appointments are imminent.


Couch Potatoes, Arise! A Temple of TV Awaits You
PAYING a visit to the Museum of Television and Radio in Manhattan is a lot like passing an average afternoon in front of the tube.
Except without the snacks, the commercials, the interruptions to answer the phone, the sound of your neighbor's lawn mower, the familiar couch or, finally, anything that really resembles a television set.
As television has taken over our culture, most of us have come to treat it much as we treat our parents: as a force that is always there, is often distracting, but rarely commands our undivided attention.
The museum, where television is an object of research, even reverence, isn't about such heedless intimacy.
An afternoon there can thus be a disconcerting -- and oddly revelatory -- experience.


A Budget With a Chance
For years, Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush sent Congress budgets that were, it was commonly said at the time, dead on arrival.
Since no one expected the Democrats who controlled Congress to approve the proposals of the Republican Presidents, the budget documents were more election manifestoes than operational plans, dependent more on stirring words than on sound fiscal analysis.
By contrast, the detailed budget President Clinton submitted today is clearly alive and kicking.
The President and the majority in Congress are not only from the same party but on the same wavelength.
This budget serves the conventional purpose: It is a road map for the course the country will be traveling.


After Cuomo's Court Withdrawal, Time to Work on a Legacy
This time there was no plane left waiting on the tarmac.
Unlike Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's last trip to the precipice, when he made preparations to fly to New Hampshire to file for the 1992 Presidential primary, there was no symbol of angst today about the Governor's decision to withdraw his name from consideration for the United States Supreme Court.


Balkan Crisis Argues for United Europe
To the Editor:
"Death of a Dream" by Anthony Lewis (column, March 29) criticizes the European Community for failing to use military force to stop Serbia's aggression in the former Yugoslavia and argues that this inaction means the death of a united Europe.
While this analysis is common among both European citizens and a growing number of Americans, it is flawed.
Even if one accepts the wisdom of military action in this crisis, it is unrealistic to expect the European Community to take charge of such an operation.
National governments and national foreign policies are still in control of Europe's foreign policy and have determined Europe's actions toward the former Yugoslavia.
The Community has so far been given almost no power in foreign policy.
The European Community commission, the Community's executive authority, has only an advisory role in foreign policy making, and even when the 12 European Community countries try to act together, any member state can veto action.
Perhaps more significant, the European Community countries have no command system for joint military operations outside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
And Germany, the biggest member state, refuses to send its army outside Western Europe.
Imagine what United States foreign policy would be like if it had to depend on the unanimous agreement of 50 governors!
Europe's weakness in the Yugoslav crisis has exposed not the failure of the Community, but the need for it.
Europe's national governments have shown themselves incapable of moving beyond narrow national interests to the more global outlook that they could have if their sovereignty was pooled together.
The dream of united Europe is not dead, but it risks getting prematurely buried under faulty explanations and exaggerated expectations.
MARK M. NELSON Senior Associate, Carnegie Endowment for Intl.
Peace Washington, March 31, 1993


For Children
'Origami for Easter'
Queens Museum of Art  Flushing Meadows-Corona Park  Queens  (718) 592-9700  Recommended ages: 8 and up  Sunday
After your children have devoured enough chocolate bunnies and marshmallow eggs, they can consider something completely different this Easter: the ancient Eastern art of origami.
The drop-in family art workshop at the Queens Museum of Art will focus on Easter, but from the perspective of shaping intricate animals from origami paper.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Greenman Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Accounts
*
Wilson Sporting Goods Co., Chicago, to DDB Needham Chicago, to consolidate its European account, previously divided among various local shops.
DDB Needham already handles the American advertising for Wilson's racquet sport division.
Billings were not disclosed.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Robert E. Lee, a former member of the Federal Communications Commission, misidentified his surviving wife.
She is the former Rose Bente.
The former Wilma Rector was his late first wife.


Cuomo Urges Product-Liability Revisions
In an effort to protect manufacturers from exorbitant legal judgments, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed significant changes in the state's laws on product liability that would make it harder for people who have been injured to establish fault and recover damages.
The Governor's proposal would also limit contingency fees that lawyers may charge in cases of product liability, as well as personal injury and wrongful death.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deduction Proposal Is Softened
After promising strict new rules to limit deductions on executive pay of more than $1 million, the Clinton Administration offered a proposal today that would continue to allow deductions of seven-figure compensation as long as it was tied to performance and approved by shareholders.
As part of its 1994 budget plan, the Administration said publicly held companies should be able to continue deducting pay of more than $1 million only if the performance goals are established by a compensation committee consisting solely of two or more independent directors from the corporation's board.


Westinghouse to Sell Property Loans
In a move to resolve one of the biggest real estate fiascos of the 1980's, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation announced yesterday that it would sell most of the commercial property loans held by its financial services unit for about $1 billion to a new partnership it has formed with an affiliate of Lehman Brothers.
Wall Street applauded the announcement, and Westinghouse shares rose $1.625, to $15.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


TOP HERMAN'S EXECUTIVE SHIFTS TO A NEW POST
Martin Burke, hired three weeks ago as president of Herman's World of Sporting Goods, has relinquished his post to become president of the holding company that was formed to acquire the chain, now in bankruptcy protection.
Before joining Herman's, Mr.
Burke tried to resuscitate the ailing Conran's Habitat stores in the United States.


Stone Container Holds Off On Stock and Debt Offering
The Stone Container Corporation, its stock pummeled since it disclosed plans last week to raise $500 million by selling stock, said yesterday that it would postpone any attempt to raise capital.
Roger Stone, chairman of the pulp and paper company, said investors had misunderstood the company's financial condition.


E-Z-EM Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Michael Marsh, Author And Quaker, Dies at 75
Michael Marsh, an author and Quaker leader, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Washington.
He was 75 and lived in Washington.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Marian Anderson Is Dead at 96; Singer Shattered Racial Barriers
Marian Anderson, whose velvety contralto and dignified, affecting stage manner melted the hearts of music lovers around the world, and whose determination helped shatter racial barriers in the arts, died yesterday in Portland, Ore.
She was 96.
She died at the home of her nephew, the conductor James DePreist.
Lee Walter, a friend of the singer, gave the cause as congestive heart failure a month after a stroke.


Prosecutor in King Beating Tells Jury to Focus on Tape
In closing arguments, a Federal prosecutor today accused the four officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King of acting as judge and executioner to punish Mr.
King for being disrespectful to them.
Gesturing with a battered black metal police baton, the prosecutor, Steven D. Clymer, urged the jurors to use their common sense to decide, "Is this the way you want police officers to treat citizens in the United States?"


Education Dept. to Take No Action on School Chief
The New York State Education Department said today that it did not have the authority to reduce the $964,000 retirement package given to Edward J. Murphy, a Long Island school superintendent whose case has become a political cause celebre.
The Executive Deputy Commissioner, Thomas E. Sheldon, said that while he found the circumstances surrounding the retirement package "deeply disturbing," he could not by law do anything about them.


Review/Architecture; Public Projects That Help the Public on Its Way
There's a light at the top of the escalator.
"Santiago Calatrava: Structure and Expression," now on view in the architecture and design galleries at the Museum of Modern Art, shines a bright beacon for those who are hoping that the end of the cold war will usher in a new era of public works.
For Mr.
Calatrava, the era is already here.
His designs for bridges and railroad stations in Switzerland, Germany and his native Spain have set the standard by which contemporary public works projects will be judged.
Trained in architecture as well as structural engineering, Mr.
Calatrava demonstrates that infrastructure can transport minds as well as cargo.


Abroad at Home; No Place To Hide
Judging by his words and his tone of voice, President Clinton feels anguished at the savagery being committed by Serbian forces in Bosnia.
He agreed when a reporter said this week that he seemed frustrated at the prospect of the Serbs getting what they want by force.
But the President's actions do not match his anguish.
In what his Administration is doing, there is no sign of any policy that might actually stop Serbian "ethnic cleansing" -- the killing and terrorizing of Bosnian Muslims to get them out of places the Serbs want.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Penn Traffic Co., Johnstown, Pa., is offering $400 million of 9 5/8 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2005 at 99.127, to yield 9 3/4 percent, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. and BT Securities Corp.
Callable in five years, the notes are rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service and B by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Seagram &amp; Sons Inc., a unit of Seagram Co., is offering $200 million of 7 percent debentures due in 2008 at 100 through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


There'll Always Be an England, In New York
IN wave after wave, immigrant groups have arrived in New York and slowly bent it to their needs.
The British are no exception.
Thrown out in 1781, they have been making their way back of late, in a trickle that has become a flood in the last decade.
Most are content to adapt to American ways, most of the time.
Freddie Hancock, a consultant for the BBC and Britain's Channel 4, gives an annual Super Bowl party at which she serves steak-and-kidney pie, for example.
And this year, she plans to celebrate Third of July, "the last day that the British still held the Colonies."


LifeCell Corp.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Uncommon Parasite Tied to Ills in Milwaukee
The parasite implicated in a recent outbreak of intestinal illness in Milwaukee is uncommon but is being recognized more frequently throughout the world.
The parasite, known as cryptosporidium, has caused several water-borne outbreaks elsewhere in the United States and England in the last 10 years.
The parasitic illness is a frequent cause of traveler's diarrhea and generally lasts one to two weeks before going away on its own.
The illness is rarely fatal except among chronically ill people such as those with AIDS.
Antibiotic therapy is generally not recommended for healthy individuals because none has proved to be effective, health officials said.


Purveyors of Requisites
New York City is not exactly a hardship post, but British subjects who live here must think strategically in order to satisfy basic cultural needs.
Below is a selection of businesses that form part of the British support system, with bonus points awarded for unusual contributions.
Drink
BRITISH OPEN, 320 East 59th Street, Manhattan, (212) 355-8467.
Bonus point: tall 20-ounce pub glasses, rather than heavy mugs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Economy
President Clinton sent Congress a $1.52 trillion budget that provides details of how he wants to reduce the deficit while spending more on public works, education and retraining jobless workers.
But his detailed five-year spending and taxing plan takes no account of the overhaul of the health-care system.  [ Page A1. ]
The Clinton Administration proposed that companies could continue to deduct seven-figure compensation packages as a business expense as long as they were tied to corporate financial performance and approved by shareholders.  [ D1. ]


Maryland Fed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Wendy's return to Britain convinces Backer Spielvogel of the importance of a global focus.
WHEN Wendy's International selected an agency two weeks ago to promote its return to Britain, it passed over the British sibling of its American agency, Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., in favor of a small new local shop.
That kind of rejection is what Michael Bungey, who in January became president and chief operating officer of the parent company, Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, is determined to avoid.


Mets Seek an End to the Hop, Skip and a Lump
It is the field of screams that produces mostly official silence.
Players like to talk around the subject of the infield at Shea Stadium, circling it as if it were a bunt they wished would spin foul.
One gets onto the topic of the infield, and one finds oneself off the record.
"I don't want to get anyone in trouble," said Howard Johnson, the third baseman for the Mets.


Pop/Jazz; Bacharach Reminisces on a Magic Moment
American pop history has been scrutinized so intensively over the last 15 years that it is easy to forget that the songwriters who created many of the best-selling records of the 1950's and 60's were too busy scrambling for hits and meeting deadlines to consider whether their work would last.
Take Burt Bacharach, the composer whose collaboration with the lyricist Hal David produced a string of memorable hits for Dionne Warwick in the 1960's.


The Weather Is Great, but Oh, the Cards!


Taylor Very Near a Return Ticket
It seems all but official: Lawrence Taylor is coming back to play another day for the Giants.
Taylor's agent, Steve Rosner, said last night that the 34-year-old linebacker was "on the verge" of accepting a two-year deal probably worth about $5 million.
"I have to speak to Lawrence to make if official," said Rosner, who added that Taylor was appearing at a dinner last night and was difficult to reach.
Rosner said that Taylor was going away for the weekend and that the two would probably not talk about the deal until Monday.


On Terming Proposed U.S. Attorneys a 'Woman and a Black'
To the Editors:
"Woman and a Black," a March 31 headline states, have been proposed as United States Attorneys in New York.
By identifying Mary Jo White and Zachary W. Carter exclusively by race and gender, you perpetuate problems that you condemn in your editorials.
Moreover, you reinforce the marginalization of both women and blacks, and indirectly help to marginalize black women doubly.


Victor Jacobs Dies; A Lawyer for Chefs And Restaurants, 87
Victor Jacobs, a lawyer who represented several leading French chefs and restaurants in New York City, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87.
The cause of death was pneumonia, his doctor said.


Brooklyn Youth, 15, Is the Latest Victim in a String of Fatal Stabbings
Yahtove Reid, an aspiring reggae artist, was the envy of many in his Brooklyn neighborhood and a star to his brothers and sisters.
He was becoming known around his streets as a talented singer and a lot of people thought he was on his way up.
On Wednesday, the 15-year-old was killed as he walked to a friend's house on a quiet Bushwick street lined with row houses.
The police said he was stabbed once in the chest.


Review/Film; Inertia, But Crisply
"Bodies, Rest and Motion" takes its title from Newton's first law of motion, the one that says a body at rest or in motion will remain that way unless acted upon by an outside force.
Inertia is the more common name for this phenomenon, but it sounds much less like "Sex, Lies and Videotape," a film to which this one owes a noticeable debt.
And inertia does not do justice to this film's quirky, magnetic characters, even though the material consigns them to passivity much of the time.
If anything, the film's four central actors seem much too vibrant and alert to play people who have fallen so deeply into the doldrums.
Marooned in Enfield, Ariz., and caught up in the aftermath of fading love affairs, they spend much of the story contemplating change and fearing the unknown.
"When we got to Enfield, I dumped you and we just stayed," one of them says casually to another.


'Assault' Gun Bans Won't Curb Crime
To the Editor:
As legal counsel in New York City for the National Rifle Association's Federal lawsuit against Local Law 78, the city's ban on "assault weapons," and a lifetime member of the N.R.A., I think "Dear Member of the N.R.A." (editorial, March 28) misses the target.
The N.R.A. membership, dedicated to protecting the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens, agrees guns should be kept out of the hands of criminals.
To suggest that recent N.R.A. actions serve the interests of the criminal more than the honest citizen is preposterous.


Executive Changes
CELLULAR PRODUCTS INC., Buffalo, named Bert C. Del Villano president, chief executive and a director.
CENFED BANK, Pasadena, Calif., a unit of Cenfed Financial Corp., named Lawrence J. Winslow executive vice president for lending and administration.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Shaw Sets 3-Point Mark  Brian Shaw wasn't known as a 3-point shooter -- until last night.
Shaw, who made only eight 3-pointers in three seasons before this one, set a National Basketball Association record by making 10 long-range shots in Miami's 117-92 victory in Milwaukee.
The Heat guard sank six 3-pointers in the first quarter and added four in the third period to break the record of nine held by Dale Ellis and Michael Adams.
Over all, Shaw was 10 of 15 from long range.
"Once I had a few, my teammates kept encouraging me to shoot them," Shaw said. (AP) Rockets 95, Jazz 90: Vernon Maxwell's short jumper with 56 seconds turned the game around after a 23-point Houston lead had shrunk to 1 as the Rockets triumphed in Salt Lake City.
Maxwell added two foul shots 12 seconds later to seal the Rockets' fourth straight victory. (AP) TENNIS  Sabatini Wins Swiftly  Gabriela Sabatini advanced posthaste to the quarterfinals, keeping alive her pursuit of a third straight Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships title yesterday at Amelia Island, Fla., when Petra Langrova of the Czech Republic retired with a groin strain after winning only seven points in five games.
Sabatini's next opponent will be eighth-seeded Leila Meskhi, who overwhelmed Angelica Gavaldon by 6-4, 6-0.
In another third-round match, fourth-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere advanced by defeating Sabine Hack, 7-5, 6-4, and will face sixth-seeded Natalya Zvereva, who defeated Patricia Tarabini of Argentina, 7-5, 1-6, 6-4.
Kathy Rinaldi lost to fifth-seeded Amanda Coetzer, 7-5, 5-7, 6-3.
Coetzer faces Jennifer Capriati, who eliminated Argentina's Inez Gorrochategui, 6-3, 6-1.
Courier Loses Second in Row in Japan: An upset sent Jim Courier out of a Japanese tournament for the second straight week yesterday, as he was beaten in the Japan Open.
The defeat threatened his No. 1 position in the world ranking.
Jonathan Stark, rated 77th worldwide, defeated Courier by 6-4, 6-2.
Meanwhile, Pete Sampras fired 17 service aces and beat a Frenchman, Guillaume Raoux, 6-4, 6-7 (4-7), 6-3, and moved into position to take the top listing. (AP)


Dylex Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Topics of The Times; Fixing Up the "Attic"
There's one good thing to say about the problems plaguing the New-York Historical Society.
Until it was on the brink of bankruptcy and dissolution, few New Yorkers were aware of its treasures -- and of how close the city was to losing them.
In an effort to save the core heirlooms, an advisory committee last month issued some intelligent proposals for a stripped-down, better focused society.
It also asked for public money: a one-time commitment of $15 million to pay for overdue repairs, a new security system and other expenses to tide the institution over until it can reopen its galleries next year.


Victor Tyson Jr., 76, U.S. Maritime Officer
Rear Adm.
Victor E. Tyson Jr., a retired chief of staff at the United States Merchant Marine Academy and the shoreside manager for three America's Cup yacht racing teams, died on Tuesday at the Medical Center of Ocean County in Point Pleasant, N.J.
He lived in Allenwood, N.J., and was 76.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Clinton Plan Adds Money For New York
The New York metropolitan region stands to benefit substantially from President Clinton's proposed increase in financing for mass-transit and social-welfare programs, according to analyses by state and city budget officials.
Mayor David N. Dinkins welcomed the budget proposal as a major change from the fiscal programs advanced by Republican administrations during the last 12 years, which eliminated many urban programs and reduced spending on others.


German Court Backs Use of Armed Forces In Bosnia Air Patrol
A German constitutional court ruled 5 to 3 tonight that German military personnel could remain on NATO air surveillance planes when enforcement of a United Nations ban on Serbian military flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina starts on Monday.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his Christian Democratic alliance had overruled objections by their Free Democratic governing coalition partners that letting German soldiers serve in what could become combat missions over the Balkans would violate the country's 1949 Constitution.


Review/Photography; Horror and Camp in Work by Joel-Peter Witkin
In recent years, Joel-Peter Witkin has attracted a cult following with photographs that combine campy and horrific elements in varying degrees.
Typically Mr.
Witkin presents such unnerving subjects as corpses, body parts or people with extreme physical deformities in daintily staged tableaux that evoke 19th-century studio photographs.
In his current show, at the Pace/ MacGill Gallery, Mr.
Witkin deploys his now familiar style in works that range from the cloyingly sweet to the truly terrifying.
In "Satiro, Mexico," a man is dressed up as a satyr, complete with furry legs and hooves and with little horns sprouting from his head.
But the silliness of this image is given a sharp twist by the fact that the man has no arms, an aspect that Mr.
Witkin, in a typically histrionic gesture, emphasizes by ringing the places on the man's torso where his arms should be with crowns of thorns.


F&amp;M National Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nets Keep Petrovic Waiting
In an attempt to safeguard his health, the Nets have decided that guard Drazen Petrovic, who has missed the last eight games because of a torn ligament in his left knee, will not make his comeback until next Wednesday when the Nets play at Indiana.
The decision was made, of course, with Petrovic's slight disapproval.


No Headline
Trading upon Los Angeles's 'good will' in Brooklyn would have been fatal to the defendants because many Brooklynites despise the Los Angeles Dodgers. -- CONSTANCE BAKER MOTLEY, a Federal judge, upholding use of the name Brooklyn Dodger Sports Bar.  [ B1:5. ]


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on March 27 about the singer Wynonna Judd's loan of her name to a collection of eyeglass frames for charity included an erroneous donation figure, supplied by the company that is to make the frames, and misidentified the beneficiary.
The company, the Liberty Optical Manufacturing Company, plans to give a minimum of $50,000 over the next year to Second Harvest, a national network of food banks.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 U.S. ATTACKS IRAQI MISSILE SITES
Administration officials said U.S. jets had bombed Iraqi antiaircraft batteries that fired at them as they flew a routine surveillance mission over the northern no-flight zone.
Iraq denied shooting at the jets, saying the U.S. attack was unprovoked.  1


F.D.A. Issues Advice On AIDS Prevention
The Food and Drug Administration announced today that manufacturers of contraceptives had agreed to label their products to make it clear that most contraceptives prevent pregnancy but provide no protection against H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, or against other sexually transmitted diseases.
Pointing out that millions of women use oral contraceptives and hundreds of thousands use intrauterine devices, which prevent pregnancy but not bacterial or viral infection, Dr.
David A. Kessler, the F.D.A. commissioner, said the only reliable device for preventing AIDS, herpes, gonorrhea and other diseases was a latex condom.


Premier Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Military Doctor Disputes One Reason for Gay Ban
Dismissing an argument used by those who oppose homosexuals in the military, the Pentagon's senior medical official says that sexual orientation is not a health issue that should be considered in the debate about gay men and lesbians in the armed services.
The official, Dr.
Edward D. Martin, the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, said in an internal memorandum that "homosexuality, per se, cannot scientifically be characterized as a medical issue," so Pentagon policies on homosexual or heterosexual behavior should be based on "mission concerns and considerations."


Sitter Questions Allen Actions With Daughter
On the afternoon of Aug. 4, 1992, Alison Stickland, a baby sitter, was walking by the television room in Mia Farrow's summer home in Connecticut when, she testified yesterday, she looked in and noticed something strange.
There, sitting silently on the sofa, she said, was 7-year-old Dylan Farrow.
The little girl, she said, was wearing a white dress and a blank expression.
And kneeling before her in a way that bothered Ms.
Stickland, she said, was the girl's father, Woody Allen.


Southern National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


IRAQI GUNNERS FIRE ON AMERICAN JETS IN NORTH, U.S. SAYS
American fighter jets today bombed Iraqi antiaircraft batteries that fired at the aircraft as they flew a routine surveillance mission over the no-flight zone in northern Iraq, Administration officials said.
But Baghdad denied shooting at the American F-16 and F-4G fighters and said the United States attack had been unprovoked.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CELLULAR INC., Englewood, Colo., said it planned to increase the number of its subscribers by acquiring cellular operations within the 16 states in which it operates.
It expects to have 10,000 new subscribers by the end of its fiscal year.
SARATOGA BRANDS INC., Bronx, New York, said it was in negotiations to acquire another snack food company but declined to identify the other parties.


Blossoms at Their Park


May Justice Come to Overcut National Forests; Our Toxic Arrogance
To the Editor:
We in the United States believe we can manage the environment by determining how much of any material the planet or a human can safely absorb without harm, and that, once this "assimilative capacity" for a chemical has been decided, we will see to it that no more is permitted to escape.
And we are confident that we can accurately establish the costs and benefits of injury prevented, lives lost, environment conserved, wildlife weakened and future value diminished.
At what cost all this analysis?
Billions, for a lot of equivocal information.
Is this arrogance, or what?


Sports of The Times; A Duffer's Delightful Disasters
For two of the world's best golfers, the Masters turned into the Disasters.
Every so often at Augusta National, somebody will shoot a high number on a hole, such as Tom Weiskopf's memorable 13 on the par-3 12th in 1980, a horrendous 10 over par after the 1973 British Open champion plunked five balls into Rae's Creek.
Two years earlier, Tommy Nakajima of Japan had a 13 on the dogleg par-5 13th hole, eight over par.


In New Jersey Campaign, It's the Consultants, Stupid
Ask Ed Rollins what the big issue in the New Jersey governor's race is and he will tell you without hesitation: "It's the economy, stupid."
Mr.
Rollins, who managed Ronald Reagan's 1984 "Morning in America" campaign, knows a good line when he hears it, and he does not mind the sweeping bow in the direction of James Carville, whom, if all goes as Mr.
Rollins plans, he will confront in the fall in a clash of consulting titans.


South Korea Steps Forth
South Koreans have a lot more to think about this spring than North Korea's defiance of the world over nuclear inspections.
Their own new President, Kim Young Sam, has set a stunning course of democratic reform that could, in the long run, prove far more significant than the shenanigans of the faltering Communist regime.
Mr.
Kim, the first civilian democrat elected to Korea's presidency in more than 30 years, had a lifelong reputation as a moderate reformer.
But in his first six weeks in office, he has moved boldly.
He has brought talented newcomers into his Cabinet, forced corrupt politicians out of office with tough new financial disclosure rules and reaffirmed civilian political supremacy over the armed forces.


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Precincts Preparing a New Outreach: Newsletters
The crack house on the corner has been raided and will be demolished.
Neighborhood burglaries are up, so residents should take care to lock their doors and windows.
A murder is unsolved and investigators need help from the community.
These are examples of the types of information that will appear in newsletters to be distributed by the New York City Police Department beginning on May 1.
The four-page letters will be available quarterly from beat officers, at precinct houses and at neighborhood meetings as part of the city's community policing program.


No Headline
Rabbi Joseph Dov Soloveitchik, a major Jewish philosopher who shaped Orthodox Judaism in America through his writing and lectures and his ordination of more than 2,000 rabbis, died on Thursday at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 90.
Sam Hartstein, a spokesman for Yeshiva University, where Rabbi Soloveitchik taught for more than four decades, said the cause was heart failure.


Sampras Displaces Courier as No. 1 Player
PETE SAMPRAS is now the No. 1 men's player in the world.
By beating DAVID WHEATON, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Japan Open in Tokyo, Sampras gained enough points to take over the top spot from JIM COURIER when the ATP ranking is released on Monday.


Sunward Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


The Versatile City That Film Makers Like to Film
To those who make movies, this city, like Hollywood itself, is a chameleon that can be Anywhere, U.S.A.
For that matter, it can be Anywhere, period.
Film makers have found the physical landscape to be highly adaptable.
The corner of Lansdowne and Dundas Streets, with a few camels, donkeys and sheep became an impressionistic Tangier in "Naked Lunch." The sprawling Kensington Market doubled as Teheran's souk in a potboiler called "Escape From Iran: The Canadian Caper." Other neighborhoods have posed as parts of London, Paris, Budapest and Beijing, as well as Chicago, Cleveland, Detroit and, of course, New York City.


Caere Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A 4-Year-Old Dies in Fire After Her Parents Go Out
A 4-year-old girl died when she was trapped by a fire that broke out in her Brooklyn home yesterday after her parents had both left the apartment, officials said.
The girl, Alethia Floyd, was one of eight children who were found alone in late February after school officials reported that two of them had not attended school for more than a month, the police said.
After an investigation, however, no charges were filed.


Bridge
A heart transplant might bar some recipients from competitive activities like running and tennis playing, but it clearly does not slow down bridge players.
An example is Hugh Montague of North Babylon, L.I., who received a new heart three and a half years ago and is just as active and effective at the bridge table as he ever was.
On the diagramed deal from a recent Long Island tournament he held the South cards and brought off an elegant swindle.


Westco Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
She begged me not to put her in a nursing home. 'Don't send me away,' she kept saying. 'Save the sleeping pills, Blanche,' she told me. 'Be careful with the sleeping pills.
We'll need them one day.' BLANCHE BLACK, 75, convicted of killing her ailing elder sister.  [ 24:2. ]


Q &amp; A
Mutual Funds' Foreign Tax
Can I deduct the portion of my mutual fund dividends withheld as foreign taxes on my 1992 tax return?
CHARLES W. EDWARDS, Princeton, N.J.
American tax rules generally permit a taxpayer to take either a deduction from gross income or a credit against American taxes for taxes paid to foreign countries.
This deduction or credit is referred to as a foreign tax credit.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Place Tim Raines, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Michael Huff, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
National League


InterFirst Bankcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RPS Realty Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Matinee Idol Gets a Makeover
Something is missing from the Easter show at Radio City Music Hall.
Not the Rockettes.
Not the orchestra pit that glides up and down, but the mighty Wurlitzer.
Or at least half of it.
For the first time since Radio City opened 60 years ago, one of the two 5,700-pound consoles of its Wurlitzer organ has been taken out to be overhauled.
The horsehoe-shaped stop and coupler control panels are now spread out in a New Jersey workshop, waiting to be refurbished and put back together.
All in all, it is a good deal more extensive than what the Tin Man got in "The Wizard of Oz."


Review/Dance; Russian Ballet Stars In a Classic Program
The backdrop looked like a wrinkled white sheet.
The stage was small.
But there was delighted talk of a sumptuous ballet feast among members of the audience on Saturday night when "Ballet Stars of Moscow and Kiev" ended a national tour with a performance at the Williams Center for the Arts.
Both the exotic smorgasbord of pas de deux and the cast combining unfamiliar and star dancers were adored by balletomanes, who made up a large part of an audience otherwise consisting of local theatergoers and, amusingly, of other New Jerseyans who had come after unsuccessful attempts to buy discount tickets to the San Francisco Ballet in Manhattan.
No one seemed disappointed, and by the end of the evening, the renovated former movie palace rang with bravos.


Lambert Somec reports earnings for Year to Dec 30


Century-Old Elephant Keeps on Traveling
To the Editor:
While the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus elephants marched past the American Museum of Natural History (photo, April 1) to salute Jumbo, another of P. T. Barnum's celebrated pachyderms arrived in New York for a face lift.


Temco Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Missile Defense Program Is Still Needed
To the Editor:
As one of the named villains in "U.S. Space Grab" (Op-Ed, March 27) by William E. Burrows, I take umbrage.
Mr.
Burrows.


Wesco Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Savannah Foods &amp; Industries reports earnings for Year to Jan 3


Poe &amp; Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knicks Won't Rest on Laurels
With their next game not until tomorrow afternoon in Boston, the Knicks have a brief period to savor their Atlantic Division title.
Then it will be back to business.
And for the Knicks, that means staying ahead of the Chicago Bulls.
"What do we have to do in our last nine games?" asked Doc Rivers, the Knicks' point guard.
"We have to win them all. That sounds simple, but it's not. We can't look at trying to win all nine at once. We have to take each game as it comes. But we want them all."


Elegant Retailer Tries Delaying Extinction
"What about a museum?" a saleswoman in handbags suggests, gesturing inside the historic Art Deco-style I. Magnin department store on Wilshire Boulevard, which closed last month -- one of six to be shut by the bankrupt retailer R. H. Macy &amp; Company by the end of the year.
"Can't you see a brontosaurus here?" she asked.
Some retail industry executives think the metaphor is particularly apt for money-losing I. Magnin, the venerable, San Francisco-based retailer known for high-priced, sophisticated fashions and an elegant ambiance.


International Innopac reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Pittsburgh Jeer for Bonds
Barry Bonds, who forsook the Pirates to become baseball's richest player with San Francisco, returned to Pittsburgh tonight and, not unexpectedly, was booed.
Some in the crowd of 22,718 applauded, but they were drowned out substantially by the boos.
Bonds responded by going 2 for 4, driving in one run and scoring three as the Giants lost, 6-5.
"I expected the booing and it pumped me up," said Bonds after the game.
"I thought it was more like 'thanks for the memories, but now we gotta get on you because you're on the other team.' "


Networked Picture Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Study Hinted at a Parasite Problem in Milwaukee
A study of AIDS patients strongly suggested five months ago that Milwaukee had a problem with cryptosporidium, the intestinal parasite that is now suspected of infecting thousands of people who drank city water.
But health officials never found out about it, apparently because of a dispute with the local AIDS group that had the information.
The study, part of a clinical trial for an anti-diarrhea drug in people with AIDS, found that of 21 cities sampled around the nation, Milwaukee had far more AIDS patients infected with the parasite than any other city -- 26 cases, as against 13 in Los Angeles, 12 in Boston, 11 in San Francisco and Miami, and 10 in Philadelphia and Tampa, Fla.
New York was not among the cities sampled.


Synovus Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Mayor's Record on Crime
Crime in New York City has been falling steadily since 1990, judging from the volume of crime reported to police.
Between 1990 and 1992, reported felonies dropped 12 percent, from 573,813 to 506,897.
Who deserves the credit?
Mayor David Dinkins claims his administration is responsible.
But critics challenge the figures and add that even if crime is down, the Mayor hasn't had much to do with it.


Bull Run Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The business investment tax credit that President Clinton has proposed as a central element in his plan to stimulate the economy is not likely to be enacted, leading Congressional Democrats say.
That means Mr.
Clinton may get almost none of the measures he has sought to jolt the economy.
The other half of the stimulus program, a spending bill, is stalled in the Senate.  [ Page 1. ]
Medical-cost inflation continued to decelerate in March, according to the consumer price report, which showed an overall rise in consumer prices of only one-tenth of 1 percent.  [ 33. ]


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
Fifth Avenue will be closed from 44th to 57th Street from 10:30 A.M. to 3 P.M. for the Easter Parade.
MONDAY-FRIDAY
Because of Passover and Orthodox Holy Thursday and Good Friday, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Pippen Goes Downtown To Cap Rally by Bulls  Scottie Pippen's 3-pointer from the corner with 15 seconds left capped a 28-10 fourth-quarter rally that gave the visiting Chicago Bulls to an 88-87 victory over Atlanta last night in the Omni.
The Bulls, who trailed by 77-60 after three quarters, outscored the Hawks by 11-1 in the final 3 minutes 32 seconds in winning their ninth game in 11 outings and ending the Hawks' homecourt winning streak at 10 games.
Michael Jordan, who outscored Dominique Wilkins by 30-26 in a matchup of the National Basketball Association's top two scorers, scored 6 points in the final 3:32. (AP) Pistons 105, Celtics 90: Isiah Thomas scored a season-high 43 points in a brilliant all-round performance as Detroit, fighting for a playoff berth, won its fifth straight game.
Thomas took a career-high 35 shots and made 17 of them as he fell 4 points short of his career-best scoring total.
He also had 10 assists, 8 rebounds and 5 steals in 44 minutes as the Pistons ended an eight-game losing streak in Boston Garden. (AP) TENNIS Agassi and Lendl Beaten  Andre Agassi and Ivan Lendl, the two top-seeded players, were knocked out of the Count Godo clay-court tournament in Barcelona, Spain, in yesterday's quarterfinals.
Sergi Bruguera of Spain beat Agassi, 6-3, 6-1, and Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine defeated the second-seeded Lendl, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2. (AP) Coetzer Defeats Capriati: Amanda Coetzer lured Jennifer Capriati into a tunnel of topspin from which she never escaped this afternoon in their quarterfinal match at the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships in Amelia Island, Fla.
Capriati, seeded third, was upset, 6-2, 1-6, 6-4, by the fifth-seeded South African.
Gimelstob in Final: One New Jersey teen-ager qualified for today's finals in the Easter Bowl junior championships at the Doral Resort and Country Club in Miami, while another's semifinal match was postponed until today.
Justin Gimelstob of Whippany, N.J., seeded No. 1 in the boys' 16's, defeated Tripp Phillips of Charlotte, N.C., 7-5, 6-2, to set up a showdown against his doubles partner, Rafael Jordan, a 15-year-old from Rio Piedras, P.R., who eliminated Brandon Kramer of Reno, 6-4, 6-1.
SOCCER U.S.
Defeats Saudis  Joe-Max Moore and Janusz Michallik scored in a four-minute span of the second-half yesterday as the United States ended a nine-game winless streak with a 2-0 victory over Saudi Arabia in Riyadh.
The United States had not won since beating Ivory Coast, 5-2, in Riaydh in the Intercontinental Cup last Oct. 19. (AP) COLLEGE BASEBALL Jaspers End Streak  Manhattan College ended a 27-game losing streak yesterday in dramatic fashion, rallying to defeat St.
Peter's, 8-4, on the strength of Mike Kaseman's three-run homer in the top of the ninth inning at Jersey City.
The Jaspers, who were 0-15 this spring after dropping their last 12 games in 1992, trailed, 4-3, before Kaseman put them ahead to stay.


Care Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Serbs Reject U.N. Demands To Preserve Bosnia Enclave
The United Nations' most senior military commanders in what was Yugoslavia met with a blunt rebuff today when they made an urgent visit to Belgrade, the Serbian capital, to try to win Serbian assurances that Serbian nationalist troops in Bosnia would not try to overrun the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica.
The Serbian military commander in Bosnia, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, emerged from a meeting with the United Nations military commanders in the Serbian capital and angrily rejected the principal demand from the United Nations generals: that Serbian forces permit an infantry company of 150 Canadian troops serving with the United Nations force to enter Srebrenica to serve as a guarantor of the enclave's survival.


Lifting a Conservative Voice; Christian Group Views School Board Elections as a Test of Voter Support
The Rev.
J.
Terry Twerell, the founder of the New York City chapter of the Rev.
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition, has been putting in long hours recently poring over city election maps, organizing phone trees and fielding requests for interviews.
His frenetic schedule reflects the intensity of this year's battle for seats on the city's 32 community school boards.
The races, which traditionally have drawn little interest, have become a testing ground for a conservative movement that had its origins in the campaign to oust Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.


Houston's New Priority
ALVIN BROOKS, the new University of Houston basketball coach, says he will take on the program's greatest villain: academics.
Brooks was promoted on Thursday from an assistant's post, replacing PAT FOSTER, who left for Nevada-Reno.
Houston was 21-8 last season and 142-73 over all under Foster.


The Tim Crews Lesson
To the Editor:
The Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission is to be commended for promptly and forthrightly disclosing that Tim Crews was legally drunk when driving a boat in which he and another Cleveland Indians pitcher were killed (sports pages, March 31).
The commission gave the blood-alcohol content reading of .14; pointed out that .1 is the legal level in Florida for operating a boat "under the influence" and made it clear that had Crews survived, charges would have been brought.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Spectrum Control (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Observer; Pork Out of Season
For low comedy try a troupe of politicians in full cry against the evils of pork.
That's what Republicans in the United States Senate tried for greeting the spring, the classic season for frivolity.
At one point admirers of unmitigated malarkey watched in delight as Senator Phil Gramm of Texas denounced pork with such fervor that for a moment one man caught himself thinking, "Great Moloch and almighty Baal! Phil is never again going to let another slab of pork cross the border into Texas."


Sundowner Offshore Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Can't Feel Proud Of Holocaust Role
To the Editor:
I am distressed by an invitation I have received from the United States Holocaust Memorial Council to attend a "tribute to liberators and rescuers of victims of the Holocaust" at Arlington National Cemetery on April 21.
It is as inappropriate as would be an invitation from an American Indian group to attend a tribute to Custer's last stand.
Let me explain:


Simtek Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Church Leader Chosen To Lead N.A.A.C.P.
The Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., a man with strong roots in the era of civil-rights demonstrations, was chosen as the new director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson withdrew from contention on Wednesday after it was apparent that many members of the group were opposed to his hard-charging style.


Charles Lanphere, Hotel Entrepreneur and Executive, 54
Charles W. Lanphere, a former Ramada hotel executive who built a chain of hotels and resorts based in Dallas, drowned Sunday while fishing near his lakeside home in Wood County, Tex.
He was 54 years old and lived in Dallas.
Mr.
Lanphere was president of the Registry Hotel Corporation, which he founded in 1974.
It operates a chain of hotels and resorts under that name in Naples, Fla.; Scottsdale, Ariz., and Bloomington, Minn., among others.


Slowing Health Costs Help To Hold Down Price Index
The deceleration in medical inflation intensified in March, the Government's consumer price report showed today, with health-care costs rising by the smallest amount in nine years.
The rise of three-tenths of 1 percent in medical costs last month magnified a slowdown that has been under way since early 1991.
Medical inflation for the first quarter of the year fell to an annual rate of 5.6 percent, down from 6.6 percent in 1992, 7.9 percent in 1991 and 9.6 percent in 1990.


Veteran of Rights Movement to Lead N.A.A.C.P.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People today selected as its new executive director the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., a man with strong roots in the era of civil rights demonstrations who said his aim was to rejuvenate and modernize the organization to appeal to young black people.
The 45-year-old Mr.
Chavis, who is an official with the United Church of Christ in Cleveland, was selected by the national board amid a swirl of political crosscurrents over the future of the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization.


Portsmouth Bank Shares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A report in the Company News column in some editions of Business Day on Wednesday, about the seizure of a Gitano Group subsidiary by a Hong Kong lender, misstated the number of lenders involved.
It was only one, which Gitano did not identify.


Recall Is Sought Over Fire Risk In G.M. Trucks
The Federal Government today asked General Motors to voluntarily recall millions of pickup trucks that critics charge are fire hazards, the Transportation Department said today.
The request -- which G.M. immediately said it would resist -- was based on a preliminary finding by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration that the gasoline tanks in full-sized Chevrolet and GMC pickups built from 1973 through 1987 were dangerous.
An estimated 4.7 million of those models are still on the road.


Metalclad Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Religion Notes
Sellout Interview
Yarmulkes are not something one often sees in the pages of Playboy.
But there one is, atop the head of Rabbi Henry Sobel, the subject of the "Playboy Interview" in a Brazilian edition of the magazine.


L.A. Gear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Astros Drop Mets in 10th; Bo Bops but Yankees Win
The streak of consecutive defeats stood at 14, and Anthony Young had every reason to believe it stood in the past.
After all, there had been six months to forget it, endless hours to wipe out the images and echoes of loud late-inning disasters.
There was a solid spring, full of triumphs and a minuscule earned run average.
Young had begun to laugh at the mean streak.
But for Young, 1993 wasn't more than an inning old when everything went crash again.
Walks, hits, a home run, defeat.
Everything was in pieces again for Young but the streak.
It was intact and at 15.


No Honors For Messier
After he played in his 1,000th career game, Kevin Lowe was honored at Madison Square Garden with plaques and Tiffany crystal and a family vacation in the Carribean.
Last night, Mark Messier wanted no part of such things.
In a clear indication of the Rangers' dismal state -- and his own personal frustration -- Messier requested that the Rangers not schedule a pregame ceremony to mark the fact that he had reached the 1,000-game milestone Wednesday, when the Rangers faced the Devils in New Jersey.
Messier told the organization to save the ceremony for next season.


Seaway Food Town Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Money Rains on the Bronx When a Bank Holdup Goes Awry
Tossing fistfuls of dollars into the street, a bank robber led police officers on a wild, twisting, five-mile car chase through highways and side streets in the Bronx yesterday morning, the police said.
The chase, with motorists and pedestrians pointing the way for more than a dozen police cars, ended when the suspect -- facing traffic in the wrong lane of the New England Thruway -- ran from his car and dived through a window of a nearby nursing home, only to be captured near the garbage bin in the rear.


Northeast Federal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Law School at Columbia Weighs Aid Program Cut
Nine years after starting a loan-assistance program to help steer lawyers to low-paying public-interest jobs, Columbia Law School officials are considering cutting it back, saying it may be too generous in fiscally troubled times.
The move is causing a stir on campus and among graduates who say they were counting on the program when they made a commitment to public-interest law.


Most Markets Were Closed
All stock, commodities and Treasury securities markets in the United States were closed yesterday for Good Friday.
Many overseas markets were closed as well, and European markets will be closed on Monday.
But the Japanese markets were open yesterday.


Ryan, Beck reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Putting Aside Skateboard Dreams of Hanging 10 Over Asphalt
"LIFE is strange," said Eli Morgan Gesner.
"I mean there I was at 17 wanting to be a professional skateboarder and here I am at 22 being a clothing designer." He shrugged, baffled by the quirks of destiny that led him and his skating buddy, Alyosha Jibril Owen Moore, to the Greene Street studio where they create apparel for Phat Farm, a SoHo store with a following among rap artists and their fans.
Mr.
Gesner was far from displeased with fate and yet there was a note of melancholy as he talked of faded skateboarding dreams.
Clearly for him and Mr.
Moore, the time to put away childish things was at hand, but that is very hard to do when you have put in so much time and energy and imagination into vaulting over benches and up and down staircases with a skateboard.


Review/Rock; Peter Gabriel's Re-entry After 5 Years Off the Road
Warming up for a summer arena tour, his first since he took part in benefits for Amnesty International in 1988, Peter Gabriel brought his band to the Academy on Thursday night.
Five years is a long time to be off the road, and Mr.
Gabriel's performance showed some strain and some miscalculation.
He is working with strong basic ingredients.
The songs from his most recent album, "Us" (Geffen), which dominated a two-hour set, brood over love and loneliness, at once hoping for and despairing at the possibility of human connection.
His voice has a haggard vulnerability, now and then rising to a diffident, almost unearthly falsetto.
And his band, including his longtime collaborators Tony Levin on bass, Manu Katche on drums, L. Shankar on electric violin and David Rhodes on guitar, can lock into his favorite soul and funk grooves, create rippling backgrounds for ballads and chime out mid-tempo rock riffs.
Joy Askew, on keyboards, sang the female parts of duets with ethereal tenderness.


L.A. Gear Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


How Mrs. Gardner's Museum Got That Way
To the Editor:
Your March 26 review of the Havemeyer Collection show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York focuses on women collectors and promoters of art.
Attempting to give a feminist spin, you overreach in stating that Isabella Stewart Gardner of Boston helped inaugurate the career of the art critic Bernard Berenson.


Consumer Research for the Benefit of Dogkind
Moriarty could scarcely contain himself.
The woman with feeding bowls was approaching, and he was ready for duty.
As she made her way up the aisle, past Una the beagle and Jethro the poodle, Moriarty, a five-year-old fox terrier, leaped at the grated door of his cage and yapped in delight.
Then, as if on command, he stood silent for the instant she opened the door to place the two plates before him.
"Okay, Mory," she said, backing away, and Moriarty set out to do his life's work, nibbling food in the plate to his right, then to his left.
Back and forth, he went.
A quick trot around the back of the cage.
Then another mouthful from each plate.
A few minutes later, he was sated and quiet again, as his bowls were taken away for analysis.


Roosevelt Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Utilities Are Sparkling, But What if Rates Turn?
OVER the last year, some who have abandoned their low-yielding certificates of deposit and money market accounts have found a remarkable investment: utility stocks.
Utilities are paying dividends almost double the interest available from banks.
Some issues raise their payouts year after year - the sort of generosity never bestowed on the holders of most bonds and C.D.'s.


Classical Music in Review
Robert Olivia Clarinetist Weill Recital Hall


International Innopac reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Lambert Somec reports earnings for Year to Dec 30


Lemieux and Penguins Turn Garden Into 5 and 10
This wasn't the original plan.
The Penguins didn't think about the record, they didn't set out to earn the longest winning streak in the history of the National Hockey League.
This was something much simpler.
It was about honoring Mario Lemieux.
The Penguins ached when Lemieux, the heart and soul of their team, announced that he had Hodgkin's disease, a form of cancer.
They stood by as he underwent radiation therapy, and they watched, afterward, as he fought to regain his strength and his speed.


Shopko Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Marin Community Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tornado Catches Storm-Seasoned Louisiana Town Off Guard
This sandy strip of land just off the edge of the continent is accustomed to furious weather, but no amount of planning could prepare its residents for the tornado that crushed its only school on Thursday, killing one of its most popular students.
Two builders working on a house behind the school were also killed.
In the school, "it looked like we were under a missile attack," said 17-year-old Ricky Price.
His mother, Debra, a substitute teacher, added: "Blood was flying. Kids were getting cut."


Travel Industry Protests U.S. Stance on Fares
Late last month, the nation's airlines cut fares about 30 percent on certain coach tickets purchased at least 14 days in advance.
While all carriers tell passengers of the various restrictions, Northwest and USAir do not add that the tickets must be purchased by April 21, because that would tip the public to a possible fare change the following day.
Why the big secret?
Both airlines fear that the disclosure would run afoul of Justice Department recommendations made as part of a civil antitrust suit against eight leading airlines, accusing them of price fixing and restraining price competition.


South Africa Moves to Yield Control of Broadcast Media
After decades of Government control, South Africa this week took the first steps to transfer supervision of nation's broadcast media to independent hands.
Ending more than six months of negotiations with the African National Congress, the Goverment announced on Wednesday the appointment of an eight-member multiracial panel, which in turn will nominate a 21-member board to administer and supervise the South African Broadcasting Corporation, currently controlled by the state.


Jury in Police Beating Trial Hears a Stark Final Defense
Directing the four police officers accused in the beating of Rodney G. King to stand and face the jury, a defense lawyer today asserted: "There is no middle ground, and there is no compromise.  Either they acted like courageous, reasonable police officers, or they acted like uniformed hoodlums. That is all there is to it."
For closing arguments in the officers' Federal civil rights trial, the lawyer, Michael P. Stone, used some of the most volatile and successful oratory of the state trial a year ago, playing on fears of violent reaction to the verdict.


InterFirst Bankcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan's Export-Import Bank To Invest in a U.S. Coal Port
A week before Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's scheduled visit to Washington, Japan's Export-Import Bank has announced that for the first time it is investing in a project in an industrialized country -- the United States.
The bank, which until now has devoted most of its resources to helping debt-laden developing countries, announced that it was investing $12 million in a new coal export terminal to replace the current one in the Port of Los Angeles.
The deal is scheduled to be signed in Los Angeles on Monday.


Valley Fashions Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When Sister's Keeper Became Her Killer
When the time came for Blanche Black to make the most important decision of her life, she was all alone without anyone to guide her.
Throughout her 73 years she had depended on others to make the tough calls: first her mother, a tower of strength, and for the last half century, her older sister, Ruth.


Classical Music in Review
Oksana Krovytska  Soprano Ukrainian Institute


A Refinanced Mortgage: Long-Term Interest Savings Offset Short-Term Pain
Last winter, when interest rates fell below 8 percent, William and Gabriela Aynat of Milford, Conn., agreed it was time to refinance their mortgage.
A $100,000 loan would cover the $91,000 balance on the original mortgage, and provide extra cash for home improvements.
They found a bank offering a 15-year, fixed-rate loan at 7.75 percent, and set a date for an appraisal fo the house.
The appraisal was a shock: The house was worth $21,000 less than the $121,000 the Aynats paid for it in 1986.
Because their mortgage balance was now 90 percent of the market value of the house, the Aynats would need mortgage insurance, even for a loan of $90,000.
And their new monthly payment of about $1,100, which includes mortgage insurance, would be nearly identical to their old one.
Even so, the Aynats decided to refinance.
Here's how the new loan will save them about $100,000 in the long run.


Rose's Stores Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Classical Music in Review
National Chorale Avery Fisher Hall


Good Friday at the Cloisters Begins Easter Visit to New York


INSIDE
Health-Care Inflation Slows
Health-care costs rose in March by the smallest amount in nine years, while consumer prices increased only one-tenth of 1 percent.
Page 33.
And a Health Card for All
The Administration will propose issuing "health security cards" to all Americans certifying their right to medical care, officials said.
Page 7.
Congressman Is Acquitted
After years of racially charged litigation, a Federal jury found Representative Harold Ford of Tennessee not guilty on charges of fraud.
Page 6.
Longest Streak on Ice
The Pittsburgh Penguins got five goals from Mario Lemieux and set a National Hockey League record with their 16th straight victory.
Page 27.


Live Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; A Tour's End: 'Swan Lake'
The San Francisco Ballet closed its engagement at the New York State Theater on Sunday afternoon with Helgi Tomasson's production of "Swan Lake," which featured pairs of new leading dancers.
Muriel Maffre danced the dual roles of Odette, the enchanted Swan Queen, and Odile, the evil magician's daughter.
Yuri Zhukov was Prince Siegfried.


CCA Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Progress, at Last, on School Aid
Nearly every year at budget time, New York City students are shortchanged twice -- first as legislators in Albany deny the city its fair share of school aid, then as City Hall often diverts some of the state education dollars to other purposes.
This year, however, there's been a surprising turnaround.
Albany came through with more dollars than usual, and Mayor David Dinkins has promised to give the Board of Education all the money Albany approved.
Though welcome, these are only first steps toward fairness.


Representative Is Acquitted In Fraud and Bribery Case
A Federal District Court jury acquitted Representative Harold E. Ford of 18 fraud and conspiracy charges today, ending a long, racially charged legal process.
Mr.
Ford, 47 years old, Tennessee's only black member of Congress and head of a powerful political dynasty, was acquitted by a jury of 11 whites and 1 black on charges of accepting bribes disguised as $1.5 million in loans.
The trial had prompted fears a conviction could result in violence.
The jury also returned not-guilty verdicts against Mr.
Ford's two white co-defendants, Karl Schledwitz, 41, and Douglas Beaty, 44, who are both lawyers accused of helping to make the money look like legitimate loans.


Salem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boston Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
"For 59 years, I have listened to comedy," said DOLORES HOPE at a recent luncheon in her honor in Beverly Hills, Calif.
"Now it's time to put some music in my life."
At 83, Mrs.
Hope, who was a nightclub singer when she met BOB HOPE in 1933, has recorded her first album.
ROSEMARY CLOONEY gave the luncheon to celebrate its release.
Among the guests were Linda Ronstadt, Alexis Smith, Ann Blyth, Martha Tilton and Debby Boone.


New Cable TV Law Upheld
A Federal court has upheld the constitutionality of a new law requiring cable television systems to carry local over-the-air channels.
The ruling, which was handed down on Thursday, is a victory for the broadcast industry.
The decision deals with a provision in the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act, which Congress passed last fall, known as the "must carry" rule.


Spelling Gets New Officers
Spelling Entertainment Group Inc., the television and motion picture company, announced a major change in its management today after the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation's acquisition of a majority stake in Spelling last month.
Spelling Entertainment said that H. Wayne Huizenga, Blockbuster's chairman and chief executive, would become Spelling's new chairman, succeeding Carl H. Linder, the Cincinnati financier who controls the American Financial Corporation.


Amnex (NSC) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Large Families Complain of Bias
Based on the newspaper ad, the three-bedroom house here sounded like the perfect place for Maureen Fairclough to raise her family.
It was in a good school district, on a safe block with little traffic and rented for $150 less than she was paying.
It never occurred to her that the agent might refuse to rent to her and her husband because they had four children.


Astros Drop Mets in 10th; Bo Bops but Yankees Win
Stay tuned for the next sneaker commercial.
What happened here today must be a commercial.
Where else but in a 30-second television spot could Bo Jackson amble to the plate for the first time in 18 months in a major league game, with 42,775 fans curious about the condition of his artificial hip and awaiting his first swing?
Where else could Jackson rock a pinch-hit home run on the second pitch?
Only between "Cheers" and "Seinfeld."


Corrections
A map yesterday showing progress in eighth-grade math scores labeled Missouri incorrectly in some editions.
The state did not participate in the national math assessment in 1990.


May Justice Come to Overcut National Forests
To the Editor:
For more than 30 years the board feet of Federal timber cut each year has improvidently and illegally exceeded the amount grown.


Commodore Environmental Services reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Day of Peace In the Streets Of Jerusalem
There was no excitement in Jerusalem today.
Unless, of course, one counts the thousands of Christian pilgrims from around the world who walked the Via Dolorosa on this Good Friday, some carrying large wooden crosses and all following the route that Jesus is believed to have taken to His Crucifixion.


Anchor Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suspected Past as Toxic Dump Closes Connecticut Schoolyard
The worst hazard that members of the Stoneybrook Restaurant softball team thought they had to face on the diamonds at Wooster Intermediate School was an errant fly ball.
But when Ron Nemec, Tony Smith and Dave Raschke, veteran teammates, arrived today for the first practice of the season, they found the five baseball diamonds closed by the Health Department because of hazardous-waste contamination in this town just east of Bridgeport.


Sant'Angelo Journal; Corrupt Quake Aid Effort Is Disaster Italian Style
It might seem a curious question to ask: What do a derelict potato-processing plant and an empty highway have in common?
The answer, equally curious, is that they both form part of a web of fraud that turned one of Italy's saddest catastrophes into a vast pork barrel.


Power Unit Acts to Drop 2 A-Plants
The Washington Public Power Supply System said today that it would move to abandon two partly built nuclear plants on which it halted work 10 years ago rather than continue to spend $10.5 million a year on the paperwork needed to keep them alive.
The executive board of the power system has resolved "to investigate all the ramifications" of closing the two plants, an action that could occur by early 1994, said Carl M. Halvorson, chairman of the board.


Corrections
A heading on the front page of The Metro Section on Thursday, in a contents reference to an article about a loss by the Yankees, misidentified the pitcher who gave up the decisive home run to the Cleveland Indians, and a correction in this space yesterday referred to him incorrectly.
He is John Habyan.


Lithuanians Lean on Ex-Marxists Amid Free Market's Uncertainties
He describes himself as a construction engineer and a Lithuanian patriot, although he has not worked as an engineer for three months now.
In January, Rimantas Pirmaitis was laid off, the sort of thing that would never have happened when the Communists were in charge.
He now sells flowers from a street stand in central Vilnius, earning what he can to support two small children and his wife, who is pregnant.


Clinton Medical Plan Calls For 'Health Security' Cards
Under President Clinton's health plan, the Government would issue "health security cards" to all Americans certifying their right to medical care, Administration officials said today.
The card would be a tangible symbol of a person's enrollment in a new universal health insurance program, just as a Social Security card shows that a person has a lifetime account used to calculate Social Security benefits.


Korean Shop Owners Fearful Of Outcome of Beating Trial
When customers at Elizabeth Hwang's tiny, graffiti-covered convenience store get angry, they know how to frighten her.
They say, "We're going to burn down your store."
They tried once before, during the riots a year ago, and now Miss Hwang and her family are preparing for new attacks on Korean businesses if the city erupts again in violence when a verdict is reached in the new trial of the four officers accused of beating Rodney G. King.


Southwest Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Whitney Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


St. Paul Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lincorp Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music Notes; For Young Musicians, Expanding Horizons
Managers, teachers and musicians seem always to be wringing their hands over the prospects for young musicians in the crowded concert field, but innovative ideas about making careers are rare.
Young Concert Artists and Concert Artists Guild, two organizations that hold auditions and competitions, select promising young players and dream up career ideas for them, have devised new programs to bring extra attention to their winners.
Concert Artists Guild is collaborating with WQXR-FM (96.3), the classical radio station owned by The New York Times, on a radio series featuring some of the guild's winners in weekly live-performance broadcasts.
The series, which is called On A-I-R (the name is an acronym for the Artists-in-Radio residency program), began on Sunday and will run through June 27.


Aggressive Tax Preparer? Make Your Comfort Level Known
Almost half of all individual tax returns -- 47.8 percent last year -- are filed with the help of preparers, including tax lawyers, certified public accountants, nationwide tax preparation companies and people who help friends or relatives at tax time.
But these preparers may be more aggressive in seeking deductions than their clients want them to be.
Studies by accounting professors have found that people who use tax-preparation services are mainly interested in filing correct returns.
But some tax professionals take very aggressive positions, at least partly on the ground that this is what their clients want.


REJECTION IS SEEN FOR A TAX CREDIT AIMED AT BUSINESS
The tax break to encourage business investment that President Clinton has proposed as a central element in his plan to stimulate the economy and create jobs is not likely to be enacted, leading lawmakers in both parties say.
That means Mr.
Clinton may get almost none of the measures he has sought to give the economy a quick jolt.
The other half of the stimulus program, a spending bill, has been blocked in the Senate by a Republican filibuster and stands no chance of passage in its current form.


Freymiller Trucking Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Stony Brook Contemporary Chamber Players  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Univa Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


A Fine Year So Far for the Utilities Group
Yield-starved investors have been pouring money into utility funds, which have been popping up like mushrooms after a rainstorm -- only 12 of today's 41 utility funds sport five-year track records.
The yields are quite juicy.
Yields for utilities funds averaged 4.5 percent through February, compared with just 3 percent for money market funds, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.


Classical Music in Review
James McKissic Pianist Carnegie Hall


Executive Changes
AMALGATRUST CO., Chicago, the trust company subsidiary of Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, appointed Robert J. Schank president and chief operating officer.
BANK ONE, CLEVELAND N.A.
Cleveland, an affiliate of Banc One Corp., named Patrick M. Prout president and chief operating officer.


Freymiller Trucking Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Peace Marchers Journey Across Midtown


Sherwood Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


I.M.F. Easing Rules for Moscow Aid
Under heavy pressure from the Clinton Administration and other Western governments, the International Monetary Fund is moving to ease restrictions on aid to Russia with the aim of freeing several billion dollars in assistance.
The much-needed burst of new assistance to the suffering Russian economy would follow a year when the monetary fund gave Moscow far less money than anticipated because Russia failed to take the strict austerity measures the fund demanded.


Live Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patents and Copyrights: Do It Yourself and Save
An economic crunch apparently makes people more defensive about protecting their property, including words, names and inventions.
Patents, copyrights and trademarks, known collectively as intellectual property, have become a growing business for lawyers.
The work comes from corporations, kitchen-table inventors and entrepreneurs naming new businesses, and on the copyright side, from artists, developers of software programs and people who write just about anything.
All aim to file applications with the United States Patent and Trademark Office or the Copyright Office.


Lincorp Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chiefs Pull Post Position 1 In the Montana Handicap
Joe Montana, bags under his eyes, completed his 48-hour tour of Kansas City and Phoenix today.
The Cardinals scored points for originality this afternoon -- by planting a "Welcome Joe Montana" billboard on Interstate 10 -- but the Chiefs scored more points on the playing field last season and are the front-runner to obtain the 36-year-old San Francisco 49ers quarterback.
Montana ate and ran today.
He arrived here from Kansas City at 7:40 A.M., was chauffeured to a doctor's office for a physical, did not throw a single pass, strolled on the Sun Devil Stadium turf, held a chalk talk with Cardinals coaches, was followed to an exclusive lunch by eight cars filled with curious fans, checked residential areas, was promised future golf games in Scottsdale and flew home by 4 P.M.


Pact Reached With Officers In Fire Dept.
The Dinkins administration and the union representing 2,400 Fire Department lieutenants, captains, chiefs and fire marshals reached a tentative contract agreement yesterday that would increase salaries by between 1 and 3.5 percent a year over the life of the five-year contract.
The agreement would also provide the city's first contract with a uniformed work force that granted not only retroactive raises, but also pay increases for future years.


Clinton Eulogizes Father-in-Law With Humor at Little Rock Service
President Clinton delivered a wry eulogy of Hugh E. Rodham at a memorial service here today, describing his father-in-law as a staunch conservative who "thought Democrats were one step short of Communism -- but that I might be O.K."
As friends, family members and White House advisers looked on at the First United Methodist Church, Mr.
Clinton spoke for a half-hour about his "tough and gruff" father-in-law, who he said at first eyed him warily.


Presidio Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Man, 36, Is Killed in Shootout With Police
A man was killed in a shootout with three police officers in Washington Heights early yesterday, the police said.
The police said three officers stopped their patrol car at 150th Street and Broadway after they heard gunfire at 1:30 A.M.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief sports article in some copies on Monday about Calbert Cheaney, a basketball player at Indiana University, referred incorrectly to an award he won.
He was named men's college player of the year on Sunday by the United States Basketball Writers Association.
The Wooden Award, which he received on Wednesday, is a separate honor.


Readicare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Welcome to I.B.M., Boss; Now, Check Your E-mail
The review of Louis V. Gerstner Jr.'s first week at I.B.M.?
The new boss has a very different style from his predecessor, and he loves the computer giant's electronic mail network.
Most of the International Business Machines Corporation's 300,000 workers worldwide have desktop personal computers and can tap into the company's E-mail system, called Profs.
The electronic network permits almost instant communication among I.B.M. workers, and it is as easy to send a message to the chairman as to a secretary.


Consumer Department Faults Health Maintenance Groups
Most New York City health maintenance organizations do not provide enough information about their services for consumers to make informed choices when deciding which to join, according to a report released yesterday by the city's Consumer Affairs Commissioner, Mark Green.
In issuing the 60-page report, the Consumer Affairs Department added its voice to the national debate over the role of health maintenance organizations, suggesting that unless they are required to make more information public, true competition can never take place.


Consolidated HCO reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY COLUMBIA MAY TRIM AID PROGRAM
Nine years after starting a loan-assistance program to help steer lawyers to low-paying public-interest jobs, Columbia Law School officials are considering reducing it, saying it may be too generous in fiscally troubled times.
Page 23.
4-YEAR-OLD DIES IN APARTMENT FIRE
A 4-year-old girl died when she was trapped by a fire that broke out in her Brooklyn home after her parents had left the apartment, officials said.
The girl is one of eight children who were found at home unattended two months ago, the police said.
Page 22.
PRECINCTS TO PUBLISH NEWSLETTERS
Beginning May 1, each of New York City's 75 police precincts will publish and distribute a quarterly newsletter.
The newsletters, which will contain articles, maps of the precincts and names of beat officers, are part of the city's community policing program.
Page 22.
FARROW'S BABY SITTER RECALLS SCENE
In the custody battle between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow, a baby sitter testified that she had witnessed a disturbing scene at Ms.
Farrow's Connecticut home: Mr.
Allen, kneeling, with his head in the lap of his young daughter.
Page 22.
CASH-THROWING BANK ROBBER'S WILD RIDE
Tossing fistfuls of dollars into the street, a man who had robbed a bank in Union Port, the Bronx, led police officers on a wild, twisting, five-mile car chase, the police said.
Page 22.
CHRISTIAN FACTION AIMING FOR ELECTIONS
The founder of the New York City chapter of the Rev.
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition has been putting in long hours, reflecting the intensity of this year's battle for seats on the city's 32 community school boards.
Page 23.
Health maintenance organizations do not provide enough information, a consumer affairs report says.
Page 22.
REGION A SISTER'S LOVE, A SISTER'S DEATH
In Toms River, N.J., when Ruth Evans, 78, asked her sister to help her end a life tormented by emphysema and angina, Blanche Black summoned her courage.
After an overdose of sleeping pills failed, she placed a pillow over her sister's face and smothered her, then, distraught, tried to take her own life.
Now, Blanche Black, 75, has been sentenced to prison.
Page 1.
FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN MAY FACE BIAS
Discrimination against families with children is common on Long Island, fair-housing advocates say, and a lawsuit has been filed against one of the Island's largest landlords, accusing it of "knowingly and intentionally" discriminating against families with children, a charge the company denies.
Page 25.
HAZARDOUS WASTE CLOSES SCHOOLYARD
In Stratford, Conn., schoolyard baseball diamonds were closed when officials found asbestos, dumped by a brake-lining factory decades ago and thought to be safely sealed below ground, on the surface of a playing field.
The company dumped sludge at fourteen other sites, and town residents fear it contained asbestos, dioxin and PCB's.
Page 25.
Museum in East Brunswick fights New Jersey State Police over Lindbergh files. Page 25.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23
Traffic Alert 22


Avesis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sterling Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Amity Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Museum and New Jersey Are at Odds Over Files
A small community museum is battling the state over the files of a former Governor, a fight that is shadowed by the legacy of the kidnapping and murder of the Lindbergh baby.
At issue are papers, books and letters of the late Harold G. Hoffman that were donated to the East Brunswick Museum by his daughter, Hope Hoffman Nelson.


CHRONICLE
The National Resources Defense Council is honoring JOHN B. OAKES for helping to bring environmental issues before the public through journalism and other avenues.
At a reception on Earth Day, April 22, the council will establish the John B. Oakes Fund for Environmental Journalism to provide a permanent endowment for its magazine, The Amicus Journal, and to commission investigative articles by nationally recognized writers.
It is also founding the John B. Oakes Award for Distinguished Journalism in the Fields of Conservation and the Environment.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about college fee increases for the 1993-94 academic year referred incorrectly to student protests about them.
Students at the City University of New York protested college expenses two years ago, not this year.


May Justice Come to Overcut National Forests; Babbitt's Strategy
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton Heads for the Timber" (editorial, April 1), on the President's abandonment of Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt's hopes for "reversing a century of federally sponsored exploitation of public lands," is well said and terribly important.
Your quotation of a Presidential spokesman who described this vital issue as "a few little skirmishes here and there" is not very reassuring to the many of us who believe Mr.
Babbitt's proposed strategy "both to protect the forests and put thousands of loggers back to work" is the way some of our most vital social and economic problems must be solved.
Mr.
Babbitt deserves support.
SCHUYLER M. MEYER JR.
Dover Plains, N.Y., April 1, 1993


Jail Sentence for Klecko
JOE KLECKO, the former Jets All-Pro defensive lineman, has been sentenced to three months in prison for lying to a Federal grand jury that investigated false insurance claims.
In Philadelphia on Thursday, United States District Judge HARVEY BARTLE 3D also ordered the 39-year-old Klecko to remain under home detention for three months after his release from jail, to pay a $3,000 fine and to perform 150 hours of community service.


Maggert Leads Masters As Rain Comes Down
As quickly as the rain that flooded Augusta National today, Jeff Maggert used the perilous back nine to slingshot past bigger names into the lead of the suspended second round in the 57th Masters.
On the strength of a chip shot for a birdie on the par-3 12th and an eagle putt from the fringe of the green on the par-5 15th, the 29-year-old Missourian shot a five-under-par 67 for a 36-hole total of seven-under-par 137.


Charles Houghton, 78, Executive in Missouri
Charles G. Houghton Jr. a business executive and former athlete, died Wednesday at a hospital in his hometown, St.
Louis, at the age of 78.
He died of heart failure and cancer, his family said.
He was chairman of Houghton &amp; Associates in St.
Louis, a manufacturer's representative specializing in the labeling of oil products.


Salant Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 2


Citizens Banking (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Another Barely Balanced Budget
"New York State is on the way back," boasts Gov.
Mario Cuomo in a confident commentary on the new state budget.
But back to what?
Negotiating in secret, he and the leaders of the Legislature patched together another year of precariously balanced books, but no long-term solution for the state's fiscal squeeze.
The new budget includes substantial pluses, notably a nudge in the right direction for urban school aid, a critical commitment to long-term planning for mass transit, and state funding to freeze New York City bus and subway fares at $1.25 for at least two years.


North Korean Chief's Son Gains Military Post
In the clearest signal yet that North Korea is in the midst of a transition of power during its nuclear standoff with the West, the country's Government said today that Kim Jong Il, the son and heir apparent of the nation's founder, has been appointed chairman of the National Defense Committee, one of the three highest posts in the nation.
The announcement came during a session of the Supreme People's Assembly.
Western analysts said the move strengthened Mr.
Kim's authority over the North Korean military and removed most lingering doubts over whether he would eventually succeed his father, Kim Il Sung, as President.
The elder Mr.
Kim turns 81 next week.


U.S. to Send General to Vietnam, Hinting a Thaw
In its first policy decision on Vietnam, the Clinton Administration will send John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general, to Hanoi on a fact-finding mission on missing American servicemen, a move that could lead the United States to withdraw its opposition to international bank lending to Vietnam, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials stressed that President Clinton will make no decision on easing any American pressure on Vietnam until he is convinced that Hanoi is doing all it can to cooperate with the American authorities on the contentious and emotional issue of Americans missing since the Vietnam War.


Miami to L.A. On Amtrak
Last Sunday, Amtrak began operating the first regularly scheduled transcontinental train service in United States rail history.
The Sunset Limited, which runs triweekly, traverses eight states (Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and California) during its 68-hour, 3,066-mile trip between Miami and Los Angeles.
The bilevel coach cars have reclining seats and there is a sightseeing car with chairs facing large windows that curve up into the ceiling of the car's upper deck.
A full-service dining car features china, white linen and regional meals from the Southern states.


Q and A
Shares, Not Rooms Question: My boyfriend and I just purchased a co-op, and we found out that we were billed for a three-and-a-half-room apartment rather than a three-room apartment.
Therefore, our maintenance is for a larger apartment and a terrace, which we don't have.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column qyesterday about a journalism award and magazine endowment honoring John B. Oakes, the former editorial page editor and environmental writer for The New York Times, misidentified the organization establishing the programs.
It is the Natural Resources Defense Council.


A New Rush Into Latin America
EVEN as much of the world dissolves into a single, faceless market, some things just won't happen.
Dunkin' Donuts would not try to sell baguettes to Parisians.
Benihana would not open hot-dog stands in the United States.
Pepsico, surely, would not sell tacos to the Mexicans.
Think again on that last one.
Pepsico, which owns the Taco Bell chain, saw the fattening wallets of Mexico's younger generation, splashed some extra hot sauce onto its tacos and headed across the border.


Historical Groups Battling to Spare Government Files From Delete Key
Behind the staid walls of the National Archives, researchers and archivists are quarreling about matters that could literally shape history.
To the researchers, the National Archives and Records Administration is more than the repository of the nation's most important historical documents, including the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
It is the place where decisions are made today about what documents to save out of the torrent of information pouring out of Federal offices, a task that has grown ever more complicated with the explosion of computer-generated information.


Health Care Provider, Heal Thyself
As a physician, I am somewhat distressed at being called a
health care provider
," writes David A. Worth, M.D., P.A., of Union, N.J., "rather than a doctor, a physician or a professional." He suspects he knows why the new nomenclature is being adopted: "It is easy to regulate
providers
but more difficult to regulate
doctors
, as people have a mental picture of their own doctors' care.
Let us not devalue our physicians by terming them
providers
.
This is just one step away from limiting what they say and depriving them of their ability to make professional decisions."
This language department, Olympian as always in its detachment from political controversy, is resolved to be irresolute on the issue of health care, formerly medical care.
But on the linguistic issue of the term
health care provider
, hand me that scalpel and forceps.


As Los Angeles Case Goes to Jury, New York City Calls for Calm
Public-service announcements promoting racial tolerance and understanding began airing on television in New York City this weekend, as city officials pleaded for calm in anticipation of a verdict in the trial of four Los Angeles police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King.
All three major network affiliates have agreed to broadcast the 30-second spots, which were distributed by the city's Human Rights Commission and have run in the past as well, said Anabel Franceschini, a spokeswoman for Mayor David N. Dinkins.


F.A.A. Bars 3 Foreign Lines
Budget-conscious air travelers have long coveted seats on foreign airlines that offered fares and travel packages at prices far below those available from the major domestic airlines.
Many of those travelers may have assumed that any foreign airline that flew into American airports met the Federal Aviation Administration's safety standards.
In reality, those airlines need only meet the more relaxed standards for such categories as aircraft maintenance and pilot training set by the International Civil Aviation Organization, an agency of the United Nations.
This month the F.A.A. indicated that some of those airlines, particularly those based in Africa, the Caribbean and Central and South America, have serious safety flaws, and has barred three carriers -- Air Belize, Regal Air of Antigua and Central America Air Lines of Nicaragua -- from American airports.
The F.A.A. cited not only grievous safety problems, but also lack of oversight by their governments.


Streetscapes: Pier A; Changed Before, Changing Now
BELOW, it was built for the ages.
Above, the Department of Docks &amp; Ferries just used sheet metal and, indeed, only fragments of Pier A's exterior have survived successive remodeling and removal.
But now a development group is using original architectural drawings, shop documents and even purchase orders to replicate the missing elements as it converts the 1886 landmark on the Hudson River at the Battery to a complex of restaurants, shops and a state center for promoting harbor tourism.


Lucie Pastoriza and Ken Sharples
Lucie Pastoriza, 30, a public-relations manager at Tiffany &amp; Company, describes herself as someone who wears pearls during the week and hiking boots on the weekends.
She and Ken Sharples, 33, a patent lawyer at Pennie &amp; Edmonds in New York, have climbed mountains together in Switzerland, British Columbia, Washington and Maine.
They speak lovingly of places like Poison Spider Mesa in Utah and of outdoor adventures like riding their mountain bikes over rose-colored boulders.


A Chinese Actress Blossoms on the Screen
In Chinese, Hua Ping, actually a flower vase, is a pejorative term for a beautiful but empty actress.
Some Chinese-speaking moviegoers reportedly applied the words to Gong Li after her debut in Zhang Yimou's 1988 film "Red Sorghum." But the criticism abated after Mr.
Zhang's next two films -- "Ju Dou" in 1990 and "Raise the Red Lantern" in 1991 -- in which Gong Li played the leads.
Last year's "Story of Qiu Ju," with Gong Li in the title role, may have silenced the skeptics forever.
The film, which opens on Friday at the Lincoln Plaza in Manhattan, won the top prize at the Venice Film Festival, and Gong Li took the award for best actress.
When "The Story of Qiu Ju," also directed by Mr.
Zhang, played last fall at the New York Film Festival, Janet Maslin of The Times praised the actress for emerging once again "as a figure of astonishing fortitude."


Swayne Accepts Offer
The Phoenix Cardinals, who entertained JOE MONTANA in Tempe, Ariz., Friday, also announced that San Diego offensive tackle HARRY SWAYNE had signed their offer sheet.
Swayne is a designated as a transition player, which means that the Chargers have seven days to match the three-year, $5.5 million Phoenix offer and keep him. (AP)


Did Someone Say Sales Pitch?
THE baseball season is off to a promising start at the New York Yankees Clubhouse Shop, just a baseball's throw from Bloomingdale's.
The store sells sports fashions closely modeled on players' attire, oddments of baseball memorabilia and tickets to Yankees games.
"It's about time they got some pitching," said Curtis Valentin, a customer who was already wearing a Yankees cap and jacket when he entered the store.
"First time they had three top pitchers," he added, naming Jim Abbott, Jimmy Key and Melido Perez.


Historic Route On the Hudson
The rich history of the Hudson River will be the focus of a series of weeklong cruises in July aboard the 68-passenger New Shoreham II.
The boat will follow the 150-mile route that 19th-century ships used to ply between New York and Albany.
On July 10, 17 and 24, the diesel-powered New Shoreham II will leave from Manhattan.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SERIES ON RELIGIONS
Religion in the context of American democracy is the focus of four lectures to be given at Manhattanville College on Wednesday evenings under the umbrella title of "Religion in the New World Order." Peter Gardella, associate professor of religion, will give the first talk this week on "Evangelists of Democracy."
"Islam and World Peace" will be discussed on April 21 by James Edward Jones, who is also an associate professor of religion at the college.
He participated in a pilgrimage to Mecca in 1992.


Mondello Should Heed Abortion Foes
I respectfully disagree, very strongly, with Joseph N. Mondello's "Abortion Foes Should Return to the Major Parties"  [ Letters, March 7 ] .
I use the word respectfully, because of the courage that Mr.
Mondello demonstrates by steadfastly maintaining his pro-life position.
In today's political environment, it is truly a modern-day "Profile in Courage." And, b, in his position as Presiding Supervisor of the Town of Hempstead he has not raised taxes in four years.
So much for the good news.
But his reasoning on his refusal to accept cross-endorsements from the Right to Life Party is flawed.
I suggest that he take an inventory of where the Republican Party currently stands in Nassau County.
It has lost control of the Nassau County Board of Supervisors because of the election of Democrats Benjamin L. Zwirn as Supervisor of the Town of North Hempstead, and Lewis J. Yevoli as Supervisor of the Town of Oyster Bay.


Ms. Hoffmeister, Jeffrey Cooper
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Hoffmeister of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nicole M. Hoffmeister, to Jeffrey A. Cooper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Cooper of Ardsley, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hoffmeister, 24, is a development officer in Armonk for the Executive Council on Foreign Diplomacy, a nonprofit organization that provides educational seminars for business executives, diplomats and United States Government officials.
She is a graduate of Brown University.
Her father is an international industry manager for I.B.M.
Asia Pacific in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother, Ursula Hoffmeister, is a real-estate agent with Vincent &amp; Whittemore in Bedford Village, N.Y.


Making Changes In Shore Management
After reading "A Battler for Funds to Protect the Shore" (New Jersey Q &amp; A, March 7), I feel compelled to make the following observations.
Many New Jerseyans have a love affair with the shore.
We have a tendency to let our emotions supersede common sense and scientific principles.
It has become apparent during centuries of man's pitting himself against the sea that man is powerless in the face of the overwhelming forces of wind and wave.


Advertisements for the Insecure, Unreal Self
Hollywood declared 1992 the year of the woman, but the best female role of the year was played by a man.
Go figure.
As for ordinary women, the cinema has been important in determining their roles, too, with strong assists from fashion magazines and advertising.
But since television arrived, advertising has probably become the most influential medium of all, with the most outlets: television itself, magazines, newspapers, printed matter like theater programs and travel brochures, public transportation, public spaces.


Bengals Are Relieved
Many Cincinnati Bengals are relieved that a woman accusing them of rape has to abide by a contract preventing her from pursuing the case.
They also say they will never be vindicated.
"The truth still hasn't come out," wide receiver TIM McGEE said.
"It still hasn't come out that me, DAVID FULCHER, BARNEY BUSSEY, ERIC BALL and some other guys weren't in the room."


Fighting the Odds, and the F.C.C., He Got His FM Station
FOR 20 years, Gerard Turro harbored a dream of starting a round-the-clock commercial FM radio station to serve Bergen County.
Last month, operating from the second story of an aging brick and cinder block building here, his station, WJUX-FM, took to the airwaves.
Reality has tempered the dream somewhat.
What Mr.
Turro, a 38-year-old radio engineer, still lacks is a commercial station.
WJUX cannot accept advertising, though Mr.
Turro has not given up on that, either.


A Nagging Question
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's article only urges more questions.
Here is my first: How does an organization that produces Shakespeare as infrequently as the Public Theater entitle itself to the name New York Shakespeare Festival?


Getting Information, or Not, From a Tourist Office
WHEN you write to a tourist office for information, how soon can you expect a reply?
This column's periodic survey of travel bureaus in the United States and the Canadian provinces shows that while some states have picked up speed since the last such test in 1991, the most likely turnaround time is still a month.
However, if your intended destination is Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Nevada, Washington State or Quebec, nothing may help: Of the 63 places queried in February -- 50 states, the District of Columbia and 12 Canadian provinces -- these 10 did not respond at all in six weeks.
New York State did not send any information either, but did send a postcard saying the literature was exhausted and a new request should be sent in April.


New &amp; Noteworthy
AMERICAN NERVOUSNESS, 1903: An Anecdotal History, by Tom Lutz. (Cornell University, $14.95.) Nervous disorders seem to be a peculiarly American malaise.
Tom Lutz shows how a constellation of symptoms ranging from insomnia to hot flashes became classified as "neurasthenia," an illness that had a broad impact on our 20th-century culture.
In 1991 our reviewer, Michael Vincent Miller, praised the writing as "witty, concrete, gossipy and intellectually pluralistic."
FORTUNATE LIVES, by Robb Forman Dew. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Martin and Dinah Howells seem fortunate in every way: they live comfortably in a New England college town with their daughter, Sarah, and son David, who is about to leave for his freshman year at Harvard.
But his leave-taking stirs up memories of the couple's other boy, Toby, who died in an accident, and the summer becomes a time when the family's bonds are tested.
" 'Bittersweet' is one of the best words for parenthood . . . and it is perhaps the right word for this novel," Ron Carlson said here last year.
Harper Perennial has also reissued Ms.
Dew's first novel, DALE LOVES SOPHIE TO DEATH ($10), which introduced the Howells family.
In 1981 our reviewer, Katha Pollitt, said the rewards of the novel, which won an American Book Award, are "quiet but rich, and prove once again that in fiction there are no automatically compelling subjects. There are only compelling writers."


Jennifer Stearns and Thomas Mottur
Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Stearns Jr. of Haddam, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Beach Stearns to Thomas Robert Mottur, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Mottur of Concord, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Stearns, 25, is a sales associate in New York for Milliken &amp; Company, a textile manufacturer.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is the owner of the Hobart House in Haddam, an antiques shop specializing in antique silver.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Carl H. Black, was the chairman of the American Can Company, a can manufacturer formerly in New York, which is now the financial-services company Primerica Corporation.


Being Gay, Being Funny
The three comedians who make up Funny Gay Males believe there is safety in numbers.
"None of us is the official gay comic," said Bob Smith (above right), at lunch with fellow troupe members Jaffe Cohen (center) and Danny McWilliams (above left).
"We are three very different people."
"I'm the Jewish New Yorker," Mr.
Cohen said.
"Danny represents blue-collar Queens and Bob is the all-American guy from Buffalo."


Man in the News: Benjamin Franklin Chavis Jr.; Seasoned by Civil Rights Struggle


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
What a shame that in his welcome essay on the scarcity of Italian-American fiction writers, Gay Talese does not consider the missing literary voice of  Italian-American women.
More disappointing, he does not mention "The Dream Book," a landmark anthology of writings by Italian-American women, edited by Helen Barolini.
Her analysis of the relative absence of work by female Italian-Americans, as compared with African-American, Irish-American and other ethnic American women writers, deals in great depth with the role of the patriarchal and church-centered Italian family structures.
ANN C. SPARANESE Englewood, N.J.


Still Life With Matzoh
LAST Sunday, after "The Third Seder," a night of performance art and music at La Mama Experimental Theater Club on East Fourth Street, Neil Goldberg, an artist, was dismantling his Wall of Matzoh and giving it to members of the audience.
"Help partake of the amazing wall of matzohs," he was saying, as the Klezmatics, a group that calls itself "a Yiddish/ World Beat/Fusion Band," played.
The matzohs are so fragile, he usually treats them with epoxy, said Mr.
Goldberg, who lives on the Lower East Side and has created a series of matzoh sculptures.
"But I thought it would be nice for people to be able to eat them tonight," he said.


Data Update
*4*NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Feb. 93
Feb. 92
Change
Starts
1,208
1,285
- 6.0%
Completions
1,264
1,110
+13.9%
Sales
595
628
- 5.3%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.74
7.73
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.86
4.91
6.33
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.58
7.58
8.97
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.66
4.73
6.11
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.61
7.58
9.07
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.49
4.52
6.14
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.86
7.86
9.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.43
5.47
6.65
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.32
3.30
4.50
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.28
7.28
8.15
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


The Fighting Words of Homer Bigart: A War Correspondent Is Never a Cheerleader
GENERALLY speaking, a book patched together from old news clippings is a poor candidate for success.
The contents of newsroom morgues may be immensely interesting to scholars, but a reader browsing through the average file of some deceased reporter is apt to encounter prose that seems as yellow and decayed as the paper on which it was printed.
But "Forward Positions: The War Correspondence of Homer Bigart" (University of Arkansas Press, $24.95) is a stunning exception.
The 51 battlefield dispatches collected here by Betsy Wade, Ho mer Bigart's colleague at The New York Times, ring with genuine drama shorn of facile cliches, propaganda and self-congratulation.
Assembled in book form, they afford a rare overview of a great journalist's career.


Getting Information, or Not, From a Tourist Office
WHEN you write to a tourist office for information, how soon can you expect a reply?
This column's periodic survey of travel bureaus in the United States and the Canadian provinces shows that while some states have picked up speed since the last such test in 1991, the most likely turnaround time is still a month.
However, if your intended destination is Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Nevada, Washington State or Quebec, nothing may help: Of the 63 places queried in February -- 50 states, the District of Columbia and 12 Canadian provinces -- these 10 did not respond at all in six weeks.
New York State did not send any information either, but did send a postcard saying the literature was exhausted and a new request should be sent in April.


The Executive Computer; Pairing People Management With Project Management
IN the crunch of getting a project out on time, many managers are so consumed in shepherding the task that they may forget to manage their employees as well.
Now it may seem odd to turn to a computer -- cold, impassive technology -- for guidance in motivating and managing people.
But Managepro for Windows 1.2 (Avantos Performance Systems, 510 654-4600, list price $395), does just that.
It reminds the executive that there are important management issues that go beyond deadlines. (A Macintosh version, as well as an improved Windows version, are promised for summer.)


Man Is Held In an Attack On a Baby
A baby in his mother's arms was stabbed in the face with a pen by a homeless man who accosted the mother on an Upper East Side street yesterday morning, the police said.
Doctors at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center released the 22-month-old boy after treatment for cuts on his cheek, forehead and ear.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Gay Talese argues that Italian-Americans with literary aspirations have been held back not just by discrimination in academia and publishing, but by their disregard for education, disdain for reading and deference to
omerta
-- the tradition of keeping family secrets.
Italian-Americans are also disadvantaged, he says, by their gregarious natures: "The writer's life is a solitary one, and I believe solitude is a most unnatural condition for the village-dwelling people that the Italians essentially are." In short, Italian writers have been hamstrung by their own culture.
To this I say
basta!


N.B.A. Dilemma: Boys Will Be Bad
"We're like a hockey team; everybody wants to see us fight," said Dennis Rodman.
"Whatever it takes," said Bill Laimbeer.


Waiting for a Verdict
After a passionate defense speech, the case of four officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King finally went to a Los Angeles jury.
But it wasn't just the fate of four policemen at stake: some Angelenos worried that a not-guilty verdict could lead to further reacial disorders, while others wonder what Los Angeles has learned from the ordeal surrounding the case.


POSTINGS: Condos Going Well; New Lincoln Center De-Sign
Three Lincoln Center, a 45-story condominium, has blazed a conspicuous trail back to the market.
Following the first opening in 1989, only 23 units were purchased.
Sales halted in mid-1990.
Late last year, a group of Japanese lenders took title to the 312 unsold units.
The new sponsors hired Rose Associates of Manhattan as asset manager.


A Clinton Report Card, So Far
Before long, the 100 days will be upon us, and we can expect a rush to judgment on the Clinton Presidency.
Of course the 100 days test is silly.
Franklin Roosevelt gave the 100 days mythic status, but he had a national crisis so urgent and indisputable that the country pleaded for action and Congress dared not say him nay.
Except for F.D.R., no President has ever accomplished much legislatively in his first 100 days.
Still, the 100 days represent a shakedown cruise that tells the people a good deal about a new President -- and tells him a good deal about the people.
For a man who a short year ago was an unknown quantity to most Americans, and a very dubious figure to some of them, Mr.
Clinton has quickly established himself as an articulate, ebullient, untiring and, thus far, rather endearing occupant of the White House.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'WORLD IS ROUND'
The Wadsworth Atheneum will present the premiere of a theater piece this week based on "The World is Round," a children's book by Gertrude Stein, adapted and directed by Juanita Rockwell with original music by James Sellars.
In 1934 the museum opened the Aetna Theater with a production of "Four Saints in Three Acts," an avant-garde opera by Gertrude Stein and Virgil Thompson.
The Atheneum became a forward marcher in the visual and performing art worlds throughout the 20's and 30's, led by its energetic director, Charles (Chick) Austin.
Roy Harris, Aaron Copland and Paul Bowles were some of the other emerging composers whose works were played there, attracting trainloads of New Yorkers to premiere performances.


Nicole Vosshall, Cort Dugan
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry B. Watton 2d of Kinnelon, N.J., have announced the engagement of her daughter Nicole Kirsten Vosshall to Lieut.
Stewart Joseph Cort Dugan, U.S.M.C., a son of John H. Dugan of Baltimore and Susan S. Dugan of Longmeadow, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Vosshall, 24, is an associate editor at Travel Holiday magazine in New York.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College, as did her fiance.


Dangerous Parking
In the aftermath of the municipal corruption scandals of the mid-1980's, New York City created an ambitious new system for negotiating and awarding municipal contracts.
The goal was to protect the integrity of contracting, which had been badly tainted by the exposure of widespread bribery and bid-rigging by companies pursuing contracts with the city's Parking Violations Bureau.
Last week, significant flaws were exposed in the vaunted new contracting system.
Once again, they involved both the Parking Violations Bureau and a New Jersey-based computer-service company that was implicated in 1986, and once again a New York mayor found himself facing a major political headache.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Gay Talese asks the question "Where Are the Italian-American Novelists?" and then leads us through an anguished account of prejudice on the one hand, sensitivity on the other; Anglicized surnames, persistent disdain for the Italian-American experience, etc.
His article continues with some old and some new stereotypes.
Italians are essentially nonliterate, they don't read, there are no books in their homes, they don't even have bookshelves; there is simply no tradition of either reading or writing in their culture.


Over the Sea to Skye
THE hitchhiker appeared in damp silhouette at the roadside, a steady trickle of rain running off his leather hat.
Behind him, bog, heather moor and the occasional grazing sheep stretched away into a mass of low gray cloud that had settled over the mountains like a tea cozy.
Almost anywhere else, I might have been tempted to speed on by; but this was the Isle of Skye, where cars are relatively few, and where the worst crime would be to leave someone trudging in the rain.
Together we drove on toward Dunvegan Castle.
Skye, we agreed, is a tonic.
Mention the Isle of Skye and the most hardened urbanites will echo "Skye?" with a glint of purple heather in their eyes.
"The Misty Isle?" Partly it's the isolation of the place, just off the soft west coast of Scotland (nothing soft, though, about the winds that can batter the island from the Atlantic), where Gaelic is still widely spoken among its 8,000 or so inhabitants; partly the thought of a place so rugged and remote that humans must fit themselves to nature's scheme.
The attraction may lie in the name, Skye: and in romance, and legend, and the fame of the old song "The Skye Boat Song."


How to Get A Moose to Smile
RARE is the photographer who has not dreamed of going off on safari with a 35-millimeter camera and telephoto lens to capture pictures of majestic animals in their native habitats.
Secluded in a tree blind, waiting out large cats or leggy giraffes, with guides to help at every turn -- this could be the picture shoot of a lifetime.
If you would like to make a trip something like this, but at minimum expense, Mark Warner may be the man to turn to.
Mr.
Warner is an experienced photographer of wildlife, a teacher and an outdoor workshop specialist who has put together a book of places -- national parks, zoos and private preserves -- where you can go on "safari" without leaving the continent: "The Best Places to Photograph North American Wildlife" (Amphoto/Watson-Guptill, April 1993, $18.95).


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Like most Americans, Gay Talese does not pick up on class signals.
The lack of books in Italian-American homes has to do with class rather than ethnicity.
Until the 1940's, most Italian-Americans lived in a sort of genteel poverty, where there was plenty of macaroni but little money for books.


On Higher Ground
In order to look good this spring, you've got to have sole.
Espadrilles, clogs, mules or sandals with chunky platforms provide just the right equilibrium to balance such styles as bell bottoms or sheer floaty skirts.
And once you get the hang of walking in these "elevators," they are really very comfortable.


On Sunday; Striking Up A Conversation With the TV
DAVID KLEIN prefers talking to his TV and VCR.
The other night he came home from his job as a corporate lawyer in Manhattan, flopped down wearily on the couch of his Upper East Side apartment, hit the power button and said, "Two-three." Instantly Channel 23 popped on -- the Knicks-Celtics game.
There was a time when he would have been a basket case switching channels.
The Knicks had a chance to clinch their division, but one of his favorite shows, "Seinfeld," was on at 9:30.
Fortunately, Mr.
Klein had planned ahead.
Days before, he'd looked at his VCR and said, "Four . . . Thursday . . . 9:30 P.M. . . . 10 P.M." Of course, his VCR is no idiot and knew exactly what to do.


Banks Looks for Riches of Transition
The riches of football free agency, which Carl Banks believes are rightfully his, have not yet flowed to the Giants linebacker.
And he has become embittered at, and suspicious of, the club to which he has given nine seasons.
Banks is one of the Giants' two transition players.
That designation entitles him to a 1993 salary of at least $1.436 million, but also gives him the right to entertain offers from other clubs.
The Giants can keep him by matching any such offer.
On Friday night, Banks disclosed that he visited the Raiders last Monday, and that he is anticipating an offer from Los Angeles.
But it hasn't come.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
As an Italian-American novelist, I haven't any interest in creating fiction centered on Sicilian goatherds and crowded ships poignantly pulling away from Neapolitan docks; or Ellis Island, or men carrying a statue of the Virgin through the streets of Little Italy, or the canonization of Joe DiMaggio.
What we Italian-American writers explore is Gay Talese's prescribed exhortations -- prudence, family honor, the safeguarding of secrets and the inevitable tragic consequences we must suffer when loyalty and honor are placed above truth.
That
is the Italian-American experience.
I, for one, feel no compunction about couching my legacy in a plate of spaghetti.
MARY-ANN TIRONE SMITH  Ridgefield, Conn.


ISRAEL TO ALLOW TOP ARAB AT TALKS
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres left little doubt today that Israel would accept an important change in the rules governing the Middle East peace talks and agree to negotiate directly with the Palestinian leader in East Jerusalem, Faisal al-Husseini.
As its price for joining the talks in Madrid in October 1991, the Israeli Government, which was then led by the Likud Party, insisted that Arabs from East Jerusalem be excluded.
The argument was that allowing them to participate would amount to acknowledging that Jerusalem's status is negotiable.


Sound Bytes; Cashed Out and Tuned In To Contemporary Art
THE name Norton is synonymous with computer utilities, the programs that are the software equivalent of fire extinguishers, life preservers, poison antidotes and engine tuneups.
Peter Norton originally wrote an "undelete" program that would recover computer files that had been inadvertently erased.
That became the core for the Norton Utilities.
In 1990 Mr.
Norton sold his company, Peter Norton Computing Inc., to the Symantec Corporation for $70 million.


Restoration of Coves In Connecticut
I was very disappointed in your publication of the article regarding Connecticut's Coves and Embayments Program (Feb. 21).
Not only was the article factually inaccurate, it did a disservice to a very successful decade-long effort -- and to the people who volunteer their time as advisory board members to make the program work.
Such a negative and unfactual perspective could seriously affect local participation in the program.
It is informative to note that the article used only two examples out of three dozen projects that have been initiated in 16 different towns, from Fairfield County to New London County.
Funding for all projects is recommended by a diverse and independent advisory board that, as one of the article's examples clearly shows, can and does override staff recommendations.
To suggest that such decisions are controllable by a single individual who does not vote or that the board is following a single individual's political grand design is not only insulting to the members of the board, it is simply absurd.


California Couture
Celebrating Richard Tyler's New York fashion show, at Mortimer's, April 6.


Chilling Out With the Stocking-Cap Crowd
In pop music, the route to spiritual epiphany is usually accidental.
It might occur during the second encore at a Springsteen concert or nearing 4 A.M. on a downtown dance floor; at these moments, transcendence comes with an air of spontaneity, no matter how carefully orchestrated the circumstances.
To actively seek some sort of nirvana (remember when it used to be a state of consciousness, not a band?) seems silly to the ranks of skeptics and hedonists that make up pop's hippest ranks.
Enlightenment is iffy business, at least it was until raves brought young scene makers into a brand-new age.
Tipping its stocking cap to psychedelia, the English-borne dance movement known as rave encourages a belief in the possibilities of mind expansion through electronic beats and synthesized hallucinogens.
On the dance floor, the quest resembles the dervish's twirl into frenzy.
But even the most energetic ravers sometimes need a break and seek a space where their mental journeys can follow a less physically demanding path.
This need has resulted in the establishment of chill-out rooms in clubs as well as the closest thing in years to a fashionable form of meditative music -- ambient house.


Drop the Mop, Bless the Mess: The Decline of Housekeeping
Dust bunnies under the couch.
Cobwebs in the corners.
A grimy shellac over the contents of kitchen cupboards.
In a culture where cleanliness has long been equated with godliness, these telltale signs should be anathema.
But rather than repenting with a vigorous spring cleaning, many Americans are changing creeds.
"I'll never be the housekeeper my mother is, and I've made peace with that," said Kristen Jaeger, whose family owns a winery in Napa Valley, Calif.
"Of course, my mother isn't the housekeeper her mother was. My grandmother used to take Lysol to hotel rooms and clean before she unpacked."


Moves by Serbs Raise Fears They Plan an All-Out Drive
Serbian forces pressed closer to Srebrenica today and intensified assaults on the capital, deepening concern among United Nations officials that the Serbs may think they can resume all-out "ethnic cleansing" without fear of serious international reprisals.
Other officials familiar with Western intelligence reports said they feared that Serbian nationalists might be planning a tank offensive to seize parts of Sarajevo.


Fear and Ghosts: The World of Marcus, 19
Dusk had just slipped into darkness on a recent night when a man parking his car was shot during a robbery and left bleeding in a vacant lot.
Minutes later, flashing blue police lights drew a crowd, and among the onlookers was Marcus Tramble, a lanky 19-year-old who lives just down the street.


Corrections
An article on March 28 about the Virginia Robinson Gardens in Beverly Hills reversed the middle name and surname of the woman who bequeathed the estate to Los Angeles County in 1974.
She was Virginia Dryden Robinson.


N.H.L. Is About to Showcase Lemieux and the Prime-Time Penguins
In setting a National Hockey League record of 16 consecutive victories, the Pittsburgh Penguins casually humiliated the Rangers on Friday night without even trying to rub it in.
For example: Two goals in Pittsburgh's 10-4 victory were set up by perfect passes of about 85 feet, almost half the playing surface.
These passes were made by the Pittsburgh
goalie,
Tom Barrasso, who is paid to prevent goals, not to create them.


BIG BROTHER'S HERE
I agree with Floyd Abrams that "even a necessary search or surveillance diminishes us by diminishing our freedom." Even my pharmacy is trying to "protect" me by requesting a list of previous medical conditions, which, it assures me, will be made available only to its numerous employees.
It further refuses to honor bona fide prescriptions on other than its own schedule.
Orders placed too close together are not filled.


Clinton's Jobs Plan Rallies the Republicans
THE tug of war between President Clinton and Senate Republicans over Mr.
Clinton's proposed $19.5 billion economic stimulus package is about many things besides the pork barrels, loopholes and swimming pools supposedly in the package itself.
It is about political body-building by Republicans getting ready for 1994.
It is about the ambivalent mood of the country on the big economic issues and, as with almost everything in American politics today, it is about Ross Perot and how to steal his voters.
In some ways, Mr.
Clinton has been a victim of his own success.
The outlines of the larger $1.52 trillion budget package he announced last week -- consisting of long-term tax increases, new spending programs and defense cuts -- have breezed so easily through Congress so far that many Americans seemed to be ignoring the fight over the smaller job-stimulus plan, designed to give a shove to the current recovery.


Prairie Bayou Runs To Derby Pack's Lead
The confusion shrouding the road to the Kentucky Derby was finally pierced today when the Loblolly Stable's Prairie Bayou won the Blue Grass Stakes by two lengths over a field of star 3-year-old colts, just two weeks after establishing his candidacy by winning the Jim Beam Stakes.
It was the fourth stakes victory in a row for Prairie Bayou, the second major one in a row, and it thrust him into the lead among the contenders crowding the route to Louisville, where the 119th Derby will be run three weeks from today.


Lawsuits Are Making the Police Gun-Shy
OFFICER Bruce Mehling and his partner, Sgt.
William Cullen, of the Fort Lee Police Department, were making an arrest at a local motel last year when they were confronted by a woman who had a .44-caliber revolver tucked in the waistband of her pants.
Holding her right hand on the butt of the gun and pulling her jacket over it with her left hand, the woman walked defiantly toward the officers.
"We were yelling for her to take her hands out of her jacket, but she just kept walking toward us," Officer Mehling said.


Police Investigate Fire Death of Unattended Child
Detectives yesterday were investigating the circumstances surrounding the death of a 3-year-old girl who died in a fire after her parents had left her alone with several other children in their apartment, the police said.
The fire killed Althea Floyd, who the police said had been left in the second-floor apartment Friday afternoon by her parents, Melvin Floyd and Cynthia Hollins, with three other children, 6, 13 and 15 years old.
The parents told the police that they had each gone out believing that the other was still in the apartment at 1391 Sterling Place in Crown Heights.


The Principles of Creating Arches
CREATING an arch by opening a nonload-bearing wall or converting a wide doorway can add a striking design feature to a home.
The job should not be too difficult for an amateur with moderate carpentry and drywall experience.
Before starting, be sure to understand the principles in case alterations are required.
Also be sure that quarter-inch-thick drywall and plastic archway corner bead are obtainable.


The Paris of Phantoms
ATGET'S SEVEN ALBUMS
By Molly Nesbit. Illustrated. 428 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press. $55.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; A New Wing For Ill Children
THE country's first Ronald McDonald House, which provides lodging for ill children and their families, is adding a wing that will double its capacity.
Groundbreaking for the $4 million, 24-bed addition is set for this summer, with completion expected in time for its 20th anniversary in 1994.
A parking lot next to the Victorian mansion on Chestnut Street between 39th and 40th Streets in West Philadelphia became available in February as a result of an agreement with the owner, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.


BACKTALK: Readers Speak Out on States of College Basketball; At Cincinnati, Faculty Protests
To the Sports Editor:
It is easy to disagree with Terry Nelson ("For One, a Laugh and an Ax to Grind," The Times, March 26) of the University of Cincinnati Bearcats basketball team.
After all, an education on an athletic scholarship is what he is supposed to be getting out of the deal.
"Supposed" is the key word here, however, because it is no secret that collegiate athletics has turned into little more than the free farm system for the professional leagues while the universities are picking up the tab.


A Health-Care War That's a Waste
To the Editor:
Regarding "The Dangers of Declaring War on Doctors" (March 21), if health-care providers zig when consumers and payers zag, no one who has followed the history of reform efforts should be surprised.
Your article contends that some notorious "zigs" -- upcoding and unbundling -- "are apparently so acceptable to the medical community that software makers sell programs to help physicians and hospitals maximize Medicare billing."


Once Again The Clowning Gets Physical
In "Benny and Joon," Johnny Depp spins hubcaps, juggles dinner plates and gets a balloon to sing.
Sam, his character, is an illiterate misfit who idolizes Buster Keaton and falls in love with Joon (Mary Stuart Masterson), a diagnosed schizophrenic.
Sam is, in fact, a quirky amalgam of Keaton, Charlie Chaplin and Jacques Tati; with his wordless acrobatic and eccentric persona, he is also the latest incarnation of the classic clown to emerge from Hollywood.
Last year, Robert Downey Jr., as Chaplin, recreated some of the Little Tramp's early vaudeville and film sketches.
The so-called new vaudevillians Bill Irwin and David Shiner are currently appearing in "Fool Moon," a silent clown duet on Broadway.
And Tom Courtenay plays a French mime during World War II in the film "The Last Butterfly," due in June.


A la Carte; Back to Basics
THE North Street Grill in Great Neck, has a lot going for it: good, often exciting regional American food; Brendan Walsh, probably Long Island's best-known chef; interesting and unusual wines, a striking California-Southwest ambiance and the experience gained by its owners at Paddy McGee's Seafood House and the Coyote Grill, both in Island Park.
Additionally, the people who run the restaurant keep it vital with wine tastings, brunches, fixed-price meals and live jazz.


Harassment to One, Opportunity to Another?
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Wink Here, a Leer There: It's Costly" (Viewpoints, March 28), candid cost analysis shows that companies that tolerate sexual harassment sacrifice profits.
Awareness training can hold down future costs, but managers who hold the line on current behavior should see immediate benefits, not only in their division's productivity but also in their own career potential.
From a personal as well as a corporate perspective, repudiating sexual harassment is indeed "an opportunity we can't afford to miss." DEMI M. RASMUSSEN  Dallas, March 19


The Principles of Creating Arches
CREATING an arch by opening a nonload-bearing wall or converting a wide doorway can add a striking design feature to a home.
The job should not be too difficult for an amateur with moderate carpentry and drywall experience.
Before starting, be sure to understand the principles in case alterations are required.
Also be sure that quarter-inch-thick drywall and plastic archway corner bead are obtainable.


Corrections
An article on page 11 of the Arts and Leisure section today about postponed movies misidentifies the producers of "Mad Dog and Glory." They are Martin Scorsese and Barbara De Fina.
Steve Jones is co-producer.


Anne L. Lusk, James Brady 3d
Mrs.
Dwight A. Hemion of Middleburg, Va., and Peter A. Lusk of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Louise Lusk to James Cox Brady 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brady Jr. of Far Hills, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Lusk graduated magna cum laude from Manhattan College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in physical therapy from the Brooklyn Center of Long Island University.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Catherine Lusk of New York and Mr.
Hemion of Middleburg.


Stop Tinkering With Cows and Milk
To the Editor:
Everyone seems to agree there is an oversupply of milk in this country, but Monsanto and other chemical companies have come up with a genetically altered hormone to inject into dairy cows to make them produce substantially more milk.


Albany Looks for Way to Break Pattern on Budget
How can you force New York lawmakers to pass the state budget by the April 1 legal deadline?
The pure shame of consistent tardiness has had little effect, clearly: the budget was late this year for the eighth time in a row, this time by five days.
No one has yet suggested making the lawmakers stand in the corner or sending them to bed without supper, but various alternatives are kicking around the Capitol, including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's bill proposing to withhold pay from himself, Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine and every legislator as long as the budget is late. (The plan is none too popular. "Don't tell me I don't get paid for my work!" shouted Assemblyman Anthony S. Seminerio of Queens last year, when the Governor broached the idea in his State of the State address).


RUSSIANS TO LIMIT MONETARY GROWTH
Under pressure from Western governments and the International Monetary Fund, which are stepping up their aid, the Russian central bank has agreed with the Russian Government to limit its granting of low- or no-cost loans that inflate the country's money supply.
Though technical and possibly temporary, covering only the second quarter of 1993, the agreement is very important.
The unrestrained issuing of these credits by the central bank has driven Russian inflation to dangerous levels, devalued the ruble and undermined the economic reforms of President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Used and Abused, But What A Deal
The mud, sweat and tears of baseball are right here in these "game-worn" New York Yankees caps.
They've been used by players within the last two years and autographed in black marker underneath the bill.
Headgear this authentic is limited in quantity.
"We get what we get," said Hernan Tudela, the manager of the New York Yankees Clubhouse Shop on East 59th Street.
Last week, that included caps of the pitchers John Habyan and Rich Monteleone ($75) and the former shortstop Alvaro Espinoza ($50).


Gardeners, (Before You) Start Your Engines
THE lawn ritual has begun.
Though it is too early to get out the mower, this is the time to make sure that all the tools are in good working order.
If the mower blades need sharpening or the motor needs an overhaul, it is time to get in line at the repair shop.
If the rakes look worn and in need of fixing, this may be the year to splurge for some new ones.
How about edgers, clippers and all those other tools that keep the lawn in good condition all spring and summer?


Putting the Poor in Uniform
WORKING-CLASS WAR
American Combat Soldiers and Vietnam.
By Christian G. Appy. 365 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $14.95.
RED THUNDER, TROPIC LIGHTNING
The World of a Combat Division in Vietnam.
By Eric M. Bergerud.
Illustrated. 328 pp.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. $24.95.


South Beach Reveries
To the Editor:
"Why Won't South Beach Go Away?"  [ March 21 ]  brings back memories of when I stayed at the Park Central Hotel in 1947 and paid $12.50 per night.
I was there for one week and also took the mandatory flight (my first plane ride) for a weekend in Havana, a side trip that was very popular at the time.


Variations on a Favorite Theme: Pancakes for Breakfast
ON weekends, my 4-year-old son and I always have breakfast in bed.
Our favorite dish is pancakes.
To cut down on fat, I use buttermilk or skim milk in the batter and serve the pancakes with fresh fruit instead of bacon.
To make the pancakes even more nutritious, I sometimes add a tablespoon of wheat germ.
Thin pancakes, folded over like a crepe, are my son's favorite.
They are made with a basic pancake batter that is more liquid than usual and are cooked in a small nonstick frying pan.
The pancakes are folded over (sometimes filled with chopped fresh fruit) and are sprinkled with powdered sugar.
He also likes thicker buttermilk pancakes, which I cook in a greased cast-iron frying pan.


Taking on Iran and Iraq, but Separately
THE way the Clinton Administration sees it, if Iran's President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, were to take off his turban and his clerical robe, put on a uniform and grow a fuller, darker mustache, he might look a lot like Iraq's President, Saddam Hussein.
It is not that the new Administration cannot recognize the difference between the two leaders or the two countries.
Mr.
Hussein, a secular, totalitarian Arab leader, came to power by force and continues to rely on force to achieve his goals.
Mr.
Rafsanjani, an Islamic clergyman whose family runs the largest pistachio empire in Iran, was popularly elected -- albeit in a less than pristinely democratic contest -- and is running for re-election next month.
Iraq runs on its terror; Iran runs despite its increasing anarchy.


Warehouse Fire Looses Toxic Chlorine Gas
A fire at a warehouse containing swimming pool chemicals burned for more than five hours this afternoon, sending one million pounds of chlorine into the air, shutting down several highways and disrupting commuter train service, authorities said.
No injuries were reported.
But workers near the Alden-Leeds Warehouse on Jacobus Avenue, in the town's industrial section, were asked to leave the area and Kearny's 35,000 residents were told to remain in their homes to avoid chlorine fumes, said Deputy Fire Chief Leo Balatsos.


Wall Street; A Tempting Little I.P.O. Called 3DO
FOR an enterprise with no revenues, not much time left to finish developing its only product and a heavy reliance on the efforts of others to succeed, the 3DO Company has a lot of fans on Wall Street.
The San Mateo, Calif., company, which has lost $13.2 million since it was established in September 1991, is developing a compact disk player that it intends to have on store shelves in time for Christmas.
It can be attached to a television and stereo to play both audio CD's and CD-based computer games.
It also displays color photos stored on Kodak Photo CD disks.
The company says it will bridge the gap between children's video games and adults' home computers.


Natural Medicines From the Garden
I AM beginning to add more medicinal herbs to my garden, for a number of reasons.
For one thing, it puts me in touch with history and with all those midwives and folk healers who practiced through the centuries.
The English, for instance, called mullein (Verbascum thapsus) the candlewick plant because its downy leaves and stems ignite so easily.
Some people called it hag's taper, because witches supposedly used it as a wick for candles.
It was also called hedge taper because the bushy plants, with their pale gray-green leaves, grow five-foot stalks covered with flowers.
A wall of them looks like pale yellow candelabra.


POSTINGS: South of 65th Street; User-Friendly City Map
In "Don Quixote," Cervantes wrote of journeying "over all the universe in a map, without the expense and fatigue of traveling, without suffering the inconveniences of heat, cold, hunger and thirst." Well, welcome to the New York Identity Map, a multicolored, double-sided, highly detailed 36- by 48-inch visit, minus traffic and pedestrian gridlock, to all of Manhattan south of 65th Street.
The map, on deliciously thick, superb-quality paper, identifies major buildings by name and provides a color-coded legend for easy identification of their purpose: gray for residential, yellow for hotel, blue for office, and so on.
There are also user-friendly symbols to identify public-use sites: a bust of a police officer for a police station, the scales of justice for a law court, a movie camera for a cinema, to name but a few.


Tech Notes; Sign on the Dotted Screen
THE Internal Revenue Service's program encouraging taxpayers to file returns electronically has been by most accounts a success.
There were 4.2 million electronic returns in 1990, the first year the program was available nationally, and the I.R.S. expects 10 percent of this year's returns -- 15 million -- will be filed electronically.
There is just one catch: taxpayers must still sign a form and mail it in.
"That means paper, and we're trying to get away from paper," said Henry Holmes, an I.R.S. spokesman.
So the service is exploring how returns can be signed electronically.


It's a Historic Victory Or a Forgettable Loss
When the Islanders played badly against a bad team tonight, the result wasn't very good, but it was historic.
They lost by 5-3, and not just to any old bad team.
They lost to the expansion Ottawa Senators, who hadn't won or tied this season on the road, setting a National Hockey League record for futility.
The Senators also hadn't won in their previous 14 games of any kind, anywhere.
They were outskated by the Islanders and outshot by a margin of 45-19.
But they played a tougher game and prevailed, thanks in large part to a hat trick by Laurie Boschman, the goaltending of Peter Sidorkiewicz and too many turnovers in the Islander zone.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to Gay Talese's penetrating essay "Where Are the Italian-American Novelists?" (March 14).
Some years ago I asked myself the same question and wrote to Prof.
Giuseppe Prezzolini, who was for many years a distinguished scholar in Italy and America.
His answer was brief: there is an absence of Italian-American novelists and an Italian-American genre because there is an absence of a public for whom to write.
He was not far off the mark.


Traffic Alert
Because of Passover and Orthodox Holy Thursday and Good Friday, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended this week.


Mediators Reach Settlement on Aristide's Return
Four months after they began an effort to resolve Haiti's political crisis, United Nations mediators say they will propose a settlement next week aimed at restoring the country's deposed President within 60 days.
Diplomats said the settlement, reached after intensive international pressure and repeated shuttling between Washington and Port-au-Prince by United Nations mediators, calls for Jean-Bertrand Aristide's quick return as President after 18 months in exile, the removal of opponents in the army who helped overthrow him and the start of a vast aid program to rebuild the country.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Gay Talese gives some incisive historical background for the ethos that diverts the artistically inclined toward the visual rather than the literary arts.
I would like to suggest one more factor -- the church.


BENEFITS
A Cappella for the Arts
TUESDAY -- The 8 P.M. performance of "The Song of Jacob Zulu" at the Plymouth Theater will benefit the national traveling exhibitions program of the American Federation of Arts.
The drama, which features the a cappella singing of Ladysmith Black Mambazo, will be preceded by cocktails and dinner beginning at 6 P.M. at the "21" Club, 21 West 52d Street.
Transportation to the theater will be provided.
Tickets, $300, or for the performance alone, $175, from (212) 988-7700.
For Pinball Wizards
WEDNESDAY -- The SoHo Repertory Theater celebrates its 18th season with a benefit preview performance of the rock musical "Tommy" at the St.
James Theater, to be followed by a late supper with the cast at B. Smith's Restaurant, 771 Eighth Avenue (47th Street).
Tickets, $180, from (212) 977-5955.
For Women's Health
WEDNESDAY -- The National Osteoporosis Foundation is sponsoring its first awards gala at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Dr.
Bernadine Healy, the director of the National Institutes of Health, will be one of four people honored for their advocacy of women's health issues.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner and dancing at the Starlight Roof.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 735-0724.
N.F.L.
Stars at the Plaza
WEDNESDAY -- Forty current and former stars of the National Football League will gather at the Plaza Hotel to raise funds for the inner-city programs of the Greater New York Councils of the Boy Scouts of America.
John Bello, the president of N.F.L.
Properties, is to be honored.
A 7 P.M. cocktail reception will precede dinner and a silent auction of sports memorabilia.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 242-1100, ext. 226.
Preventing Child Abuse
WEDNESDAY -- Family Dynamics Inc., a nonprofit child-abuse-prevention agency in New York, will be the beneficiary at the 8 P.M. performance of "Ain't Broadway Grand" at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater.
The musical is to be preceded by a 5:30 P.M.  buffet at Laura Belle, 120 West 43d Street.
Tickets, $185, from (212) 255-8484 or at the door.
A Dickensian Musical
THURSDAY -- The National Youth Music Theater of Great Britain will perform "The Ragged Child," a musical set in Dickensian London, at the Triplex Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street (West Street).
The program will benefit the Kids Arts performance series.
A 6:15 P.M. cocktail reception at the theater with Prince Edward, the president of the Youth Music Theater, will precede the performance.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 346-8510 or at the door.
Before the Millennium
THURSDAY -- A benefit for the New York Theater Workshop, founded in 1979, will feature a preview performance of "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches." The 8 P.M. performance at the Walter Kerr Theater will be followed by a late supper at the Broadway Museum Cafe of the Embassy Suites Hotel, 47th Street and Seventh Avenue.
Tickets, $225, from (212) 302-7737.
Leatherneck Ball
FRIDAY -- The 31st annual Marine Corps Leatherneck Scholarship Ball and awards dinner at the Imperial Ballroom of the Sheraton New York will benefit the Corps scholarship foundation.
Gary B. Bettman, the National Hockey League commissioner and a former Marine, will be among those honored.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by a grand march and dinner.
Black tie or military uniform.
Tickets, $500, from Robert Mangieri at (212) 371-9155.
A Party for WBGO
FRIDAY -- A big-band swing party will benefit the jazz programs on public radio station WBGO-FM.
The event, from 7:30 P.M. to midnight at the Continental Club, 17 Irving Place (15th Street), will feature the George Gee Orchestra.
Tickets, $20, from (201) 643-4300 or at the door.
The 223d Dinner Dance
FRIDAY -- The 223d St.
George's Day Dinner Dance will take place at the St.
Regis Roof.
The event is to benefit the St.
George's Society of New York, which provides social services to British and Commonwealth citizens in the New York metropolitan area.
Cocktails at 6:45 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Black or white tie.
Tickets, $165, from (212) 924-1434.  'Gourmet Gents' Buffet
SATURDAY -- The Children's Art Carnival, a nonprofit arts education program in New York City public schools, is sponsoring its 14th annual Gourmet Gents buffet from 5 to 9 P.M. at Riverside Church, Riverside Drive at 120th Street.
More than 200 men of various professions will serve up their favorite dishes.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 234-4093 or $50 at the door.
Children under 12, $20.
Jazz Ahead at BAM
SATURDAY -- Betty Carter, the jazz vocalist, and her trio will perform with young jazz musicians at a fund-raiser for Jazz Ahead, the nonprofit program she founded to support young jazz artists.
The 8 P.M. performance at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street (Rockwell Place), will be followed by a buffet supper at the Lepercq Space at BAM, 30 Lafayette Avenue (Ashland Place).
Tickets, $100, from (718) 636-4181 or $10 for the performance only.
The Opera Ball at the Met
SATURDAY -- The Metropolitan Opera Club will present its 33d annual ball at the Metropolitan Opera House, a benefit for the opera's activities.
Placido Domingo will conduct "La Traviata" at 8 P.M., followed by dinner and a formal ball at 11 P.M. on the grand tier, where the Emery Davis Orchestra will play.
There will also be chamber music in the Belmont Room and the Richie Iacona's Disco Band in the Opera Club room.
White tie.
Tickets, $650, for the performance, dinner and dancing, or $550 for dinner and dancing alone, from (212) 496-1516.
John Harms Center Ball
SATURDAY -- The ninth annual Griffin Ball will benefit the programs of the John Harms Center for the Performing Arts in Englewood, N.J.
A 7 P.M. cocktail reception at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton, 200 Tice Boulevard near Chestnut Ridge Road, will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, from (201) 567-5797.
Celebrity Street Fair
APRIL 18 -- Kids for Kids is sponsoring a celebrity street fair for children, from 3 to 6 P.M. at the Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street (Jane Street).
Carnival games like a dunk tank and a wheel of fortune will be staffed by celebrities, including Michael Bolton, Dustin Hoffman, Cindy Crawford and Joan Rivers.
Sports activities are to be led by Muhammed Ali, Patrick Ewing and others.
Lunch will be served, and a performance by Patti Labelle will end the afternoon, a benefit for the Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
Individual tickets, $500, or family tickets, $1,000 for four people, from (212) 545-2690.
Vacations From Citymeals
APRIL 18 -- What is being billed as a fitness feast will benefit Citymeals-on-Wheels, which assists the homebound elderly in New York City.
Six chefs from resorts will prepare spa cuisine for the event, which will begin at 6:30 P.M. at Tavern on the Green.
Admission will include a raffle ticket for one of 25 vacations.
Black tie.
Tickets, $600, from (212) 687-1234.
Orchestra Outreach
APRIL 18 -- Andre Previn will conduct the Orchestra of St.
Luke's at Avery Fisher Hall at a benefit for the orchestra's community outreach programs.
The 8 P.M. performance will be preceded at 5:30 P.M. by a cocktail reception and dinner on the promenade, and a dessert and champagne reception with the musicians will be held after the concert.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, or $125 for the concert and dessert alone, from (212) 840-7470.


Public &amp; Private; The Good Guys
Before another television talk show hands out money to chat with the members of the Spur Posse, the lowlife band of high school jocks who measured their own self-worth in terms of how many meaningless sexual encounters they'd had, the people who produce and host the shows should acknowledge something about their guests.
And that is that as surely as if they were paying white supremacists to come on and spew garbage about black people, they are enriching those who happily represent the worst and most distorted view of an entire class of human beings.
And I don't mean women, although the teen-aged members of this sexual street gang treated girls like garbage while they were passing them around and trashing them afterwards.


In Paris, a Blockbuster to End All Others
"The Century of Titian: The Golden Age of Venetian Painting," here at the Grand Palais, is the quintessential blockbuster.
At once glittering and provocative, it is a genuine landmark event, bringing together some 300 of the premier paintings and drawings by Venetian masters of the 16th century and by artists outside Venice who came under their spell.
The story of Venice's rise to artistic prominence during the 1500's has often been told, but it cannot be told too often.
For the achievements of Titian, especially, marked a watershed in the history of painting.
The show is aptly named: until he was done in by the plague in 1576, at about the age of 90, Titian had a dominating place in the artistic landscape of the 16th century not unlike the one Matisse has occupied in ours.
Titian's masterly effects of light, the richly textured surfaces of his late works, his noble and psychologically penetrating portrait style, and his ability to evoke, in the same painting, both intimacy and grandeur, set the pace for countless artists for the next several hundred years.
All across Europe and well into the 1800's, from Rubens and Velazquez through Delacroix and Turner, painters felt compelled to respond to the art of Titian and to the accomplishments of other masters of the 16th century that are on view here.


Viewpoints; Form 1040? What's a Form 1040?
BILL CLINTON has proposed one of the most sweeping tax-reform programs in a decade, but most Americans don't really understand what he is talking about.
This will become even clearer when taxpayers face up to the annual rite of filing returns for 1994, the first year that would be affected by any Clinton overhaul.
If his efforts to rally the nation behind his tax program are to succeed, the President must recognize that the country is suffering from a massive case of tax illiteracy that goes beyond the inherent complexity of the system and cuts across every economic and educational stratum.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Gay Talese has really hit the nail on the head, and I am very grateful for his well-researched essay.


Getting Information, or Not, From a Tourist Office
WHEN you write to a tourist office for information, how soon can you expect a reply?
This column's periodic survey of travel bureaus in the United States and the Canadian provinces shows that while some states have picked up speed since the last such test in 1991, the most likely turnaround time is still a month.
However, if your intended destination is Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Nevada, Washington State or Quebec, nothing may help: Of the 63 places queried in February -- 50 states, the District of Columbia and 12 Canadian provinces -- these 10 did not respond at all in six weeks.
New York State did not send any information either, but did send a postcard saying the literature was exhausted and a new request should be sent in April.


Data Update
*4*NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Feb. 93
Feb. 92
Change
Starts
1,208
1,285
- 6.0%
Completions
1,264
1,110
+13.9%
Sales
595
628
- 5.3%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.74
7.73
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.86
4.91
6.33
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.58
7.58
8.97
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.66
4.73
6.11
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.61
7.58
9.07
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.49
4.52
6.14
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.86
7.86
9.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.43
5.47
6.65
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.32
3.30
4.50
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.28
7.28
8.15
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


The Digital-Cellular-Video Revolution Is Running Late
IN Silicon Valley, Hollywood and on Wall Street, it is fashionable these days to assume that telephones, television and computers will eventually converge into one intelligent, wireless carry-anywhere device.
Such devices, presumably, would be snapped up by executives who want laptop computers that can dial a call from the back of a cab and hold a face-to-face video conference with the New York and Los Angeles offices. (It's conceded, at least for now, that home customers who want to answer their ringing TV set or watch "Lawrence of Arabia" on their wristwatches are as rare as home-appliance buffs who'd buy Cuisinarts that make toast.)


2 Mets Shout At Reporter
Two Mets players, apparently angry over the publication of a book they believe is critical of them and the organization, engaged in a shouting match with one of the book's authors yesterday at Shea Stadium.
One of the players, outfielder Bobby Bonilla, had to be restrained by a team official after threatening Bob Klapisch of The Daily News, whose book "The Worst Team Money Could Buy" was written with John Harper, now also of The Daily News.
Last season, Klapisch was the regular Mets reporter for The News and Harper covered the team for The Post.


Who Named Papp's Successor?
To the Editor:
Concomitant with the rhetoric of Frank Rich's criticisms of JoAnne Akalaitis as artistic director of the Public Theater  [ "Opening a Window at a Theater Gone Stale," March 21 ]  is the offer of eternal life he makes to Joseph Papp.
He paints a portrait of Papp the Great Decision Maker.


Catherine Collins, Mark D. Curnin
Mr. and Mrs.
John Brassil Collins of North Dighton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Margaret Collins to Mark Daniel Curnin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Francis Curnin of Larchmont, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Collins, 23, is an editor in the Prentice Hall division of Simon &amp; Schuster in Edgewood Cliffs, N.J.
She and Mr.
Curnin are graduates of Dartmouth College.


12 Countries, 340 Million Shoppers, One Planet
A CHEERFUL flower logo with an "E" for a pistil is about to become the symbol of one of the European Community's most ambitious efforts to curb pollution.
The "eco label," which will appear as a sort of green seal of approval throughout the 12 Community countries, will signal to some 340 million consumers that the product with the perky sticker will be less damaging to the environment than others.
Although the task of developing pan-European consumer guidelines is costly and complex, the governments have pressed ahead in response to a rise in public concern about the environment.
The plan is seen as a sign that the Community is willing to use market forces as well as the law to protect the environment.


Ms. Van Winkle, Mark W. Dulsky
Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Van Winkle of West Paterson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Debra Carrie Van Winkle to Mark William Dulsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Dulsky of Woodland Hills, Calif.
An August wedding is planned.


Imprints and Identities on a Super Scale
IN a long low building in Glen Cove, where the excitement of the day used to be whether to canter or trot, business history is made daily.
"We are part of the changing of corporate America," Lawrence F. Steiner said.
When corporate America changes, Mr. Steiner makes the signs for it.


What Are Smokers Supposed to Do?
Having smoked for 35 years, I felt compelled to respond to "Smoking Bans Casting a Wider Net"  [ March 14 ] .
I firmly believe in a person's right for not wanting to be exposed to secondhand smoke, but I also believe that the antismoking radicals have been allowed to carry things to an extreme.
My case in point is the workplace.
I worked for four and a half years in a large firm in Nassau County.
Prior to May 1, 1992, a room was made available on one of the three floors that the firm occupied for people who chose to smoke and didn't have an office.
The door was kept closed at all times, and no smoke emanated from the room.
But the antismokers continued to complain about the "smell." I wasn't aware that the "smell" of smoke was a "health hazard."


Pitching Duel Is Won By Batters
A lot of little things went wrong yesterday.
Dwight Gooden tried to sort them out, tried to get his body and his arm in perfect rhythm, but when something finally went right, it seemed that something else went wrong.
By the end of the day, Gooden was kind of befuddled by it all.
Five days after pitching a shutout on opening day, he pitched a stinker.


Making Changes In Shore Management
The March 7 Q &amp; A interview with Thomas Gagliano pointed out a major flaw in our system.
Here is a man espousing the antiquated concept of beach replenishment as an antidote to storm damage, who signs up others who apparently love the Jersey Shore and then works with our state government to get millions consigned annually to the promotion of his ideas.
The goal is to get even more money to waste and to promote even more shore development that will require still more money to maintain.
Mr.
Gagliano has apparently given some of his own time and money to his concept.
This is fine; he's allowed to throw away his money.
He also gathered a crowd known as the Jersey Shore Partnership who want to throw away their money.
That's fine; they're allowed to.


Sydney
Let's make one thing clear: Australia and Australians are not what you probably have been lead to think.
For reasons known only to themselves, the Aussies, or at least the people they hire to sing their praises, choose to promote the image of a boisterous, beer-swilling populace whose cultural icon is the barbecue.
There is, as they say, that element.
But Sydney is as far removed from it as it is from New York.
It is a sophisticated, modern city inhabited in the main by sophisticated, modern people.
Like them it can be elegant, intriguing, challenging.
And like them it can be staid, raunchy and bohemian.


Bender Heads West
BOB BENDER of Illinois State was hired Friday as the men's basketball at the University of Washington.
Bender, Illinois State's coach for four years, replaces LYNN NANCE, who resigned March 19.
Athletic director BARBARA HEDGES said Bender will be given a long-term contract, probably four years, at $110,000 a season.
Bender, 35, was an assistant under MIKE KRZYZEWSKI at Duke for six years before taking over at Illinois State.
In four years as coach of the Redbirds, his teams won two Missouri Valley Conference regular-season titles and made one National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament appearance. (AP)


Horseplay


It's You, Baby
Young people who dress to their own drumbeat were in full regalia at the off-Seventh Avenue fall shows of designers like Seth Shapiro, whose collection was presented at night on an alleylike street in SoHo (above the photo at right) and Manolo, who chose a dance hall on Irving Place.
From the two young men wearing bright green braids under their crocheted skullcaps (right) to the woman whose signature is inch-wide painted-black eyebrows (above), these free-spirited dressers are unfettered by uptown conformity, and their often exaggerated style of dress champions self-expression.
They provided a raw, youthful energy on the fringe of fashion week.


Observatory Is Renovated
The Old Royal Observatory at Greenwich has recently undergone a 15-month, $3 million transformation.
The observatory is the site of the prime meridian at longitude zero and the place where Greenwich mean time, the basis for standard time in most countries, is determined.
The renovation created 16 galleries devoted to mankind's attempts to map space and measure time.
Highlights include interactive displays that explain the longitude and latitude, time differences between countries and navigation by the stars; a new Time Gallery featuring sundials, clocks, watches and unusual timepieces from all over the world, and the beautifully restored Octagon Room.


Q and A
Airlines' Standby Policies
Q.
At what point does a standby passenger become a passenger with full rights?
After being admitted as a standby passenger on a recent Delta flight, I was asked to relinquish my seat when a regularly ticketed passenger arrived just as the door was about to close. -- Richard I. Aaron, Salt Lake City


Sabatini Finds Aid, Comfort And First Final of the Year
For a woman who believes herself to be on the rebound, the immediate picture was postcard perfect.
Bathed in sunshine and buffeted by a breeze that turned her topspin to a bludgeon, Gabriela Sabatini defeated Amanda Coetzer of South Africa, 6-3, 6-2, this afternoon to reach her fifth career Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships final.
"It must be something about here," Sabatini said of this quaint stadium site with its fringe of palms and pin oaks and constant ocean breeze, backdrop for her winning ways in 1989, 1991 and 1992.
"I didn't get to a final this year until now, but I feel ready to win here. I'm comfortable. And I think I need a win like this, to beat a top player."


Fabulous Fakes: From Elegant to Eccentric
The best costume jewelry in the 20th century has been inspired by art.
Symbolist nudes dominated Art Nouveau brooches.
Cubist geometrics emblazoned Art Deco bracelets.
Biomorphism reshaped earrings following World War II.
And tribal art, when gilded, spelled glamour in necklaces of the 1980's.
The wealth of new forms and decorative finishes to emerge after 1900 are documented in "Jewels of Fantasy: Costume Jewelry of the 20th Century," an exhibition at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan through May 8.
The first comprehensive survey of the subject, the show of 400 baubles encompasses the elegant and the ersatz, the innovative and the ingenious knockoff.


The 12-Step Coach
The coach was out of reasons to roam the sideline with trademark bursts of kinetic energy.
He was no longer waving his arms wildly while pitting his raspy North Carolina-accented commands against the roar of 23,000 fans.
Now, arms folded, eyes sunken, John Lucas was still for several seconds, absorbing a particularly galling defeat.
Finally, one of his assistant coaches put a comforting hand on his shoulder and nudged him in the direction of the locker room.
What a memorable night this might have been, a homecoming victory in Charlotte with Lucas's parents and relatives in from Durham, N.C., 135 miles northeast; with his injured All-Star forward, Sean Elliott, back in Texas; and with his All-World center, David Robinson, at a local hospital having his battered left hand placed in a splint.
A rare snowfall had come to Charlotte along with Lucas's family that late February afternoon, and after trailing the hometown Hornets by 19 points in the second half, the San Antonio Spurs had been close to a stunning comeback their coach could appreciate better than most.


An Edgy Los Angeles Awaits a Jury's Verdict
The City of Los Angeles has a bad case of frayed nerves.
Less than a decade since the city preened as a national exemplar of urban efficiency and racial harmony during the 1984 Olympics, the city must ponder now what has gone wrong -- and whether matters will get even worse when a jury renders a verdict, if it can.


Lee Esterling, Brian Stewart
Mr. and Mrs.
Grant D. Esterling of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Dalley Esterling to Brian James Stewart, the son of R. Earl Stewart of Sacramento, Calif., and Gloria Whalen of San Diego.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Esterling, who is known as Lee, is a substance-abuse counselor in San Diego.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, now retired, was the counsel in Washington for the International Business Machines Corporation.


Commercial Property: The Korean Equation; A Major New Presence in the Metropolitan Market
USUALLY, when brokers want to sell a building, they put together brochures that tout not only the building's attributes, but also its proximity to transportation, restaurants, theaters and the like.
When Darcy Stacom, senior director at Cushman &amp; Wakefield, got the job of selling 1270 Broadway, a 120,000-square-foot, 13-story building at 33d Street, her brochure featured a map of the Korean district that bordered the building to the south.


Shad Festivals, Hold the Shad
SOME clock the return of shad to the Hudson River by the yearly blooming of forsythia.
Others say the best and tastiest shad swim up the river when the dogwood trees burst into color along the shoreline.
Henry Gourdine, who has been a commercial fisherman for most of his 90 years, places little credence in either theory and waits instead for a southern breeze and moderating air temperatures.


A Seaside Detour in Morocco
COMING into Essaouira, after a straight, flat, dusty two-hour drive from Marrakesh, we were struck by the sudden change in the color scheme.
One of a string of cities that punctuate the Atlantic coast of Morocco from Rabat to Agadir, Essaouira gleams refreshingly white and brilliant blue, with only occasional accents of the sandy pink terra cotta that dominate the inland cities.
The air, buffed by a light sea breeze, is clean and gentle.
So is the city itself, making it one of Morocco's most enjoyable stops for the visitor who likes to stroll, to shop and to sample good food.
It is worth an easy day or two's detour from Marrakesh or a stopover on the route along the coast toward Agadir.


The World According to Elaine Stritch
Noel Coward once gave Elaine Stritch a piece of advice.
"He told me never to work with anybody unless they knew more than I did," she says.
"Well, that's great if you can swing it financially, but in this business, baby, you could starve to death."
Certainly not Miss Stritch.
At 67 (sorry, Elaine) she's attained a cult status that's been hard to find in the theater since the days of divas like Ethel Merman, whom Miss Stritch actually understudied in "Call Me Madam."


A Haitian Doctor Who Overcame the Odds in America
DR.
VALIERE ALCENA left the television studio where he had just finished taping a program about cardiology with Dr.
Judith C. Monteferrante, the president-elect of the Westchester chapter of the American Heart Association, and arrived in a driving rainstorm at his medical office on Davis Avenue here.
He turned on the waiting-room lights, illuminating a vivid art collection of landscapes and market scenes from his native Haiti and settled in for an undisturbed hour of reflection about his full and unusual life.


Editors' Note
The cover article in The Times Magazine today discusses the overseas adoptions of girls that result from Chinese families' preference for boys.
The cover headline says, "China's Market in Orphan Girls," and a subheading, in the table of contents and on page 24, says, "Unwanted and abandoned, baby girls have become the newest Chinese export."


John M. Morris, Who Developed a Birth-Control Pill, Dead at 78
Dr.
John McLean Morris, a leading gynecologic researcher who discovered the "morning after" birth-control pill and made important contributions to cancer treatment, died on Thursday at his home in Woodbridge, Conn.
He was 78.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Think Normandy, Instead
To the Editor:
Your article on South Beach started off with an incorrect historical metaphor.
The author referred to being the last to "wade ashore after the Great Media Invasion of South Beach. (Think Dunkirk with leather bustiers and sunblock.)" The parenthetical reference apparently was to the June 1940 rescue of over 300,000 British and other allied troops from the French port of Dunkirk under the guns of the German forces.
Rather than an invasion, the miraculous Dunkirk operation was a mass evacuation of troops to avoid their capture.
ROBERT C. BOEHM Miami


Variations on a Favorite Theme: Pancakes for Breakfast
ON weekends, my 4-year-old son and I always have breakfast in bed.
Our favorite dish is pancakes.
To cut down on fat, I use buttermilk or skim milk in the batter and serve the pancakes with fresh fruit instead of bacon.
To make the pancakes even more nutritious, I sometimes add a tablespoon of wheat germ.
Thin pancakes, folded over like a crepe, are my son's favorite.
They are made with a basic pancake batter that is more liquid than usual and are cooked in a small nonstick frying pan.
The pancakes are folded over (sometimes filled with chopped fresh fruit) and are sprinkled with powdered sugar.
He also likes thicker buttermilk pancakes, which I cook in a greased cast-iron frying pan.


China and North Korea: Not-So-Best of Friends
THE self-styled North Korean Great Leader, Kim Il Sung, sometimes describes China as his country's "large rear area."
Mr.
Kim does not mean any insult, and if he has a sense of humor he hides it better than his nuclear weapons program.
But it is true enough that China these days feels that it is being treated as North Korea's large rear area.


CULT LEADER GIVES 'LETTER FROM GOD'
David Koresh presented the Federal authorities with a four-page "letter from God" on Friday, citing biblical passages and threatening the forces that have surrounded his religious sect's compound near here for 43 days.
Federal Bureau of Investigation officials said the letter, written in the first person as if from God and bearing no salutation, was addressed to "Friends" and was signed "Yahweh Koresh."


Business Diary/April 4-9
THE ECONOMY Attaching Numbers to the Clinton Economic Vision


After Blast, New Interest in Holy-War Recruits in Brooklyn
They were two wars running in parallel, seemingly one.
In Washington, the Central Intelligence Agency spent $3 billion to arm the Afghan rebels in their battle against the Soviet-backed regime.
And in Brooklyn, content that they had both God and country on their side, a small circle of Islamic fundamentalist immigrants made a separate contribution, sending raw recruits to become foot soldiers in their own holy war in Afghanistan.
Now a year after the victorious rebel forces seized Kabul, the Afghan capital, the World Trade Center bombing has caused investigators to take a second look at the storefront office near downtown Brooklyn that quietly sent fighters to the far-off war.
For it was behind its doors that many of the people surrounding the bombing inquiry came together for the first time.


Fear of a Serbian Offensive
Serbian forces in Bosnia appear to have concluded that the risk of Western military intervention has faded, and United Nations officials are worried that they may soon renew a drive for "ethnic cleansing." Page 4.


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Travel Watch column on page 15 of the Travel section today omits an airline under the heading "Unrestricted Fare." The airline, Kiwi, matches the lowest fare, $198, available on the New York-Chicago route.


Gardeners, (Before You) Start Your Engines
THE lawn ritual has begun.
Though it is too early to get out the mower, this is the time to make sure that all the tools are in good working order.
If the mower blades need sharpening or the motor needs an overhaul, it is time to get in line at the repair shop.
If the rakes look worn and in need of fixing, this may be the year to splurge for some new ones.
How about edgers, clippers and all those other tools that keep the lawn in good condition all spring and summer?


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
SWORN ENEMIES
By Carol Matas 132 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $16. (Ages 12 and up)


No Matter the Color, the Cars Are Green
AMERICA'S oldest automobile show opened its doors for a nine-day run at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center on Manhattan's West Side yesterday, and all the usual hoopla and glitter of its 93-year history were there.
The Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders were on hand.
A marching band was there.
Officials of the sponsoring Greater New York Automobile Dealers Association cut a ribbon.


Harassment to One, Opportunity to Another?
To the Editor:
Your generally priggish column makes no allowance for one woman's sexual harassment not necessarily being another's.


Sports of the Times; Wayne's World Finer Than the 1962 Mets
ALL over apocalyptic America, the greatest sign of social breakdown has been the videocassette.
Instead of sharing a laugh or a cry at the local movie emporium, Americans slip furtively into a hole-in-the-wall in the mall, drop a few plastic cassettes into a sack, and scurry home to triple-lock the door and "entertain themselves," which sounds vaguely obscene to me.


Hysteria Barred a Fair Trial in Sex-Abuse Case; Relevance of Timing
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen contends (column, March 31) that the lesson of the Kelly Michaels case is that future trials need to be conducted "with an unusual degree of sophistication and caution." I disagree.
The real lesson is that a legal trial may not be the appropriate venue for protecting children from sexual abuse.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 11, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
63
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
52
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
4
38
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
4
WILDEST HEARTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A businesswoman proposes a marriage of convenience to a rich man.
6 *
3
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $6.99.) The tales of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their Jewish heritage.
7
5
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
8
16
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
9 *
2
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
10
2
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing helps others.
11
1
STARS, by Kathryn Harvey. (Avon, $5.99.) A tragic, scandalous past haunts a manipulative woman who runs an exclusive Palm Springs mountaintop resort.
12
12
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
13
2
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser and his old friend Hawk investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
14 *
6
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them.
15
28
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
2
492
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
3
78
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
4 *
8
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
5
99
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
6
13
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
7
4
DOUBLE CROSS, by Sam Giancana and Chuck Giancana. (Warner, $5.99.) Two relatives of the late Sam Giancana recall his life in the Mafia.
8 *
15
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
9 *
27
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
10
2
BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
129
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
112
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
87
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
1
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
12
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Hysteria Barred a Fair Trial in Sex-Abuse Case
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen takes a more balanced view of the Kelly Michaels case in "But Not Both" (column, March 31) than in "Believing the Children" (April 29, 1992).
In the earlier column, she appeared convinced of the validity of a child's claim that Ms.
Michaels, while working at the Wee Care Day Nursery in Maplewood, N.J., had placed kitchen utensils in the child's vagina, yet there was no medical evidence of such traumas.


Variations on a Favorite Theme: Pancakes for Breakfast
ON weekends, my 4-year-old son and I always have breakfast in bed.
Our favorite dish is pancakes.
To cut down on fat, I use buttermilk or skim milk in the batter and serve the pancakes with fresh fruit instead of bacon.
To make the pancakes even more nutritious, I sometimes add a tablespoon of wheat germ.
Thin pancakes, folded over like a crepe, are my son's favorite.
They are made with a basic pancake batter that is more liquid than usual and are cooked in a small nonstick frying pan.
The pancakes are folded over (sometimes filled with chopped fresh fruit) and are sprinkled with powdered sugar.
He also likes thicker buttermilk pancakes, which I cook in a greased cast-iron frying pan.


Gordon P. Ritter and Amy J. Metzler
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Metzler of Winnetka, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Jill Metzler to Gordon Phillips Ritter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Ritter of Kennebunk Beach, Me.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Metzler, 27, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a law clerk to Judge William B. Shubb of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California, in Sacramento.
Her father is president of Richard J. Metzler &amp; Associates, management consultants in Deerfield, Ill.
Her mother, Barbara J. Metzler, owns Barbara Metzler Interior Design in Winnetka.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport  $120,000
3 Harriett Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year- old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Bohemia  $145,000
15 Aron Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old high ranch; dining room, family room, den, inground pool; taxes $4,100.
Lake Grove  $102,000
8 Fulton Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,400.
Oakdale  $150,000
14 Hewlett Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Ronkonkoma  $96,000
5 Lakewood Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement; taxes $3,000.
Sayville  $157,000
8 Norgate Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split level; family room, office, screened porch, beach and boating rights; taxes $4,700.
OTHER AREAS Essex, Conn.  $120,000
45 Grandview Terrace  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 53-year-old ranch; fireplace, workshop, walk to village, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,208.
Ossining, N.Y.  $180,000
12 Piping Rock Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, full basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,086.
Hopatcong, N.J.  $93,500  22 Keith Road  2-bedrom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace, cathedral ceiling, skylights; taxes $2,161.


BACKTALK: Readers Speak Out on States of College Basketball; Tracing History Of Black Presence
To the Sports Editor:
William C. Rhoden's "Changing the Pictures on the Wall" (The Times, April 3) raises questions about the history of black basketball players.
He is "puzzled about the lack of black players" before 1950.
He then asks if blacks knew how to play.


Order in the Court: 'L.A. Law' Is Shaping Up
Previously on "L.A. Law": Battered during the Los Angeles riots, Stuart has become sexually impaired and his marriage to Ann is falling apart; Gwen is being stalked by an erotomaniac mad for her lover Daniel; Arnie has become a film producer and is planning to turn Douglas's autobiographical story about doing time into a television movie starring Erik Estrada; and the attractions at a nearby strip club include a topless string quartet.


A Painter Finds That Dolls Can Be Dynamite
It was not until a day or two ago that I first looked closely at the present state of the doll industry.
I owe this adventure to the 12 huge paintings of gift-wrapped dolls (each one is 60 inches square) that dominate the big first room in James Rosenquist's new exhibition at the Leo Castelli Gallery in SoHo.
They have, one and all, a grand hieratic presence, and one that is disconcerting beyond all expectation.
The doll is, of course, one of the most potent of all household objects.
In childhood, the idea of the doll that comes to life can be scary.
As for the doll that falls apart or is thrown away, it may well have given us our first intimation of the role of loss in human affairs.
In every house in which daughters have been raised, the doll has been there, as sample and surrogate and trial run. (Boy dolls are comparatively rare, by the way, though a fat little fellow called Spanky is now much in demand.)


'No,' He Says (But Why?)
When Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last month alternately described the Supreme Court as heaven and entombment, many in Albany thought: "There he goes again." Cuomo-watchers had seen such waffling before, about another Federal job.
Still, many of the Governor's closest friends, aides and relatives were sure he dearly coveted a seat on the Court.
In the future, they may pay closer attention when New York's Governor thinks out loud.
The only person previously mentioned by President Clinton as a potential nominee to the Court, Mr.
Cuomo said last week that he had asked to be removed from consideration.


BIG BROTHER'S HERE
Floyd Abrams is right about the role of Big Brother in our lives ("Big Brother's Here and -- Alas -- We Embrace Him," March 21).
In fact, Social Security numbers
have
served as Government-assigned identification numbers for quite some time to better allow the Federal Government to track its population of cash cows, i.e.
us
.


Love Letters


If Miniver Could Carry A Tune . . .
. . .
Miniver sighed for what was not, And dreamed, and rested from his labors; He dreamed of Thebes and Camelot, And Priam's neighbors . . . .
"Miniver Cheevy" by Edward Arlington Robinson


Off and Running in the Quest for the Eggs


David C. Dove Jr., Leigh Tiedemann
Leigh Cumming Tiedemann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Hans Tiedemann of East Hampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
David Clifford Dove Jr., the son of Dr.
Dove of New York and the late Pamela Despres Dove.
The Rev.
Alfred Shands 2d performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents in George Town, Exuma, the Bahamas.
Ms.
Tiedemann, 27, graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is the senior partner of the Tiedemann Investment Group in New York and a former president of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the investment banking company.


A Black Leader in South Africa Is Slain and a White Is Arrested
Chris Hani, the leader of the South African Communist Party and the most popular militant in the African National Congress, was shot and killed in the driveway of his home today, casting another anxious gloom over the country's transition to majority rule.
The police said they had arrested a 40-year-old white man, identified as Januzu Jakub Waluz, whose car license number was taken down by Mr.
Hani's neighbors as he fled the racially mixed neighborhood.
They declined to say if he was known to have any political affiliation.


President's Budget Plans Worry Some Scientists
President Clinton's $1.52 trillion budget package, sent to Congress on Thursday, recommended a modest 4.1 percent overall increase in Federal financing of American science.
Much of it was earmarked for programs that would stimulate technology and seek medical cures, however, and many scientists fear that the White House initiative will bleed off financial support for basic research.
Mr.
Clinton's budget has yet to pass through the Congressional gantlet, and Congress seems certain to introduce major revisions, but many scientists are already scrutinizing the President's request for indications of the new Administration's priorities.


Corrections
An article on March 28 about breweries in Wisconsin misstated the ranking of Pabst Brewing among the nation's producers of beer.
It is the sixth largest brewery in the United States, not the third.


Sardi Gradually Restores Restaurant's Luster
On July 1, 1990, Vincent Sardi Jr. looked at the roaches and leaking roof in the famous restaurant his family had owned and thought how far the place had tumbled.
Those who saw him remember his profound sadness.
"You blame yourself -- you can't blame anyone else," he said of what the late press agent Richard Maney called "the club, mess hall, lounge, post office, saloon and marketplace of those who make up the theater."


Noreen O'Connor And Ted Abel
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph C. O'Connor of Annandale, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Noreen O'Connor to Edwin George Abel 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abel Jr. of Wallingford, Pa.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
O'Connor, 28, is a manuscript editor at Yale University Press in New Haven.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in French literature from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was an administrative officer in the office of logistics at the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, Va.
Her mother, Beryl O'Connor, now retired, taught the third grade at the St.
Thomas More School in Arlington, Va.


He Gives Piano A Place in Rock
Is there a place in rock for the acoustic jazz piano?
That is a question few would even have thought to ask, except for the fact that Bruce Hornsby's fourth album, "Harbor Lights" (RCA RJC 66230; CD and cassette) integrates jazz piano into adult rock with an unexpected grace.
Compared to the guitar, the piano has always been a kind of stepchild of rock.
Although it has enjoyed a secure place in rock's instrumental arsenal since the days of Fats Domino and Jerry Lee Lewis, it has never entirely shed its highbrow aura.
And for reasons that have a lot to do with the music's macho rebel side, rock has yet to spawn a keyboard hero with the Dionysian mystique of Jimi Hendrix or the godlike one of Eric Clapton.
An unfortunate stereotype of the male pianist that persists is of a mama's boy who is too busy practicing his scales to go outdoors and play baseball.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
The belief on the part of publishers that Italians are incapable of writing serious literature is made quite clear by the illustration accompanying Gay Talese's essay.
The drawing shows a burly man at a table before a typewriter.
His hair is slicked back like that of a 1940's gangster, and on the table is a jug of wine and a glass filled to the brim.
I found the illustration offensive.
It's bad enough when stereotypes of Italians persist on television; it's reprehensible when they show up in The New York Times.
ALBERT DIBARTOLOMEO  Philadelphia


After the Fall
He tumbled into that narrow space like a shiny penny disappearing into his new ceramic piggy bank.
It was a slow-motion movie sequence, and I was powerless to stop it.
A quick glance up at me, devoid of all expression, and he vanished.
Our careful choreography had gone awry.
Parent instinctively trying to watch over child.
That grown-up caution that guides the movements of a little boy, not yet 4, had broken down.
Failed.
People always say, when it happens, it is sudden.
It was.
The train ride was to be a small reward for a large rash he was withstanding and learning to ignore.
More than I can say for his parents.
We had driven into the city to consult with the dreaded doctor.
That called for some token goodie, more than lunch at "Old McDonald's" could provide.
A train ride was as good as it got, at least as far as Ben was concerned.
So why not?


Dr. Milan Vuitch, 78, Fighter for Abortion Rights
Milan M. Vuitch, a doctor who brought one of the earliest legal challenges to restrictive abortion laws, died on Tuesday at Holy Cross Hospital here after suffering a stroke.
He was 78 and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
Dr.
Vuitch's open defiance of legal prohibitions on abortion made him an important figure in the early abortion rights movement during the decade before the Supreme Court's 1973 ruling in Roe v.
Wade, which gave women a constitutional right to choose abortion.


Focus; Seattle; Developers Turning to Farms and Forests
HOME builders are turning to virgin forests and farmland far from this city's job markets because closer sites are locked up in land-use disputes.
Longtime developers like William Conner are rethinking strategies and focusing on rural towns because, they say, the state's 1989 Growth Management Act requires cities to designate certain areas as rural, closing thousands of acres to development.


APRIL 4-10: Jackson Quits; The N.A.A.C.P. Gets A New Leader
It was a tortuous search, but in the end it took only one ballot for the board of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to select the Rev.
Benjamin R. Chavis as the new executive director.
It is unclear how lasting the wounds left by the search will be; the Rev.
Jesse R. Jackson Jr. pulled out of contention Wednesday, saying the N.A.A.C.P. was too staid.
On Friday, some board members returned fire, saying Mr.
Jackson was temperamentally unsuited to lead the group.
Mr.
Chavis, for his part, seemed to acknowledge criticisms by Mr.
Jackson and others when he talked about revitalizing the 89-year-old group and making it attractive again to young black Americans.


Sports of The Times; Defending Augusta's Dazzle
OVER more than half a century of Masters tournaments, the Augusta National course has sparkled as one of golf's precious jewels, an exquisite emerald discovered and cut by Bobby Jones and Alister Mackenzie.
But it's an emerald that has been constantly polished and buffed to dazzle the world's best golfers.
"This course," the golf architect Robert Trent Jones Jr. was saying, "has always been a work in progress."


APRIL 4-10: The Space Station; This Time the Russians Get Asked for Aid
The space shuttle Discovery got into orbit last week, ending six weeks of snags that had grounded the nation's winged spaceships.
Even as it did, the space agency in Washington said it was asking for Russian aid in trimming the costs of its planned space outpost for astronauts, its most expensive space project.
NASA said the United States and its partners in the station -- Europe, Japan and Canada -- were considering using Russian hardware, including the Mir space station.
A spokesman at Russia's Embassy applauded the announcement, but reaction in NASA was mixed.
Some officials favor autonomy, but others feel that in a time of frugality, a partnership with old rivals is the only way the space-station program can survive.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Regarding the apparent dearth of Italian-American novelists, I would suggest that interested readers investigate the work of John Fante, a product of Colorado's large Italian immigrant community, many of whom, like his father, were stonemasons and bricklayers.
He writes with great humor, insight and passion of growing up in that community.
RANDALL S. BELL Santa Fe, N.M.


Fire Chiefs Assail Rescue After Bombing
Soon after the explosion at the World Trade Center, police helicopters evacuated six people, including a pregnant woman, from the roof of one of the towers.
Officials at the time called the rescue courageous, but now a group of New York City fire chiefs is charging that it was reckless.
"This was nothing more than sheer grandstanding, a cheap publicity stunt done at the expense of public safety," the group, the Fire Chiefs Association, wrote in a letter to Mayor David N. Dinkins on March 25.


Technology; Automotive Lighting: Leaving the Dark Ages Behind
ANYONE who has driven down a dark street and found it difficult to see, even though the car's headlights are on, can take heart.
Over the next several years, an entirely new type of automotive lighting will become commonplace, one that promises to light up the roads of America like never before.
It's called high-intensity discharge, or HID lighting.


Hillary Clinton's Father Is Buried On a Hillside in His Hometown
Hugh E. Rodham was buried today after a service at the Methodist church where his daughter, Hillary Rodham Clinton, was baptized as a child.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Hale of the Court Street United Methodist Church led the private, hourlong service, and President Clinton spoke briefly.
After the service, the President and Mrs.
Clinton followed the hearse carrying Mr.
Rodham's coffin to the Washburn Street Cemetery, on the western slope in this valley town, where Mr.
Rodham bought a family plot in 1952.


Wall Street; Stocks Are High, Even in the Face of Inflation
IF one measure of an investment is its ability to keep up with inflation, then the stock market has been brilliant over the past decade.
The accompanying chart shows the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index, measured as a multiple of the consumer price index.
When share prices rise exactly as much as inflation, that figure stays even.
If inflation outstrips stock price gains, as happened in the late 1970's, the index plunges dramatically.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Real Estate section today with a report in the Postings column about a condominium building that has returned to the market misstates the address.
It is 3 Lincoln Center.


Gardeners, (Before You) Start Your Engines
THE lawn ritual has begun.
Though it is too early to get out the mower, this is the time to make sure that all the tools are in good working order.
If the mower blades need sharpening or the motor needs an overhaul, it is time to get in line at the repair shop.
If the rakes look worn and in need of fixing, this may be the year to splurge for some new ones.
How about edgers, clippers and all those other tools that keep the lawn in good condition all spring and summer?


Ice Cream Tristesse
To the Editor:
I'm despondent that Ben &amp; Jerry's Primal Ice-Cream Therapist, Peter Lind  [ top right ] , has not satisfied my craving for some maple fantasy ("The Ice-Cream Sorcerer," March 21).
In one of the greatest scandals of ice-creamdom, the company that exploits its Vermont image has no maple offering beyond the depressingly uninspired maple walnut.
The original B &amp; J's scoop shop in Burlington did produce a flavor called something like Honey Maple (it was euphoric).
But it was quickly withdrawn, subjecting me to a profound post-maple tristesse.
Imagine the trauma of a displaced Vermonter who must make do with the merely ambrosial White Russian and Fresh Georgia Peach!
RICHARD PARKER Lock Haven, Pa.


Variations on a Favorite Theme: Pancakes for Breakfast
ON weekends, my 4-year-old son and I always have breakfast in bed.
Our favorite dish is pancakes.
To cut down on fat, I use buttermilk or skim milk in the batter and serve the pancakes with fresh fruit instead of bacon.
To make the pancakes even more nutritious, I sometimes add a tablespoon of wheat germ.
Thin pancakes, folded over like a crepe, are my son's favorite.
They are made with a basic pancake batter that is more liquid than usual and are cooked in a small nonstick frying pan.
The pancakes are folded over (sometimes filled with chopped fresh fruit) and are sprinkled with powdered sugar.
He also likes thicker buttermilk pancakes, which I cook in a greased cast-iron frying pan.


Of Dinosaurs Why Must This One Thrive?
Help! he's fat, he's purple, he's goofier than Gomer Pyle, and he's eating our children!
Well, he's gnawing away at their imaginations, anyway.
Who is he?
For those who are not parents of toddlers, he is Barney, a stuffed animal (ostensibly a dinosaur) who comes to life, delighting his little chums and threatening the sanity of adults.
"Barney and Friends," broadcast daily on most PBS stations, is a half-hour show that deals with issues like rain, sun, friendship and going to the beach.
Barney, about six feet tall, with thunder thighs, chipmunk cheeks and overbright eyes, is all sweetness and fun.
He leaps around the stage and leads a group of multicultural suburban children in song and dance -- well, in song and movement.


A Potential Murder Spoofs the Mystery
THE fact that "A Sting in the Tale" is a comic satire of the mystery-thriller genre is completely lost in the current production at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale.
The play, by Brian Clemens and Dennis Spooner, takes on everything from "Dial M for Murder" to "Sleuth," with a dollop of Agatha Christie tossed in for spice.
To set up their series of droll commentaries on the subject of mysteries and mystery writers, Mr.
Clemens and Mr.
Spooner have devised a plot in which two writers of mystery plays are struggling to come up with a new twist for an old tale of murder and mayhem.


General's Recall Reported
The newspaper Le Monde reported today that France has decided to withdraw Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon as commander of the United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina and replace him with another senior French army officer.
General Morillon, who assumed the post in March last year, has been fiercely criticized by leaders of Serbian nationalists in Bosnia for his recent efforts to lift the siege of the eastern town of Srebrenica.
Many Bosnian Serbs charge that he has taken sides with Bosnia's Muslims in the conflict.


Data Bank/April 11, 1993


Marc Gross and Caroline Oolie
Mr. and Mrs.
Sam Oolie of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Tamar Oolie to Marc Jonathan Gross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Alan Gross of Boca Raton, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oolie, 24, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in occupational therapy at New York University.
Her father is the chairman of Oolie Enterprises, a venture-capital company in Fairfield, N.J.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Deep River, Conn.  $175,000
119 Meadowwoods Road  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 7-year-old contemporary; w/b stove, window seats, skylights, 3.5 acres; taxes $3,135.
Essex, Conn.  $120,000
45 Grandview Terrace  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 53-year-old ranch; fireplace, workshop, walk to village, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,208.
Old Saybrook, Conn.  $110,500
14 Old Boston Post Road Place  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, new Cape Cod; single-level starter home, expansion possibilities, city water, 0.5 acre; taxes to be determined.
Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $62,500
328 Richbell Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old co-op; entry foyer, h/w floors, new kitchen, beach rights, parking space; maintenance $498.
Mount Pleasant, N.Y.  $164,750
33 Park Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 91-year-old cottage; screened porch, pantry, family room, 2-car garage, attic; taxes $3,223.
Ossining, N.Y.  $180,000
12 Piping Rock Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, full basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,086.
OTHER AREAS Bayport, L.I.  $120,000
3 Harriett Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year- old Cape Cod; attic, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Ronkonkoma, L.I.  $96,000
5 Lakewood Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, basement; taxes $3,000.
Hopatcong, N.J.  $93,500  22 Keith Road  2-bedrom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace, cathedral ceiling, skylights; taxes $2,161.


Carnage Unseen
Who in America has heard of Greenville, an African town that once was home to 15,000 people?
Located in Liberia, a country invented and settled long ago by offspring of American slaves, it became a ghost town in mid-March when its inhabitants fled a devastating air raid by Nigerian warplanes.
All that was left of the town's hospital were bloodied sheets and mattresses in the emergency ward where the staff tried to save dozens of wounded civilians.
Because a correspondent happened to visit Greenville, the raid was graphically recounted in last Sunday's Washington Post.
Readers were reminded that a five-nation West African expeditionary force has been embroiled in a widening war against rebels led by Charles Taylor, who refuses to disarm or otherwise comply with a regional peace plan.
The multinational army was sent to halt a civil war that has ravaged cities, killed an estimated 20,000 civilians and made rubble of well-marked hospitals.


Plight of Architects Who Are Women
IF you are an architect, particularly an architect who is a woman, the maxim "Stay alive until '95" is wearing thin.
"By '95, the building industry is supposed to have rebounded, but those of us affiliated with construction are skeptical," said Erika Krieger, an architect and now Mount Vernon's Building Commissioner.
"We sense the downturn that started long before the administration had recognized it formally because when it comes to women architects, it's the old story of last hired, first fired, and when the recession hits, among the first to be let go by the larger architectural firms were women architects. There had never been a lot of us in the profession until recently."


On the Inside, Looking Out
Dominick Dunne doth protest too much.
"A Season in Purgatory," his mesmerizing new novel about an immensely rich, powerful Irish Catholic family named Bradley that covers up the murder of a teen-age girl to protect the Presidential ambitions of its most charismatic son, has just hit bookstores.
And he is already objecting to its being called a roman a clef about the Kennedys.


No Headline
I just wanted a book with both covers on it, not some hand-me-down.
THE REV.
BENJAMIN F. CHAVIS, recalling his childhood venture into a whites-only library.  [ 20:1. ]


No-Commission Life Insurance Is Already Here
To the Editor:
Regarding Eric K. Tyson's lament ("Why Can't I Buy Insurance Directly?" Viewpoints, March 28): With all due respect, Mr.
Tyson, where have you been?
There are two highly regarded companies that have been offering no-commission life insurance policies on a direct basis for years.
USAA in San Antonio serves a large affinity group of military officers but offers its life products to nonaffinity customers; Ameritas Life sells directly to the public through its Veritas subsidiary in Houston, as well as through a network of fee advisers.
GAY YELLEN Houston, March 29  The writer is vice president of Ameritas Life's Veritas subsidiary.


The Principles of Creating Arches
CREATING an arch by opening a nonload-bearing wall or converting a wide doorway can add a striking design feature to a home.
The job should not be too difficult for an amateur with moderate carpentry and drywall experience.
Before starting, be sure to understand the principles in case alterations are required.
Also be sure that quarter-inch-thick drywall and plastic archway corner bead are obtainable.


An Environmental Plan Threatens an Old Industry
The water in the Ward Sand and Materials Company dredging pond is as clear as a cloudless sky as the company's little blue dredge steadily vacuums the pond bottom for sand and gravel to feed the region's concrete mixers.
But however clean the water may be or however well the new pine seedlings grow on the mined-over restoration areas, the independent commission that regulates land use in New Jersey's 1.1 million-acre Pinelands National Reserve seems ready to force out most sand mines like this one.


Kendall L. Losee, Clark Graebner Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Penny Losee Jr. of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kendall Louise Losee, to Clark Edward Graebner Jr., the son of Mrs.
Clark Caldwell Graebner of New York and Mr.
Graebner of Southport, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Losee, 24, graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father is the senior vice president and publishing director of the Knapp Communications Corporation in New York.


Bright Kids Deserve a Chance to Shine
To the Editor:
The high school I attended was not much different from the one in Lakewood, Calif., made notorious by the Spur Posse's exploits.
Status among boys was based on sports ability -- football outranked basketball, which outranked baseball; the backfield was better than the line. (My sports -- swimming, tennis, wrestling -- didn't rate at all.) For girls, popularity was based on ability to attract a high-status boyfriend.


Anne Liss and Darrell Johnson
July wedding plans have been announced for Anne Bernice Liss, a daughter of Victor S. and Harriet H. Liss of Fairfield, Conn., and Sammie Darrell Johnson, the son of Sammie and Ola Mae Johnson of the Bronx.
Ms.
Liss, 25, teaches third grade at the Fox Run School, an elementary school in Norwalk, Conn.
She and Mr.
Johnson graduated from Wesleyan University, and she received a master's degree in education from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is the chief executive and vice chairman of the board of the Trans-Lux Corporation, the telecommunications company, in Norwalk.
Her mother is the office manager at People Insurance, an insurance agency in Fairfield.


POSTINGS: A Nude Dancing Club?; A Case of Mistaken Identity
Office towers, yes.
Larry A. Silverstein owns those.
He's had his hand in stores, hotels and a mart.
But a building in Forest Hills, Queens, that houses a nude dancing club called Runway 69?
Could its landlord be the Larry Silverstein who is president of Silverstein Properties and a former chairman of the Real Estate Board of New York and a board member of New York University and U.J.A.-Federation?


Every Breeze Seems to Whisper Langer
On a windswept afternoon when the holes at the Augusta National seemed to grow smaller, Bernhard Langer pulled off a destiny-evoking shot among a host of pyrotechnics today to take a commanding lead into the final round of the 57th Masters.
Despite a bogey on the 18th hole, Langer's 54-hole total of nine-under-par 207 was four strokes better than Chip Beck and Dan Forsman, and five better than Russ Cochran, Lanny Wadkins, Steve Elkington and the second-round leader, Jeff Maggert, who fell to a 75.


A Political Pause, a Worrisome Accident
President Boris N. Yeltsin, after being urged at the Vancouver summit to "Win! Win!" by his new best friend, Bill Clinton, prepared for a crucial referendum in Russia two weeks from today by taking a little rest.
After a rally with aluminum workers in Bratsk on his way home to Moscow last weekend, the moody Mr.
Yeltsin had a strangely quiet week.
That caused some concern among his supporters, who think his best chance of using the vote to win a renewed personal mandate is with an aggressive campaign.


THE COMPANY OF DOGS
By the end of the fourth paragraph of Joseph Olshan's About Men column ("The Company of Dogs," March 14), I was sure somebody was going to get bitten.
Beo displays all the telltale signs of the dominant- aggressive dog.
He solicits affection on his terms, and growls when he's had enough.
He refuses to be left alone, and succeeds in being taken everywhere.
He requires his attendant to stay with him while he eats. (Typically, dominant-aggressives either guard their food or insist on having someone nearby to wait on them.) When he doesn't get his way or is chastised, he overreacts with submissive urination -- an almost guaranteed way to get people off your case.


Slaying in Brooklyn Linked to Militants
It was just after 7 P.M. on a cold February night in 1991.
A light snowfall muffled the sound of cars moving through the Sea Gate neighborhood in southern Brooklyn.
Mustafa Shalabi, an Egyptian immigrant who lived in a rented house on Neptune Avenue, was hurriedly packing to return to Egypt the next day, where he planned to join his wife and child.
His life, he told friends, might be in jeopardy.


Correction
An article last Sunday about hip-hop clothing referred incorrectly to the band behind the clothing line BBD Flipside.
It is Bell Biv DeVoe.
The article also omitted the identity of the line's manufacturer.
It is Starter Inc.


Is Bonds Missed? Are You Kidding?
Returning to Three Rivers Stadium in enemy apparel for the first time, Barry Bonds was booed profoundly by Pirate fans Friday night -- when his name was announced in the lineup for the San Francisco Giants, when he stepped into the batter's box and when he took his place in left field.
In the outfield, fans showered him with fake money and displayed signs like "Barry Who" and "No. 25, the Weasel."
"MacArthur had a warmer homecoming," noted the sportscaster Beano Cook.
Cook, who happens to live in Pittsburgh, was attending the game along with some 22,718 other paying customers on a cool, damp night adrip with disdain for the one-time Pirate hero.


ITALIAN SCANDAL SPREADS FURTHER
Italy's bribery scandal spread to the strategic state-controlled defense industry today with the arrest of the director of a major helicopter manufacturer.
Roberto d'Alessandro, the president of Agusta SpA, was arrested overnight in the northern resort of Portofino and charged with extortion, the police said.
It is the first time that the state military industry had been implicated in the scandal over massive kickbacks paid by public and private businesses to politicians in return for public works contracts.


Once Again, Understudy For Cuomo Is Waiting
There is a joke that Stan N. Lundine, New York State's Lieutenant Governor, tells about two young men from a small town.
The first becomes a ship's captain, the second a lieutenant governor.
One goes off to sea, the other to Albany.
And neither is heard from again.
It is the type of self-deprecating quip that Mr.
Lundine, whose humor Rodney Dangerfield could admire, usually tosses off with aplomb.
But as he told it to a visitor last week, the joke landed flat, leaving an awkward silence that seemed to say: "All too true."


A Rural Setting, a Bit of Backlash and 10 Men Named Robert
AT the Academy Books and Bindery here is "The Bob Show," so called because all the participants are named Robert.
Not only that, the spectacle comes with the unwitting imprimatur of Robert Newhart, given when the comedian announced that "you're either a Bob or you're not." He might also have pointed out that if you are a Bob, it's 10 to 1 you're a man, too.
More of that later.
The gallery, owned by Carol Joyce, is yet another newcomer to the scene but unlike the Thread Waxing Space in Manhattan and other ye olde whimsies, its title is for real.
Books are really bound (and restored) in this one-woman workshop, housed in a stone and clapboard structure that was once a slaughterhouse.


Jackknifed
Jackknife - vi.
To slide together so as to form an angle of 90 degrees or less; said of a tractor and its trailer.
What's the Frequency?
In North America, 35,885 tractor-trailer accidents a year, or 4 an hour.


Thugs Or Heroes?
To the Editor:
The article "Revolution Redux?" by Lena Williams  [ March 28 ]  treats Black Panther thugs like Eldridge Cleaver and Ericka Huggins as folk heroes.
Ignoring historical details, your reporter attempts, through interviews with the children of Eldridge  [ Joju and Maceo Cleaver are shown at right ]  and Ericka to rescue the "political" message of these 60's radicals to provide guidelines for "a generation that doesn't necessarily have the historical context to decipher the underlying slogans, imagery and politics." Apparently, The Times sees itself as the Ramparts magazine of the 90's.


Meddling in the Balkans: The Burden of Centuries
FOR all the growing outrage over atrocities by Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the insistent calls for military intervention to stop them, one factor making it so difficult for the West to decide what to do is that through the centuries, outside interference in the Balkans has usually just made things worse.
The easiest decision is to do nothing, but Bosnian Muslims plaintively insist that that too is a kind of outside intervention, one that favors the Serbs.


Tish Reardon, Staley Tregellas
Mr. and Mrs.
Roy L. Reardon of New York have announced the engagement of his daughter Letitia Elizabeth Reardon to Staley Tylor Tregellas, the son of Mrs.
Robert B. Kyle of New York and S. Staley Tregellas of Middletown, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Reardon, who is known as Tish, is the manager of special events for National Hockey League Enterprises Inc., the marketing subsidiary of the National Hockey League, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder, from which she also received a master's degree in sports management.


No-Commission Life Insurance Is Already Here
To the Editor:
Having sold hundreds of life and disability insurance policies, I cannot remember anyone who called me and said, "Today is the day to buy life insurance!" Insurance is not bought; it is sold.
The insurance professional matches the product -- whole life, term, variable universal life, current assumption home life, etc., etc. -- to the need.
Let the consumer buy direct, but let the buyer beware!
WILLIAM ALTNEU New York, March 29


Promise and Despair Share Project
Five-year-old Travis Thomas looked up from his waffles and crinkled his nose.
"I'm going to the planetarium," he said.
"I'm going on a trip." His 9-year-old brother, Clifford, gazed out the eighth-floor window across the morning grayness of the Gowanus Houses in Brooklyn.
"How cold is it?" he asked.
Minutes later, Clifford and Travis ventured out of the sure security of their apartment for the first time since school the day before.
At the corner of Bond and Baltic Streets, the project's main industry -- the heroin trade -- had already begun.
It was not yet 8:30.
Hand in hand, the boys stepped past countless crack vials, syringes and an empty 9-millimeter shell, into the other world of the project.


The Return of the Green Ray
FURTHER ADVENTURES
By Jon Stephen Fink. 597 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. Paper, $14.95.


Clark Clifford's Judgment
Maneuverings in the courts of New York and Washington have lowered the chances for a satisfying judgment about Clark Clifford, the erstwhile statesman accused of committing fraud for a crooked bank, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Several years after B.C.C.I.'s global financial crimes began to surface, the question persists: Was Mr.
Clifford a crook himself -- or a dupe, as he claims?
Mr.
Clifford, 86 and recovering from a heart operation, is excused from the trial that has just begun in state court in Manhattan.
That leaves his law partner, Robert Altman, to plead that both men were deceived about B.C.C.I.'s illegal foreign control of the American bank they chaired.


Filling 'Papa's' Radical Shoes
To the Editor:
As another child of a radical 60's visionary, I offer my opinions to provide further evidence that we won't go away.


Correction
Last Sunday's column mistated the vulnerability and bidding.Here is the correct version: East and West were vulnerable.
The bidding: [ DIAGRAM ]


Pirates Sign Bell For $20.1 Million
The Pittsburgh Pirates finally stopped their exodus of high-priced players by signing shortstop JAY BELL to a new contract that will pay him $20.1 million through the 1997 season.
Bell, who led all major league shortstops with 51 extra-base hits last season, will make $3 million in 1994, $4.2 million in 1995, $4.5 million in 1996 and $4.8 million in 1997 under the four-year extension.
The contract also includes a $1 million signing bonus.


Fulfilling an Age-Old Jewish Tradition of Visiting the Sick
FOR Harry Appel of Ossining, his weekly visits to patients at a local hospice, hospital and nursing home give focus to his days -- and a welcome opportunity to put into practice some of the precepts he has valued throughout his life.
"I like to think I'm helping people," said Mr.
Appel, a retired grocer who is a volunteer for the Caring Committee, a group led by members of the Congregation Sons of Israel Synagogue in Briarcliff Manor.
"There's a personal satisfaction I get in trying to comfort people, most of whom are about my age, in their early 80's. We just talk, but it's pleasant work and I try to go as often as I can."


Sallie Stockton, Andrew O. Bunn
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Stockton of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sallie Bradley Stockton, to Andrew Overman Bunn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Freeman Bunn of Short Hills, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Stockton, 26, is a fourth-grade teacher at the Kent Place School, a private girls' school in Summit.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is the general manager of NYT Custom Publishing, a publishing company that is part of The New York Times Company.


Loren J. Poole, John W. Dixon
Linda M. Poole of New York and James R. Poole of Tenafly, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Loren Jean Poole to John Wilson Dixon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart S. Dixon of Lake Forest, Ill.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Poole, 26, is an associate at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is the president of James R. Poole &amp; Company, a mortgage banking company in Newark.


Unheralded Scientist Behind Nobel for DNA
I read "Watson Relinquishes Major Role at Lab" with interest, hoping to find in your discussion of the great elucidation of the structure of DNA some reference to the X-ray crystallography data provided to Watson, Crick and Wilkins by the brilliant scientist Rosalind Franklin.
While Dr.
Franklin's work has more recently been cited by historians of science (and by Crick) for its pivotal contribution to Watson and Crick's Tinkertoy model of DNA, it appears to have eluded your article.
Certainly, had she not died before the Nobel Prize was awarded to Watson, Crick and Wilkins, she may well have been the fourth scientist to share that prize.


At Yale Repertory, 'Escape From Happiness'
TO some theatergoers, the absurdist terrain of "Escape From Happiness" at the Yale Repertory Theater will appear all too familiar: the violence outside (Feiffer's "Little Murders"), the anarchy inside (Shepard's "Curse of the Starving Class"), the remote relationships (Ionesco's "Bald Soprano").
They're all here, like a reunion of old threats.
Or the sheer din of the New Haven co-production (with Center Stage in Baltimore), overdirected by Irene Lewis, is going to prove hazardous to audiences who would rather keep their psychological resistances up and preserve dramatic conventions.


ENDPAPER: Public Stages; Men in Uniform
There is no solid proof for the transvestism charges leveled against J. Edgar Hoover in Anthony Summers's best seller, "Official and Confidential." But we can dream, can't we?
For connoisseurs of hypocrisy, it is hard to beat the spectacle of our No. 1 G-man -- the puritanical, blackmailing spy on the sex lives of Martin Luther King and the Kennedys, the malicious persecutor of "sex deviates" and any other nonconformists he deemed subversive -- getting all dolled up in outfits reminiscent of Marie Dressler in "Dinner at Eight."


Talking: Waterfront; It's Time To Look for Bargains
COULD this be the ideal season to hunt for waterfront property?
Real estate brokers say that although buyers are still enthusiastic about living on the waterfront they are more cautious about the houses they are willing to take on.
Others say that the East Coast's winter storms caused so much damage that a large number of owners may now be eager to get out.
In addition, some potential buyers may have now decided it's too risky, leaving less competition in the field.


Mutual Funds; At Tax Time, Thoughts of I.R.A.'s
THE individual retirement account season finishing up this week has been a busy one.
The number of people saving for retirement has jumped over last year and I.R.A.'s are the most popular plan, according to a survey last month by Fidelity Investments and the Gallup Organization.
But much of the I.R.A. money, analysts say, flows into exactly the wrong places.
Nearly 20 percent of the $211 billion invested in mutual funds as of the end of 1992 was stashed in supersafe -- but low-yield -- money market funds, and an even bigger chunk was in bond funds, according to the Investment Company Institute.
The reason is that most people do not understand the real risk of investing for several decades: Inflation.
Over time, only the stock market, despite its greater risks, has proven an effective hedge against inflation.
The reason?
Capital growth.


Their Place in History
Full of colorful and informative vignettes and anecdotes, BLACK WOMEN IN AMERICA : An Historical Encyclopedia (Carlson Publishing, $195) breathes life into the unsung heroines and tireless workers whose contributions have often been omitted or overlooked in the chronicles of American history.
The two-volume set contains more than 800 entries and more than 400 photographs, illustrating the activism and enterprise of black women, from domestics to librarians to entertainers to laundresses.
Entries range from Butterfly McQueen to Barbara Jordan and offer a telling chronicle of black American life, describing the political, economic and social involvement of black women, who were in the vanguard of the abolitionist, suffrage and civil rights movements.
The editor, Darlene Clark Hine, who teaches history at Michigan State University, acknowledges that not every woman worthy of inclusion can be found among the entries in the encyclopedia, which is primarily devoted to those who played a role on the national stage or who she thinks typify black women throughout the country.
But one can hardly find fault with this exhaustive effort.
It is long overdue.


An American Now
CHILD OF WAR, WOMAN OF PEACE
By Le Ly Hayslip with James Hayslip. 374 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.50.


Zell/Chilmark, Bottom Fisher, Begins Filling Its Boat
CALL them vulture investors, bottom fishers or by their preferred moniker, grave dancers.
By any name, Sam Zell and David Schulte, who invest in financially troubled companies through the $1 billion Zell/Chilmark Fund L.P., have been on a dealmaking binge.
In recent months, the Zell/Chilmark Fund has refinanced or closed deals to invest more than $700 million of its equity in various companies wobbling under debt accumulated in the 1980's.
The Chicago-based fund now has an interest or control in a wide array of businesses.


Women: Swap 'Em Or Sell 'Em
Mom always said that it's just as easy to fall in love with a rich man as a poor man.
"Indecent Proposal" proves that it's easier.
To reveal the film's premise gives away nothing important.
Demi Moore and Woody Harrelson are Diana and David Murphy, a married couple passionately in love and seriously in debt, who go to Las Vegas to try to beat the odds.
There, a billionaire named John Gage offers them a million dollars for one night with the wife.
It says everything about the film, though, that Gage is played by Robert Redford.
Here is Diana torn between one of America's genuine sex symbols, looking better than he has in years, and the bar guy from "Cheers," whose movie character behaves like a dweeb.
What would
you
do?
The first thing the Murphys do, proving they are true children of the 80's, is call in their lawyer (the superbly unctuous Oliver Platt) to draw up a contract.
He provides the story's one touch of humor and goes to the heart of the film's complexity when he says, "For a million bucks
I'd
sleep with him. It's not like it's hard duty or anything. He's a great-looking guy."


No-Commission Life Insurance Is Already Here
To the Editor:
Mr.
Tyson advocates the repeal of the antitrust exemption accorded to the insurance industry by the McCarran-Ferguson Act, thus to open the way for insurance discounting (known as rebating) by insurance brokers and agents.


In Accounting, Truth Can Be Very Scary
TRUTH hurts. Especially if it threatens to cost powerful people a lot of money.
That, in a nutshell, is why there is anger over the Financial Accounting Standards Board's effort to force companies to deduct from profits the value of stock options they give to officers and employees.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
Much of what Gay Talese said in his eloquent essay was familiar to me.
As a first-generation Italian-American, I too grew up in a home without books.
One of the first purchases I ever made was a cheap encyclopedia.
It was less than adequate, but it whetted my appetite for more.
More was the public library.


The Search for Miss Polaroid
CRY ME A RIVER
By T. R. Pearson. 258 pp. New York: Henry Holt. $22.


A New Work


Corrections
An article on March 14 about documentaries and the Academy Awards incorrectly characterized "Incident at Oglala." It was a nominee for the 1992 International Documentary Association Award, not a winner.


The Principles of Creating Arches
CREATING an arch by opening a nonload-bearing wall or converting a wide doorway can add a striking design feature to a home.
The job should not be too difficult for an amateur with moderate carpentry and drywall experience.
Before starting, be sure to understand the principles in case alterations are required.
Also be sure that quarter-inch-thick drywall and plastic archway corner bead are obtainable.


In Health Care Too, Price Controls Don't Work
To the Editor:
President Clinton and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York should be informed that price controls on health care or anything else do not work.
I know firsthand.
In 1972 and 1973, during Richard M. Nixon Presidency, I was involved in developing price controls for the Cost of Living Council, the agency set up to control all prices.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
CHARLIE PARKER PLAYED BE BOP.
Written and illustrated by Chris Raschka.
Orchard. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 7) There is a giddy representation of the way the saxophone can sound in this delightful meditation, which also features a truly excellent cat.


SURFACING
MUSIC --
Beyond Raffi:
The roster of musicians recording for the "Baby Beluga" set has grown to include Little Richard, Bobby Goldsboro, Maria Muldaur, Mickey Dolenz, Michael Feinstein, Waylon Jennings and Peter, Paul and Mary.
CLOTHES --
The starving-artist look:
Despite Biennial evidence, it seems that painting has
not
died.
Certain items from Calvin Klein's CK line (above) and Jean-Paul Gaultier's new Gaultier Jeans collection will make you look like you've rolled about on a wet Pollack canvas.
FOOD --
Menus of inclusion:
Places like the Blue Ribbon restaurant on Thompson Street, where pu pu platters commingle happily with tofu ravioli, fondue, caviar and fried chicken, seem designed to accommodate any and all gastronomic persuasions.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
March retail sales, percent change
0.3
0.1
Wednesday
Feb. business inventories, percent change
0
0.1
Early-April auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.6
6.6
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
369
350
Friday
Feb. trade deficit, change, billions of dollars
-7.3
-7.2
March industrial production, pct. change
0.4
-0.1
March capacity utilization, percent
79.9
79.7
Tuesday: U.S.
Treasury auctions 7-year notes Group of Seven meeting in Tokyo Wednesday: Japan to announce large fiscal package  Friday: Japanese Prime Minister meets with President Clinton


To Prevent Diabetes
To the Editor:
A bill now in the insurance committees of both the New York State Assembly and the State Senate would require all health insurance companies to cover expenses for diabetic equipment, supplies and self-management education programs.


Forever Hip
BOHEMIA
Where Art, Angst, Love, and Strong Coffee Meet.
By Herbert Gold. 253 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.


Low-Fi Rockers
AT a white-frame house named Brookridge Farm, in bucolic Bucks County, Pa., the dialogue went like this:
Mickey: "Hey, man, we got offered the Shad Festival two days ago!"


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE BABY SWAP CONSPIRACY The Shocking Truth Behind the Florida Case of Two Babies Switched at Birth.
By Loretta Schwartz-Nobel.
Villard, $20.


In the Region: Connecticut; Forest Protection vs. Property Rights
TWO years ago a developer took an option on the Birch Lane Restaurant in New Hartford and 130 acres of timberland off Route 44.
He planned to build a mixed residential-commercial complex, but, said the owner, Kenneth Kohner, "the deal fell through because of the poor economy."
Today, still unable to sell the property, Mr.
Kohner has begun to harvest the trees.
He is one of many woodlot owners, foresters and loggers in the state who make part or all of their living from trees.
In the next year or two they will be faced with controversial new state regulations aimed at protecting landowners from unscrupulous loggers, protecting forests from decimation and preserving wildlife habitats.


Fashion's Waif Look Makes Strong Women Weep
FORGET the endless waffling over skirt lengths, or the baffling return of green eyeshadow as a sign of eco-consciousness.
This year, the only real fashion news is not what women are wearing, but the bodies that are doing the wearing.
After a long spell of the lusty, towering glamour queens, of the women with physiques hammered out at the health club and often perfected at the surgeon's office, of the Cindy Crawfords and the Claudia Schiffers, the fashion industry has pulled another of its tectonic shifts and declared this the year of the gamine.
Now it is time to celebrate the saucy little street urchins, the winsome starvelings.
The mature, big-haired and big-breasted look is out, and the short, waiflike and wafer-like look is in: girls like Carla Bruni, Kristen McMenamy, and Kate Moss, who recently posed in a Calvin Klein ad with rap singer Marky Mark and gave Jaye Davidson of "The Crying Game" a run for the award as foxiest androgyne of the year.


Unheralded Scientist Behind Nobel for DNA
In reading "Watson Relinquishes Major Role at Lab"  [ March 21 ] , I realized that, once again, a grave injustice has been done to Rosalind Franklin.
Her name was omitted from this article, as it has been for years by textbooks, nonfictional publications, Watson and Crick's scientific manuscripts and, ironically enough, "The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA" by James Watson.
Rosalind Franklin was a dedicated scientist working at the King's College laboratory in London in the 1950's, along with Maurice Wilkins, recipient of the 1962 Nobel Prize for medicine and physiology.
While there she experimented with X-ray crystallography techniques on deoxyribonucleic acid and used these patterns to decipher the structure of DNA.
As James Watson and Francis Crick were struggling with the idea of a triple helical structure, Rosalind Franklin found that DNA was a double helix with the sugar-phosphate backbone on the outside, contradicting Watson and Crick's ideas.
In February 1953, Watson came to Franklin's laboratory and asked Maurice Wilkins if he could see the X-ray film patterns.
Without asking her permission, Wilkins agreed to show him, and it was this secret information that aided Watson and Crick in their discovery of DNA's structure.
To the day of her death, Rosalind never knew that her patterns were revealed to Watson and that this was the reason they won the "competition" for DNA's discovery.
This information appears in "Rosalind Franklin and DNA" by Anne Sayre, published in 1975.


A Capital Climb as Billington Leads Devils to Playoffs
The Devils clinched a playoff spot tonight with a 5-3 triumph over Washington, and drew to within a point of the second-place Capitals in the Patrick Division race.
With Craig Billington leading the way in goal, the Devils were more effective than the Capitals, who could well provide the opposition for the Devils in the opening round of the playoffs.


Republicans And Pearls
To the Editor:
Re: "A Virtuous Pursuit," Karen DeWitt's article profiling Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington  [ March 7 ] . , Why the obsession with pearls?
I attended the National Review Institute Conservative Summit in Washington.
The crowd was dramatically different from that described in the article ("the women dressed in oatmeal-colored suits with latches of pearls at their throats, the men balding and sedate").


The Navy's Latest On Jobs for Women
Rivalry among the military services is nothing new, but it took on new form last week as the Navy vied to outmaneuver the Air Force on the issue of women.
Pentagon officials let it be known that the Navy's top admirals were now united in believing that every job in the service should be open to women, even flying frontline fighters into combat.
Admiral Frank Kelso, the chief of operations and acting Navy Secretary, signed on to the idea, which has been kicking around for several months.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Mar. 27  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $1.4 million
39 West 10th Street  6-bedroom, 4-bath, one-family brick Greek Revival town house; dining room, den, 6 marble fireplaces, 13-ft. ceilings, original molding and detail, 24- by 94-ft. lot; taxes $10,877 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  SoHo  $555,000
2 Charlton Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. postwar duplex penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dinette, 500-sq.-ft. wrapped terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,540, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  Upper East Side  $775,000
21 East 66th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar condo penthouse; 24-hr. doorman, 4 sliding French doors, 2,000-sq.-ft. wraparound terrace; common charge $1,847, taxes $8,112 (Broker: Walter &amp; Samuels)  Upper East Side  $585,000
135 East 74th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, windowed eat-in kitchen, dining room, 2 fireplaces; maintenance $1,663, 28% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $1.5 million
115 Central Park West (72d St.)  (Majestic)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, concierge, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, Central Park view; maintenance $2,283, 48% tax-deductible (Brokers: Joan Blackett Schlank Real Estate-William B. May)  BRONX  Parkchester  $42,000
1569 Metropolitan Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; elevator, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; common charge $320, taxes $500 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale  $230,000
212 West 252d Street  2-family semiattached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining foyer in simplex; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,047 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $303,500
287 Warren Street  2-family detached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen, 2 gas fireplaces in each unit; 68- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Ditmas Park  $210,000
668 Argyle Road  6-bedroom, 4-bath, one-family detached frame Queen Anne side-hall colonial; dining room, birchwood, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,660 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Bayside  $210,000
2 Bay Club Drive  (Bay Club)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, eat-in kitchen, health club, L.I.
Sound view; common charge $377, taxes $2,760 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  Forest Hills Gardens  $245,300
404 Burns Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, skylight in upper-floor bedroom, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  St.
George  $27,000
50 Fort Place  (Fort Place Tower)  521-sq.-ft. postwar, studio co-op; dining el, common terrace and garden, 2 exposures; maintenance $322, includes gas and electricity, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty)  Sunnyside  $185,000
83 Tioga Street  2-family semiattached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; hospitality suite in basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


'I'm Ready For My Close-Up'
To the Editor:
I lament with the six actresses  [ "As the Academy Hails Women, Women Talk Back," March 28 ]  that there aren't enough film roles today for women.
In former years, there was no lack of roles -- big roles -- for the likes of Garbo, Dietrich, Shearer, Crawford, Monroe, Davis and Mae West, among many others.
The film moguls of their era must have figured that when an actress is popular enough, her films bring in money.
And so, big roles -- sometimes good, sometimes awful -- were sought and found for box-office attractions.


Browning Points
When paillards of meat brown quickly in a hot skillet, a subtle contrast of flavors is created between the cooked and the uncooked; less subtle is the contrast in texture between the meat's crusty exterior and its barely warm, pliant center.
The same thing happens to fish, shellfish and vegetables, only faster: browning draws the juices from the center to the surface, but with less fat inside to mitigate the flow, a second too long and the succulence becomes cardboard.
This is particularly so when sauteing a thin fish fillet or a tiny shrimp and a Spartan amount of fat is used.
You must, therefore, prepare very carefully for those few seconds of sizzle.
First, choose your weapon.
According to the Larousse Gastronomique, sauteing should be done in a shallow copper pan with straight sides.
For heavier cuts of meat or fish, there's a logic to this choice -- its construction promotes an even and sustained distribution of heat.
But for smaller morsels, a slope-sided skillet is a better tool.
It's easier to shake.


A Homer in Japan
JESSE BARFIELD made his debut in Japan with a two-run homer yesterday to help the Yomiuri Giants to a 5-2 victory over the Yokohama Bay Stars at the Tokyo Dome on the opening day of the Japanese season.
Barfield, who hit 241 home runs in 12 major league seasons -- most recently with the Yankees -- led the American League in homers (40) in 1986. (AP)


On the Sense and Sensibilities Of Rockland County Artists
A LEG depicted in a photograph at the Rockland Center for the Arts here is no ordinary leg, for it belongs to Mikhail Baryshnikov.
This is one of the black-and-white prints by Judy Tomkins that are on view along with the third yearly "Rockland Connection," featuring works in different media by artists who live or have lived in Rockland County.
Ms.
Tomkins, though she lives in the county too, has spent a lot of time photographing in Manhattan, notably in Hell's Kitchen.


Weather Quirks Limit Maple Season
A smaller-than-normal maple syrup crop is facing consumers this year because of a short production season caused by an unusual weather squeeze this spring.
Cold weather and heavy snow in March delayed the beginning of maple syrup production by about two weeks, and warm weather in April seems to be ending it about a week earlier than usual.


Seven Shutout Innings After Four Blank Years
When Al Leiter pitched seven shutout innings against Seattle and gained the victory in the Toronto Blue Jays' second game of the season, he officially ended a personal four-year ordeal and struck a blow for players everywhere who are presumed to be baseball dead.
There may even be hope for Mike Witt and Ted Higuera.
"I had to wait four years for my next win, since that wonderful cold evening in Yankee Stadium against Minnesota," Leiter said, recalling his last previous major league victory, April 14, 1989.
"Sometimes, I remember it like it was yesterday; other times, it seems so long ago. But I'm very happy, very happy."


Steering Students to the Right Job
FOR most high school sophomores, the closest connection to the working world is an after-school job at the local fast-food restaurant or a retailer, or baby-sitting for the neighbors.
In an ambitious effort to enlarge students' career horizons, a group of residents have embarked on an innovative mentoring program to put a wide range of professional possibilities into the classroom.
The Pelham Civic Association, a volunteer group of professionals, entrepreneurs and business owners, recently sponsored the Career Awareness Day program at Pelham Memorial High School.


Cozy Space, Reliable Menu in New Canaan
BLUEWATER CAFE, a pint-size restaurant in New Canaan, has made a success of consistency and thinking small.
It begins with a cozy dining room (space for a mere 26 guests) plus a clutch of seats in the partitioned-off bar area.
Tables are close together but white walls, mirrors and vases of fresh tulips create an illusion of space.
Small extends to the menu, too.
Mostly Italian, it is much the same as when Bluewater opened: a few starters, salads, pasta dishes, grilled and baked entrees and a few daily specials.
These too are mostly Italian and have shown flashes of imagination, within the framework of nutritious food extremely well-prepared.


2 Cab Drivers Fatally Shot
Two cab drivers were shot and killed in separate incidents yesterday, the police said.
After a Yellow Cab driver was fatally shot in the head early yesterday, his taxi crashed into a Queens home and burst into flames, the police said.
The driver, Ifkiya Malayev, 38, crashed into the garage of a house on 127th Street in Kew Gardens at 2:15 A.M., the police said.
Investigators first thought Mr.
Malayev, of Rego Park, Queens, died as a result of the crash, but an autopsy found that he died of the gunshot wound.
And a gypsy cab driver was found, also fatally shot in the head, in his cab on a Brooklyn street last night, the police said.
The victim, who was not immediately identified, was found about 7 P.M. on Danforth Street in East New York, the police said.


Mondello Should Heed Abortion Foes
I found the exchange between Mary Jane Tobin, the Right to Life Party leader, and Joseph Mondello to be most interesting.
Mrs.
Tobin  [ Jan. 31 ]  contends that endorsement by the Right to Life Party could be of crucial help to Republicans in close elections.
As I started to read Mr.
Mondello's response  [ March 7 ] , I naturally assumed he would deny her claim.
Amazingly, he did exactly the opposite.
Instead of denying what Mrs.
Tobin said, Mr.
Mondello admitted it.
To quote his letter verbatim, Mr.
Mondello concedes that "in a small handful of particularly tight races Right to Life endorsement may provide candidates with the margin of victory."


Gymboree Stock
WHAT: Stock offering for the Gymboree Corporation, the children's clothing retailer and perpetrator of Gymboree play centers, the company responsible for teaching children across America and in nine foreign countries the insidious mantra "We Want Gymbo!" WHO
IS
GYMBO?
A clown and Gymboree's mascot.
He now has a lovable little sister, Gymbelle.
Note their perky, propagandistic names.


How the Marx Brothers Got That Way
"MINNIE'S BOYS" recalls a time when musicals were overflowing and most of them sank -- like the 1969-70 season, which produced 30 Broadway and Off Broadway musicals and more than a dozen song and dance revues.
Of such bounty, "Company" is the only Broadway candidate for posterity.
Unlike that season's star-driven vehicles, "Applause" (Lauren Bacall) and "Coco" (Katharine Hepburn), "Minnie's Boys," which prevailed upon an uneasy Shelley Winters to play a martyred mama to the Marx Brothers in ascent, has had a semblance of afterlife.
And in stock and touring productions, the show, a 10-week casualty after eight weeks of previews, has certainly outlasted its fellow flops of the season.
Does anybody revive "Jimmy," "Gantry," "Georgy" or "Park"?


Iran Is Said to Give Money to Abdel Rahman
A Saudi Arabian newspaper reported today that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who preached at mosques in Brooklyn and New Jersey where suspects in the World Trade Center bombing had worshiped, had received money from Iran's mission at the United Nations.
The Arabic daily Asharq Al Awsat said Iran had been using its office in New York City to advance money to the Egyptian cleric for the use of his followers in Egypt.


Not a Waif, Not Super, Just Happy
NAME: Naomi Campbell.
IDENTITY: 22-year-old supermodel. Not a waif.
CURRENT ACTIVITIES: Putting together an album; styled a fashion layout for the May issue of Mademoiselle.


New Look for an Old Mansion in Roslyn
THE lovely 135-year-old Italiante-style mansion in historic Roslyn Village that once housed Villa Gattopardo is now Allison's.
Even though the elegant white-tablecloth restaurant looks much as it did and its owner was associated with Villa Gattopardo, Allison's has undergone more than a name change.
Allison's food, like that served at Villa Gattopardo, is Italian, but similarities end there.
Paul DePalma, the new chef, who formerly cooked at Nick &amp; Toni's in East Hampton, brings a contemporary nontraditional East End flair to Allison's.


Gathering Under The Big Top
A benefit for Childhelp USA, with the Cirque du Soleil, Battery Park City, April 7.


Foreign Affairs; No Success, No Power
Success feeds power.
And President Clinton has little prospect of a power-building success in foreign policy, one that would catapult him to new stature at home and abroad.
From potshots in Iraq to human rights in China, from genocide in Bosnia to trade negotiations with Europe and Japan, from propping up Boris Yeltsin in Russia to cajoling Arabs back to the bargaining table with Israelis, Bill Clinton faces mostly quicksand and mudholes.
His best bet for a quick diplomatic score might be in Haiti, but even there peace talks remain wobbly.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Academy Awards misstated Marlene Dietrich's connection to the prizes.
She received one Oscar nomination, for best actress in the 1930 film "Morocco."


BIG BROTHER'S HERE
If we were to turn off all the metal detectors and closed-circuit cameras and guarantee unquestioned passage through airports, courts, banks and other public places, would we be advancing our freedom?
The Declaration of Independence states that among our inalienable rights are "life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." Does the sequence of these three cherished freedoms inform the dilemma we face?
The first must be assured to gain access to the two that follow.
MERLE CHAIT PRICE
New York, N.Y.


A New Performer


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  U.S. PANEL URGES INTERVENTION
Clinton Administration experts assessing the fighting in Bosnia urged Washington to seriously consider military intervention, according to an executive summary of the group's draft report.  1  SERBS INTENSIFY BOSNIA FIGHTING


CHILEANS BAFFLED BY BRITON'S DEATH
Three years ago, in the stately Hotel Carrera in downtown Santiago, a maid entered Room 1406 to tidy up.
She opened the closet door and found the body of a British journalist hanging by his neck, a pillowcase over his head.
She screamed and ran out.
At first, the police ruled the March 31, 1990, death of the journalist, Jonathan Moyle, 28, a suicide, and closed the case.
Then some British officials suggested that it was accidental, that Mr.
Moyle had been engaged in a dangerous form of sexual stimulation.
Some family members say there was a deliberate attempt to discredit him by members of the British intelligence service in London.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about the Clinton Administration's policy on abortion law referred incorrectly to a United Nations agency for which the Administration has said it will seek renewed financing.
It is now known as the United Nations Population Fund, no longer the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, although the organization still uses the initials U.N.F.P.A.


Conversations/Joao Jorge Santos Rodrigues; The New Beat of Black Brazil Sets the Pace for Self-Affirmation
After Nigeria, Brazil has the world's largest black population.
But Joao Jorge Santos Rodrigues, a leading promoter of black culture here, was not surprised to see film distributors delaying releasing "Malcolm X" in Brazil.
To explain why, Mr.
Rodrigues flipped through a recent issue of Veja, the country's largest-selling news weekly.
Thumbing through the 100-page issue, he failed to find a single advertisement with a black or brown face.


The I.R.S. Seeks Professional Help
THE biggest collection agency in the world, the Internal Revenue Service, is about to turn to private debt collectors to help it collect overdue taxes.
No contracts have been signed yet, but the plan was disclosed in President Clinton's budget request last week.
The I.R.S. will test using a private company this year and, if it works, will ask Congress to let it use some of the proceeds in 1994 to hire even more private collectors.


Electronics Use Aboard Planes Debated in U.S.
As passengers carry more and more electronic devices onto airplanes, the airlines and the Government are debating measures to restrict their use for safety reasons.
While there is no known instance of a crash caused by a passenger's radio or other device, many pilots have reported that they believed their planes' controls had been impaired by interference from consumer electronics.
Adding to the concerns is the increasing use of computerized controls on the planes themselves, which might make any possible interference more dangerous.


Boys Choir Sings Poems by Children of Terezin
THE American Boychoir has appeared with the New York Philharmonic and the Boston Symphony, recorded with Jessye Norman and the Boston Pops, appeared on national television with Wynton Marsalis and Andre Previn.
Perhaps nothing in its extraordinarily wide repertory, though, can compare in emotional impact with the song cycle "I Never Saw Another Butterfly." Composed for the choir by Cantor Charles Davidson, this work is based on children's poems written in Terezin, the concentration camp in Czechoslovakia.
It and a group of Yiddish folk songs will be performed by the boys choir in a free concert on Friday at 8:30 P.M. at the Westchester Reform Temple in Scarsdale.
James Litton will conduct.
"This is an exquisite and haunting song cycle," the temple's Judy Oestreich said, "and our rabbis and cantor are writing an original service around it."


In New Mexico, Catholic Church Tries to Overcome Its Pain
As they have for centuries, Hispanic Catholics here are carrying out rituals to commemorate the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, but this weekend they are also seeking comfort and continuity for a church in pain.
The source of the pain is the downfall of Archbishop Robert Sanchez of Santa Fe, the nation's first Hispanic archbishop, and the cases of 14 priests in New Mexico who have been accused of sexually molesting children over the last 20 years.


Over the Sea to Skye
THE hitchhiker appeared in damp silhouette at the roadside, a steady trickle of rain running off his leather hat.
Behind him, bog, heather moor and the occasional grazing sheep stretched away into a mass of low gray cloud that had settled over the mountains like a tea cozy.
Almost anywhere else, I might have been tempted to speed on by; but this was the Isle of Skye, where cars are relatively few, and where the worst crime would be to leave someone trudging in the rain.
Together we drove on toward Dunvegan Castle.
Skye, we agreed, is a tonic.
Mention the Isle of Skye and the most hardened urbanites will echo "Skye?" with a glint of purple heather in their eyes.
"The Misty Isle?" Partly it's the isolation of the place, just off the soft west coast of Scotland (nothing soft, though, about the winds that can batter the island from the Atlantic), where Gaelic is still widely spoken among its 8,000 or so inhabitants; partly the thought of a place so rugged and remote that humans must fit themselves to nature's scheme.
The attraction may lie in the name, Skye: and in romance, and legend, and the fame of the old song "The Skye Boat Song."


APRIL 4-10: Palestinians; A Change of Address On the Path to Peace?
Having the right address can make a difference -- sometimes.
When the hard-line Israeli Government led by Yitzhak Shamir agreed in 1991 to sit down and talk peace with Palestinians, the Arabs had to come from the right place.
The Israelis excluded any who lived in East Jerusalem, which Israel has long since annexed.
The Israelis argued that to sit down with someone from there -- as opposed to someone from lands in the West Bank and Gaza Strip that have not been incorporated into Israel -- might somehow lead the Palestinians to hope that the status of Jerusalem might become subject to negotiation.


Seattle Builders Turn to Farms and Forests
Home builders are turning to virgin forests and farmland far from this city's job markets because closer sites are locked up in land-use disputes.
Longtime developers like William Conner are rethinking strategies and focusing on rural towns because, they say, the state's 1989 Growth Management Act requires cities to designate certain areas as rural, closing thousands of acres to development.


A District Divided
This town that gave the world Elvis, Beale Street and its incongruous new pyramid-shaped arena gleaming over the Mississippi, awoke this morning with an unaccustomed feeling of peace.
The racially charged legal battles that swirled around Representative Harold E. Ford ended Friday with his acquittal on 18 fraud and conspiracy charges, but it was anyone's guess whether this was really peace or just a lull in the ferocious history of disputes over race here.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Cherry Hill  $120,000  1528 South Bowling Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; new kitchen and roof, full basement; taxes $2,900.
Cinnaminson  $160,000  2402 Riverton Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old custom- built ranch; deck, 2 fireplaces, large lot; taxes $3,900.
Edison  $158,000  14 Edison Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; ceiling fans, new w/w carpeting, finished basement; taxes $2,282.
Hopatcong  $93,500  22 Keith Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; fireplace, cathedral ceiling, skylights; taxes $2,161.
Moorestown  $325,000  567 Sentinel Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; one-acre plot, screened patio, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $6,768.
Old Bridge  $125,000  17 Hastings Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old split level; c/ a, patio, in-ground pool, 1-car garage; taxes $3,409.
OTHER AREAS Essex, Conn.  $120,000
45 Grandview Terrace  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 53-year-old ranch; fireplace, workshop, walk to village, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,208.
Ossining, N.Y.  $180,000  12 Piping Rock Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, full basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,086.
Ronkonkoma, L.I.  $96,000
5 Lakewood Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,000.


Fatal Tornado in India Destroys Five Villages


Satellites Bring Information Revolution to China
Four years after China's leaders crushed a movement by millions of prodemocracy protesters, they are facing a new challenge -- one that is quieter and less confrontational but eventually perhaps more serious.
The challenge is most visible in the form of hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes that are sprouting, as the Chinese say, like bamboo shoots after a spring rain.


Is 'The Sandlot' Tossing Its Audience a Sharp Curve?
Toward the end of "The Sandlot," the new film about suburban boys playing endless days of baseball during the summer of 1962, two of the youngsters nervously encounter a blind recluse named Thelonius Mertle.
The character, played by James Earl Jones, claims to have known and played against Babe Ruth.
It is a small scene, but one made more incongruous by the sight of a photograph of Mertle (the 19-year-old Mr. Jones) standing between Ruth and Lou Gehrig.
The idea of Ruth competing against a black player in the 1920's or 1930's may seem unlikely, because Jackie Robinson did not break baseball's color line until 1947.
What the film does not explain is that major leaguers used to barnstorm in the off-season with players from the Negro Leagues.
According to John Holway, a Negro League historian, "Ruth played against Negro Leaguers in Cuba, all over New Jersey and out West in Kansas City and St. Louis."


Japan Weighs Aid to Russia Against an Old Feud
When Japan announced this week that the Russian Foreign Minister would attend next week's meeting of senior officials from the wealthiest industrial nations, the news set off a furious debate among Government officials here.
The issue was not how democracy could be fostered in Russia, but whether Japan would be able to use the visit to press Moscow to return a group of islands seized at the close of World War II.
The chief cabinet secretary, Yohei Kono, first said the territorial issue would not be raised, since the point of the meeting is to provide financial support for the programs of the beleaguered Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin.
But later Mr.
Kono abruptly changed course, saying the long-sought northern islands might be discussed when the Japanese and Russian foreign ministers meet separately.


Marvin Blue and Sandra E. Roper
August wedding plans have been announced for Sandra Elena Roper and Marvin Blue, lawyers in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Roper graduated from the Arnold and Marie Schwartz College of Pharmacy of Long Island University.
She and her fiance received law degrees from Brooklyn Law School, and she received a master of law degree from New York University.
They own Matchless Brokers, a mortgage and business-finance brokerage in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Roper is also a pharmacist at St.
Mary's Hospital in Brooklyn and the chairwoman of the legal redress committee of the Brooklyn branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
She is a daughter of Norma Roper of Brooklyn and the late Ralph Roper.
Her father was a skycap for American Airlines at Kennedy International Airport in Howard Beach, Queens.


Kermit Washington Likes the Knicks
Like any good sports-talk showman, the co-host on the noon-to-two slot on KZRC isn't afraid to say what he thinks.
Honesty goes with the territory, so go on.
Ask him if the hometown Trail Blazers might be better off without Clyde Drexler in the lineup.
Ask if Coach Rick Adelman ought to return next year.
Ask what the Blazers should do if they get eliminated early from the playoffs next month.
Ask what he thinks about those bully Knicks from New York.


Penguins: 17 in Row. Rangers: 3 to Go.
The Rangers did not know what to feel.
Should they be hopeful?
Should they be frustrated?
Should they be angry?
Should they even care?


PRESIDENT IS URGED TO CONSIDER FORCE TO HELP BOSNIANS
A team of experts sent to Bosnia by President Clinton to assess the plight of civilians caught in the fighting has urged Washington to give serious consideration to military intervention to end the suffering.
In a draft report, the group recommended that the Administration consider civilian "safe havens" protected by international forces and stronger military action to both insure the delivery of aid and silence the heavy artillery Serbian forces have used to shell besieged cities.


Spring Chores
After all that rain and snow, don't let the sun make you forget that your garden may be as wet as freshly poured cement.
Make sure the soil is as crumbly as chocolate cake before you plant those peas.
Rake all the dead leaves out of the perennial beds and remove all the mulch.
But don't throw it out.
If you don't have a compost pile, make one.
Every shred of organic material should go back into your garden.


Refashioning Madison Avenue
LIKE a chrysalis 240 feet high, a bland post-war steel-and-glass office tower at Madison Avenue and 61st Street is being transformed behind tarpaulins into something out of pre-war Paris, with broad limestone pilasters framing delicate black ironwork.
When it emerges in September, the first nine floors will house Barneys New York, proclaiming itself the largest specialty store to open in Manhattan since 1929.
By virtue of its size -- 240,000 square feet of selling space -- and the thousands of customers it will draw, the impact of Barneys will probably be felt for many blocks around.
Indeed, it is already having an effect.


A Modern Twist For Church Tokens
ABOUT 200 years ago, some churches in the northeastern United States commissioned special tokens to be used only in the churches.
Counterfeit copper coins were making the rounds and often turned up in collection plates.
To solve the problem, the churches bought their own tokens, sold them to parishioners, then accepted them in offering plates.
Not only did the tokens alleviate the counterfeiting, but they also allowed worshipers to prepay their earthly dues.
Churches and synagogues are still buying special coins, but now they're selling them in gift shops.
One sculptor, Barry Silverman, has accepted several commissions, and his work is available in the gift shops of both the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York and at Christ Church in the City of Boston, better known as Old North Church.


Looking Right, Ivana's Way
How do you say Ivana?
Last Saturday, Ivana Trump introduced her line of gold-plated jewelry and polyester-rayon women's suits on the Home Shopping Network.
For about two hours, she chatted comfortably with the host, Bobbi Ray, and callers from around the country, many of whom mispronounced her name, rhyming it with "Savannah."
Mrs.
Trump, born in Czechoslovakia, shouldn't complain.
Her own broken English provided many humorous moments during the program.
For instance, she repeatedly referred to places like "the Paris" and "the Europe." It mattered little.
Her bubbly personality was endearing and betrayed no knowledge of the news, which hit the papers four days later, that Marla Maples was pregnant with her ex-husband's child.


Update; Tax Collectors and Ikea Store Declare Truce on Advertising
It began noisily in November, with the big guns of New York State aimed squarely at Ikea, the chain with a store in Elizabeth, N.J.
But by last week a truce had been reached, and Ikea was launching a new advertising campaign intended to placate the tax collectors in its neighboring state.
Both sides claimed victory, but Ikea, a seller of home furnishings, was clearly the more amused on its way to the bank.


'Upper West Side Story'?
There's a new "West Side Story" on the way.
Arthur Laurents, the playwright, and the choreographer Jerome Robbins are looking to remount the musical and, said a source who has spoken with Mr.
Laurents, the play may be rewritten for the 90's.
Mr.
Laurents confirmed that there are plans to revive the 1957 musical.
"I really don't want to be specific," he said.
"Why don't you call Mr. Robbins?"


Watching the French Define High Style
The "France Danse" festival presented last month by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington offered an illuminating mini-survey of French dance.
The focus was on four modern-dance troupes, the Ballet du Rhin from Alsace (in an 18th-century reconstruction of the quintessential French ballet "La Fille Mal Gardee") and the Paris Opera Ballet.
The latter turned out in full might with Rudolf Nureyev's staging of "La Bayadere" plus a mixed bill intended to show off a specifically French repertory.
Such programming suggests that French dance is split down the middle between establishment troupes and dissenters.
It might be relevant, then, to recall the analysis that Francois Goguel, a French political scientist, applied to French society as a whole.
France, he wrote in the 1940's, was perennially divided by the forces of movement and order.
This division, however, was not simply synonymous with the political left and right, since the parties on either side could often advocate social change or the status quo.


Results Plus
TENNIS Sampras Advances to Final Pete Sampras, the new top-ranked player in world, will play his fellow American Brad Gilbert for the Japan Open title today in Tokyo.
Sampras celebrated his climb to the top of the ATP Tour ranking with a 6-4, 6-2 victory over the Australian Wally Masur in yesterday's semifinals.
The seventh-seeded Gilbert outlasted fifth-seeded Henrik Holm of Sweden, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3.
Top-seeded Kimiko Date successfully defended her women's singles title by defeating eighth-seeded Stephanie Rottier of the Netherlands, 6-1, 6-3. (AP) Medvedev's Winning Ways Continue: Sergi Bruguera of Spain and Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine won semifinal matches in a clay-court tournament in Barcelona, Spain.
Bruguera defeated Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden by 6-0, 4-6, 6-4 before Medvedev ousted Thomas Muster of Austria, 6-4, 6-3.
The 18-year-old Medvedev, seeded ninth, is one of the hottest clay-court players on the circuit.
He won three tournaments on clay last year and got off to a winning start this season with a victory last week in Portugal. (AP) Junior Player Tops Doubles Partner: Justin Gimelstob of Whippany, N.J., defeated his doubles partner, Rafael Jordan of Puerto Rico, 6-4, 6-3, to win the boys' 16's division of the Easter Bowl Junior Tennis Championships at the Doral Resort &amp; Country Club in Miami.
In the boys' 18's final, ninth-seeded Glenn Weiner of Cypress, Calif., defeated second-seeded Eric Taino of Jersey City, 6-4, 3-6, 7-5.
ROWING Brown Upsets Harvard For only the third time in the 29 races of the Stein Cup series, the Brown men's varsity crew beat Harvard yesterday on the Charles River in Cambridge, Mass.
Hinting of a shake-up this season in the usual order of Eastern rowing supremacy, the Bears routed the Crimson, defending national champions, by 10 seconds, or more than two boat lengths, in the fast time of 5 minutes 38.05 seconds for 2,000 meters.
In an earlier event on the Charles yesterday, Northeastern retained the Arlett Cup by sweeping three races from Boston University in varsity, second varsity and freshman events.
The Northeastern women's eight was also victorious in taking the Orange Cup from Penn and Syracuse.
Penn Takes 5th Straight Childs Cup: The University of Pennsylvania's men's varsity heavyweight crew won the Childs Cup for the fifth consecutive year today, defeating Princeton and Columbia in the oldest cup competition in American rowing.
It was only in the final 200 meters that Penn gained its 4.2-second, or boat-length, margin of victory, in the rain-swollen, current-aided time of 5:37.1.
SOCCER Manchester United Rallies Steve Bruce scored two late goals in a furious 10-minute stretch yesterday in Manchester and led Manchester United over Sheffield Wednesday, 2-1.
The victory put United into first place in England's Premier League after Aston Villa was held to a scoreless tie by Coventry.
Villa was 1 point ahead of United going into yesterday's play.
With just five games to play, United is the favorite to capture the title for the first time in 26 years.
After 37 games, United has 69 points to Villa's 68. (AP) BOXING Pilot Wins Box-Off Sean Fletcher, who skipped the national meet but was invited to the United States Box-Offs based on his international record, dominated Aristead Clayton yesterday in Phoenix to win a spot at the world boxing championships in June.
Fletcher, a Navy pilot based at Norfolk, Va., was the only challenger to unseat a champion, scoring a 46-20 decision over Armistead of Baker, La., in their 119-pound bout.
In other bouts, the 139-pounder Lupe Suazo of Tucson, Ariz., beat LeChaunce Shepherd of Milwaukee by 50-33, and Larry Nicholson of Tyler, Tex., outpointed Abayomi Miller of Toledo, Ohio, 49-28 at 132 pounds.
Heavyweight Derrell Dixon of Lynnwood, Wash., edged Bobby Harris of Worcester, Mass., 41-36, and Eric Wright of Fort Hood, Tex., defeated 17-year-old Shane Swartz of Fort Collins, Colo., 29-24. (AP)


Over the Sea to Skye
THE hitchhiker appeared in damp silhouette at the roadside, a steady trickle of rain running off his leather hat.
Behind him, bog, heather moor and the occasional grazing sheep stretched away into a mass of low gray cloud that had settled over the mountains like a tea cozy.
Almost anywhere else, I might have been tempted to speed on by; but this was the Isle of Skye, where cars are relatively few, and where the worst crime would be to leave someone trudging in the rain.
Together we drove on toward Dunvegan Castle.
Skye, we agreed, is a tonic.
Mention the Isle of Skye and the most hardened urbanites will echo "Skye?" with a glint of purple heather in their eyes.
"The Misty Isle?" Partly it's the isolation of the place, just off the soft west coast of Scotland (nothing soft, though, about the winds that can batter the island from the Atlantic), where Gaelic is still widely spoken among its 8,000 or so inhabitants; partly the thought of a place so rugged and remote that humans must fit themselves to nature's scheme.
The attraction may lie in the name, Skye: and in romance, and legend, and the fame of the old song "The Skye Boat Song."


World Markets; Yellow Flags for Eurotunnel Shares
INVESTORS looking for a play on the European single market have given a big lift this year to the shares of Eurotunnel, the financially troubled company that will operate the 24-mile tunnel beneath the English Channel that is scheduled to open late this year or early in 1994.
The shares, which traded below 300 pence ($4.53) in London last year, have risen as high as 515 pence ($7.78) in recent months and closed last week at 470 pence ($7.10).
But while the cross-Channel link is nearly complete, the risks are far from ended for investors.
Some analysts, in fact, are raising warning flags, suggesting that the shares, which are also traded in Paris, are substantially overvalued.


Shaping a Monument to Memory
In 1986, when he announced the appointment of the architect who would design the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum here, Elie Wiesel said: "The Holocaust in its enormity defies language and art, and yet both must be used to tell the tale, the tale that must be told.
"In James Freed," continued Mr.
Wiesel, then head of the council that would build the museum, "we have found an architect who can master this unique challenge."


Street of Dreams
THERE are many signs of revival along 125th Street, the heart of Harlem, and some of them are baffling.
There is a former mugger ("That was my job," he says) who scoops sweet potato pie ice cream at Ben &amp; Jerry's.
And how to explain the 136 Italian tourists, stylish but unruly, singing phonetic English at a gospel brunch at the Cotton Club?
"Lemme hear you calling: Jesus!" Annie Sinclair, a Baptist minister, belted out on a recent Sunday afternoon.


Gardeners, (Before You) Start Your Engines
THE lawn ritual has begun.
Though it is too early to get out the mower, this is the time to make sure that all the tools are in good working order.
If the mower blades need sharpening or the motor needs an overhaul, it is time to get in line at the repair shop.
If the rakes look worn and in need of fixing, this may be the year to splurge for some new ones.
How about edgers, clippers and all those other tools that keep the lawn in good condition all spring and summer?


A Russian Bear Hug in Space?
The end of the cold war and the stark need for budget cuts inject a dose of common sense into the costly American space program.
Last week the Clinton Administration announced that it would give "full consideration" to using Russian equipment in designing a smaller, more affordable space station than the expensive version now under development by the U.S. and several allies.
That does not mean that Russian space hardware will inevitably be used.
But it does mean that potential Russian participation will be given the most serious scrutiny yet, ending years in which the space agency and its contractors have grasped every excuse possible to avoid large-scale integration with the Russian space program.


25 Men on a Team and 7 Figures Per Man
For the first time since players became wage-earning millionaires, the number earning $1 million or more has decreased.
The $1 million roster this season has 262 names, a 2.6 percent decrease from the 269 players on that list a year ago.
That development, however, brings little consolation to the club owners who are paying the players.
They would more likely point to the 45 percent increase in the number of players earning $3 million or more, a number that in four seasons has multiplied from 1 to 32 to 69 to 100.


Sound Travels By Mail
Call it the L. L. Bean syndrome: ordering fancy items by phone has spread to audio.
In fact, several outstanding products are now available only by mail or telephone.
Cambridge Sound Works, for instance, is currently selling components this way.
The company is headed by Henry Kloss, who back in the 60's almost single-handedly transformed high-quality stereo from an esoteric hobby to an element of everyday life.
He did this mainly by making components small and simple at a time when bulk and complexity were the rule.
As chief engineer for what was then his own company, KLH of Cambridge, Mass., Mr.
Kloss created the first portable stereo system with clear, wide-range sound.
The famous KLH Model 11 looked like a small gray suitcase and opened avenues of musical discovery to young baby boomers.


I.B.M. Vacancies Add to Westchester Glut
A RECENT announcement by I.B.M. that it would vacate 845,000 square feet of office space in two Westchester County buildings has sent the already beleaguered office market in the county reeling.
For one thing, it caused this year's first-quarter office vacancy rate to shoot up 4 points, to 26.4 percent, from three months ago, according to Rostenberg Doern, a Stamford, Conn., brokerage firm that specializes in commercial real estate.


The Executive Life; Variations on a Tuxedo: The Hollywood Look
ONE of the guilty pleasures of following the entertainment business is scanning the last page of The Hollywood Reporter, the industry trade paper, for party-hearty pictures of studio and agency colleagues in fancy dress.
It's a pastime indulged in not just by fashion-conscious women, however, for a man's black-tie uniform isn't really as simple as it looks and men in style-conscious Hollywood find they must stay just as aware as women of what's right to wear to all of the charity balls and benefit premieres.
Arthur Cohen, for instance, president of marketing at Paramount Pictures, thought he would be right on the cutting edge of Hollywood style at the Academy Awards presentation two weeks ago.
Once he got there, he wasn't so sure.
Under his five-year-old black dinner jacket from Paul Stuart, Mr.
Cohen wore a black tuxedo shirt, which his wife, Jeanne, had urged him to buy "because she thought it was sexy," he said.


When One Person's Trash Is Another's (Art) Treasure
YOHURU RALPH WILLIAMS used a metal mallet to knock a circuit board off a television set in a vacant lot in Bridgeport.
"I love the internal parts," he said.
From dilapidated cabinets piled nearby, he dislodged doors and drawers.
"They're going to be frames," he said.
He also collected candy wrappers and bottlecaps from the sidewalk.
"Bottlecaps give a nice silver color," he explained.


APRIL 4-10: Beaten and Run Over; Murders in Miami Terrify Foreign Visitors
Back home in Germany last week, the story of a German tourist who was robbed, beaten and fatally run over after she got lost on her way from Miami International Airport to her hotel on April 2 aroused shock.
The Miami police arrested two suspects, but city officials still felt they had to scramble to assure visitors, especially foreigners, that Miami is safe.
The death of Barbara Jensen Meller was, after all, the sixth killing of a foreign tourist in Florida since December.
Officials say the worldwide revulsion threatens Florida's $31 billion tourism business, which increasingly is being fed by foreign visitors.
In response, local officials stepped up police patrols and posted new highway signs designed to steer tourists straight to the beaches and away from high-crime neighborhoods.


Kristin Allardyce, David Livingston
Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Armstrong Allardyce of New York and Watch Hill, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kristin Jahn Allardyce, to David Taylor Livingston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Stanley Livingston of Westerly, R.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Allardyce is a teaching assistant at the Edward W. Morley Elementary School in West Hartford, Conn.
She is a graduate of Skidmore College.
Her father is a vice president and the chief financial officer of American Standard, the building materials manufacturer, in New York.


APRIL 4-10: The Caucasus; Bloody Ethnic Feuding Gets Even Grimmer
The bloodiest of the old Soviet Union's many ethnic flashpoints turned more somber than ever last week after Armenian forces struck deep into Azerbaijan, seizing an area linking the disputed mountainous enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, which is inhabited mostly by separatist Armenians, with Armenia itself.
The offensive sent thousands of Azeri refugees fleeing into the mountains.
The Clinton Administration and the United Nations Security Council condemned it, and Turkey retaliated by closing its borders to overland relief for Armenia, its energy-starved neighbor.


OTHER VOICES -- 'Young People Is Killing Young People'
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q Do you feel you have to dress a certain way so you won't be harassed?


April in Paris? No, New York
A dinner-dance for the French-American Foundation, at the Plaza Hotel, April 7.


Where Are the Italian-Americans?
To the Editor:
I was sorry to see the depiction of working-class Italian-Americans as book haters.
Martin Scorsese's parents were unsure whether to let him in the house with a book?
Sounds apocryphal to me.


Key Plus Two Digits Equal Blowout II
Welcome to Jimmy Key's pitching laboratory.
See him change speeds on his pitches gracefully, see him bite the corners of the plate expertly and see him drive batters batty consistently.
Key is a swift worker who does not even receive signals from the catcher because he despises wasting seconds.
He wants to be in charge.
Tonight, Key was.
Again.
In a game that mimicked his first Yankee start five days ago, Key was on cruise control and pitched as if he were still dominating in spring training by squelching the White Sox on six hits over seven innings and driving the Yankees to a 12-0 victory at Comiskey Park.


Send Back The Crown
To the Editor:
So, JoAnne Akalaitis failed to fill Joe Papp's shoes.
What else is new?
Has Ted Mann filled Jose Quintero's shoes?
Will Don Scardino fill Andre Bishop's shoes?
Better yet, will Andre Bishop fill his own shoes now that he's at Lincoln Center? (Remember "My Favorite Year"?)


Ferry Beats Buzzer and The Nets, Too
In the Nets' locker room after their painful 100-99 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers tonight, there was nothing but stunned looks and a general sense of disbelief.
Derrick Coleman stared at the floor.
Rumeal Robinson stared at the wall.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the building, there was Cleveland's Danny Ferry, who looked as if he just won the lottery.
In a way he did.
Only in this lottery, it's victories at stake, which to the Nets are more valuable than money.
The Nets keep looking for one, any one, and they'll keep looking since, before 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, they saw Ferry send New Jersey to its fifth straight loss by sinking a 19-footer with no time on the clock to win it for the Cavaliers (47-27).


Getting Information, or Not, From a Tourist Office
WHEN you write to a tourist office for information, how soon can you expect a reply?
This column's periodic survey of travel bureaus in the United States and the Canadian provinces shows that while some states have picked up speed since the last such test in 1991, the most likely turnaround time is still a month.
However, if your intended destination is Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Nevada, Washington State or Quebec, nothing may help: Of the 63 places queried in February -- 50 states, the District of Columbia and 12 Canadian provinces -- these 10 did not respond at all in six weeks.
New York State did not send any information either, but did send a postcard saying the literature was exhausted and a new request should be sent in April.


How to Help Russia And Create U.S. Jobs
To the Editor:
"Military Cuts: A Millstone for Ex-Workers" (front page, April 5) describes the difficult plight of workers laid off because of cuts in military spending.
"President Urges America to Back Help for Moscow" (front page, April 2) reports that only 41 percent of American adults favor giving economic aid to help reform Russia's economy.
Many people oppose helping Russia as long as so many Americans are out of work.


Jury in Police Beating Case Begins Deliberations
Jury deliberations began today in the case of four white officers charged in the beating of a black motorist after seven weeks of testimony in which eight lawyers and more than 60 witnesses presented their varying views of the events on the 81-second videotape of the beating of Rodney G. King.
The jury got the case at 3:05 P.M.
Pacific time and deliberated for 2 1/2 hours before adjourning for the day.
They planned to resume deliberations Sunday at noon.


CLINTONIAN CINEMA
Hollywood may be reflecting the antimacho stance of a new Administration, but unfortunately the war against women in the movies continues (Endpaper/Public Stages: "Clintonian Cinema," by Frank Rich, March 21).
In "Scent of a Woman," women, as the title indicates, are olfactory sensations.
In "The Crying Game," the only
real
woman is a maniacal two-faced assassin, and in "A Few Good Men" (again, the title tells it all), matronly Demi Moore suffers, if I remember correctly, at least two vicious verbal assaults directed specifically at her gender.
ROWENA FENSTERMACHER
Millerton, N.Y.


BEST SELLERS: April 11, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
2
2
35
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
4
2
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two Kansas teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a famous model.
4
3
7
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
5
7
8
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) A series of fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905.
6
8
11
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist.
7
5
5
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
8
9
10
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
9
1
FORWARD THE FOUNDATION, by Isaac Asimov. (Foundation/Doubleday, $23.50.) The final volume of a science fiction series about the fall of the Galactic Empire and the birth of a new order.
10
6
3
THE DEVIL'S HEART, by Carmen Carter. (Pocket, $20.) The crew of the U.S.S.
Enterprise in a new "Star Trek" tale of adventure and betrayal.
11
10
5
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state and the human race is approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his fate.
12
12
32
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
13
11
20
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
14
13
5
TO GREEN ANGEL TOWER, by Tad Williams. (DAW, $25.) The third and concluding volume in the fantasy series "Memory, Sorrow and Thorn."
15 *
5
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the story of a street boy and a genie.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
8
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
2
2
35
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
3
3
30
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
4
21
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
5
5
6
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
6
7
4
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A Yale historian assays social and political forces and how they will affect the future.
7
6
43
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
8
8
17
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
9
9
5
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
10
10
29
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
11
7
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.
12
12
12
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
13 *
11
7
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The legendary actress as remembered by her daughter.
14 *
7
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the King's six spouses.
15 *
16
40
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
16 *
13
25
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
3
39
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
3
4
57
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
56
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
2
6
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) How to adapt your financial situation to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
WHAT REMAINS AND OTHER STORIES, by Christa Wolf (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25), and THE AUTHOR'S DIMENSION: Selected Essays, by Christa Wolf. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) These volumes span nearly 30 years of work by the former East Germany's most discussed author.
"What Remains" offers eight fiction pieces whose vital insights are sometimes blocked by a puritan, didactic tone; the essays show Ms.
Wolf struggling, right down to the end, with the conviction that Communism wasn't working yet, but could and should be made to.
SHYLOCK: A Legend and Its Legacy, by John Gross. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) An absorbing and lively study of "The Merchant of Venice" and of changing attitudes to the play and its most fascinating character since Shakespeare's time.
PANDAEMONIUM: Ethnicity in International Politics, by Daniel Patrick Moynihan. (Oxford University, $19.95.) Senator Moynihan, one of ethnicity's prime explorers, argues that modern politics has culpably slighted the subject and that national self-determination has proved a perilous principle.
MARTYRS' DAY: Chronicle of a Small War, by Michael Kelly. (Random House, $23.) A personal account of extremely vivid experiences during and after the Persian Gulf war, by a journalist who later became a correspondent for The New York Times.
THE MAN IN THE TOWER, by Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $19.95.) A mordant, funny novel about a reclusive German painter who lives in the south of France and broods on many things.
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $20.) Ms.
Proulx's third book of fiction concerns a man mourning his adulterous wife in Newfoundland, where he works on a newspaper whose boss magically senses what will most annoy his employees.


Corrections
A report on March 14 about the Munich Opera Festival in a roundup of European music festivals misstated the nationality of the tenor Ben Heppner.
He is Canadian, not American.
A picture caption with the roundup misidentified the site of a concert at the opening of last year's Vienna Festival.
It was the corner of Graben and Karntner Strasse, near St.
Stephen's Cathedral.


BACKTALK: Readers Speak Out on States of College Basketball; Michigan Received Unjust Criticism
To the Sports Editor:
Michigan has been the news media's punching bag in the escalating hype surrounding National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball the last two years.
Nearly every column I read over the last three weeks portrayed the Wolverines as villains and criticized "the long, baggy, drooping shorts," "the black shoes and socks," the "gangster" image and the "trash talk" of the Michigan players.
Maybe these guys are fashionably ahead of their time.
Maybe they deserve to be cocky because they have succeeded in a white man's world and stand to become very wealthy.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
113.34
113.75
132.90
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6046
1.5995
1.6365
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2571
1.2644
1.1868
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5285
1.5205
1.7655
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$337.00
$340.60
$340.60
Republic National Bank
Currency: Thursday NY Close


What BMW Sees In South Carolina
GLEAMING black BMW 740 sedans, costing $60,000 each, glide up and down the broad boulevard that is this city's main street, their elegance a striking contrast to the crumbling buildings and vacant lots, once home to so many knitting mills.
The cars belong mostly to BMW executives, who are becoming more numerous by the week.
They are here because BMW A.G., after scouring the world, has chosen a 900-acre stretch of red clay halfway between Spartanburg and Greenville to build a car assembly plant.
The attraction: promises of an eager, technically trained work force, the proximity of both the port of Charleston and numerous automotive suppliers, tax incentives and a favorable climate.


The Best Partnership With No World Title
ASK knowledgeable experts to select the best player who has never won a world title and you would get many answers.
Among them would no doubt be Tim Seres of Australia, Jean Besse of Switzerland, Alvin Roth of the United States and, from the younger generation, Zia Mahmood of Pakistan and Tony Forrester of Britain.
Some with long memories would suggest another American, Helen Sobel.


Body Language in Somalia -- Letter From an Exhausted Land
JAN. 24 -- I'm writing this from the rooftop of a house in Mogadishu, a once-graceful port city, now a hellhole of destruction and misery.
All I see are hulks -- burned and twisted ruins, mangled people.
The foreign military has seized many of the guns that were once so prevalent, but there is still a sense of menace everywhere you go.
My first glimpse of this lurking violence came earlier today on a visit to the American diplomatic compound.
Robert Oakley, the special United States envoy, lives behind high walls and metal doors, as does everyone here.
At a nearby checkpoint, a group of Somalis scowled before allowing the pickup to drop me at the compound gate.
Just down the dusty road is the home of a wealthy businessman, backer of a major warlord, so I figured the thugs are probably to protect him.
But the checkpoint is a none-too-subtle kick from the people who brought the country down, a reminder that despite the American military presence you can proceed only at their say-so.
One of the brigands had his mouth blown away so badly that his teeth seemed to grow out of his face, directly from his nose.
The wound was old, something that the rest of his face had grown around, making him seem monstrous.
But how else could he look?
How could he not look vicious with a mouth that had become an apostrophe twisting up between his chin and eyes?
It was horrifying, all the more so because there is nothing noble about it.
No ideology, not even a warped belief in God, just the animal order broken down to the point where man feeds off other men.


Idyllic Love


Phillip Beverly and Courtney Small
Courtney Lisa Small, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Small of New York, and Phillip Adrian Beverly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adrian Beverly of Chicago, were married yesterday on Roosevelt Island in New York.
The Rev.
Dwight M. Jackson performed the Baptist ceremony at the Chapel of the Good Shepherd.
Mrs.
Beverly, 27, teaches sociology and economics at Robert Morris College in Chicago.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in social service administration from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a supervisor in the New York City Family Preservation Program.
Her mother, Shaila M. Small, is an assistant to the president of the Conceptual Communications Group, a New York company that produces corporate annual reports.


Free Concert Features Concerto by Yale Dean
WHETHER your tastes run to chamber music, choral song or opera, it is a busy week at Yale, starting at 8 P.M. on Tuesday when chamber ensembles selected by the faculty present a showcase recital at Sprague Memorial Hall.
At that same hour and place on Thursday, the music of the dean of the music school, Ezra Laderman, is featured in a free concert under the auspices of New Music New Haven.
Mr.
Laderman will conduct his own Concerto for Chamber Orchestra, while Ransom Wilson introduces "June 29 for Solo Flute." Works by three other Yale composers -- Douglas Knehans, Francine Trester and Robert Levin -- are also on that evening's schedule.


NOTES
Fashion
can
go to your head.
"I got so caught up last week in the affectations of fashion week that I double air-kissed my super," said Monica Lynch, the president of Tommy Boy Records, at a benefit on Thursday for the Community Research Initiative on AIDS.
The party's fashion show included four performers in need of comebacks: Debbie Gibson in Zang Toi, Corey Feldman in Mizrahi and Rob Pilatus and Fab Morvan, formerly of Milli Vanilli, in Nicole Miller.


And It's Not Over Till It's October


Where to call or write in the states and provinces
Here is a list of addresses and phone numbers for requesting tourist information from the 50 states, the District of Columbia and the 12 Canadian provinces and territories.
Postcards are best for mail requests; "800" numbers are sometimes answered in other states, and calls to toll numbers may get better results.
United States
Alabama Bureau of Tourism and Travel, Post Office Box 4309, Montgomery, Ala. 36103; (800) 252-2262 or (205) 242-4169.


Partying Into the Night At Sondheim's
While it would be especially gratifying to be able to welcome Julie Andrews back to the New York stage in a full-blown musical, "Putting It Together," the revue of Stephen Sondheim songs at the Manhattan Theater Club, will serve the purpose just fine.
More than fine, actually.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Lee Stevens, first baseman, to a minor league contract and assigned him to Syracuse of the International League.
National League


INSIDE
U.S. Still Seeks to Oust Iraqi
The Clinton Administration plans a scaled-down version of the covert effort to oust Saddam Hussein, though it feels the program has failed to weaken him, officials say.
Page 3.
U.N.
Has Plan for Haiti
Mediators say they will propose a settlement this week to return Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's deposed President, to power.
Page 10.
Arguing for Posterity's Sake
The National Archives is being accused by historians of being too passive in seeking to preserve important Federal records.
Page 21.
Deep Roots in Civil Rights
The Rev.
Benjamin Chavis organized his first civil-rights protest at age 13.
Now he is hoping to lead the N.A.A.C.P. into a new era.
Page 20.
Albany's Eternal Bridesmaid
When Governor Cuomo removed himself from Supreme Court consideration, it was another setback for Lieut.
Gov.
Stan N. Lundine.
Page 23.


Clinton to Scale Down Program to Oust Iraqi Leader
The Clinton Administration has concluded that the Bush Administration's covert program to overthrow Saddam Hussein has failed to weaken the Iraqi leader, but it plans to maintain a scaled-down version of the program anyway, Administration and other Government officials say.
In reviewing the program, the new Administration has concluded that much of the aid has been misdirected to groups with no popular following, and that too much money has been spent on leaflets and other propaganda devices that have had little impact, the officials said.
They added that the Administration would try to make less money do more in trying to destabilize the Iraqi Government and make life more difficult for Mr.
Hussein.


Profile/Anthony L. Watson; Fighting an Image of Cattle-Car Health Care
POUND for pound in polished metal and marble, the new Fifth Avenue headquarters of the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York can match those of most Wall Street firms for pre-crash, post-modern stylishness.
Wood paneling is everywhere.
Suits and ties are now mandatory; anything that suggests public-sector dreariness is anathema.
Anthony L. Watson, chief executive of the organization that is New York's largest health maintenance organization and is commonly known as HIP, insists on such appearances.
"These offices were designed to project the image of a first-class organization," said Mr.
Watson, whose towering frame stands out more than his elegantly tailored suits at HIP's offices.
"That's what we are now."


At Work; Labor's Return to Prominence
HERE'S one more sign that the Labor Department is working through the post-traumatic stress of its 12 years in the hands of Republicans.
Early this month, Labor Secretary Robert Reich appointed a longtime union activist to run the Glass Ceiling Commission, a group devoted to figuring out why women and minorities seem to get stuck in the pipeline below the top tier of large corporations.
The lack of female C.E.O.'s has not heretofore been viewed as a critical labor issue, and Joyce Miller, a vice president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and president of the Coalition of Labor Union Women, can be expected to expand her constituency beyond those with their eyes on a corner office.
Ms.
Miller has been around the glass ceiling problems of the labor movement long enough to bring relevant experience to the job she will begin on May 3.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Small First Steps
WITH backpacks, guitars and Craig Gordon's two-week supply of Passover food at the ready, 27 Hofstra students and one professor were about to embark on a six-week bus trip across America.
All the way to Alaska.
"Perhaps even to Russia," said a student, Gemps Michelot of Elmont.
Russia? "Maybe," he said. "I guess it's a secret."


Kasparov Rehearses For Match With Short
ALTHOUGH Gary Kasparov of Russia and Nigel Short of England are bickering with the International Chess Federation about who controls the world championship match, the titleholder has given one implication that he expects to answer the Englishman's official challenge in September with or without formal approval.
In the last round of the elite Linares International Tournament in Spain, which ended March 14, Kasparov chose Short's favorite attack so as to defeat Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn and nail down first place.
This effort seems to indicate that Kasparov wanted to get the hang of his future title opponent's approach to the strategy of the game.
It can be seen that he passed the test with flying colors.


Martha Goldberg, Daniel Aronson
Dr.
Stanley and Luella Goldberg of Minneapolis have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Rose Goldberg to Daniel Robert Aronson, a son of Philip and Carole Aronson of Needham, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goldberg, 25, is a business analyst for corporate development at Medtronic Inc., a medical device manufacturer in Minneapolis.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a clinical professor of surgery at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis and a surgeon in private practice in Minneapolis.
Her mother, the chairwoman of the board at Wellesley College, will be the college's acting president beginning in July.


Homeowners Refuse to Let Dream Die:


THE COMPANY OF DOGS
So Joseph Olshan was running away from a relationship.
And he landed in the paws of Beo, a mixed breed who thrived under Olshan's unconditional affection as he never had before.
Well, I too am running away from a relationship.
After 25 years of marriage, I have decided to leave my husband.
Why?
Because in order to rise from bed one morning, he asked me to move rather than inconvenience the dog sleeping next to him.
When you're standing at the edge of a precipice, it takes surprisingly little to push you over the edge.


Books From The Times
THINKING OUT LOUD: On the Personal, the Political, the Public and the Private, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Anna Quindlen's Public &amp; Private columns began appearing twice a week on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times in 1990, and they won Ms.
Quindlen a Pulitzer Prize for commentary in 1992.
Eighty-seven of these columns are collected in "Thinking Out Loud"; they concern men, women, war, men and women at war, men at war with women, fashions, abortion rights, issues and nonissues, reflections and perceptions on current news reports; many of them remind the reader that almost all the power and authority in the world belongs to men, and that a good reason for this state of affairs is hard to find.


Macy's in Bloom
A party for the Greater New York Chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, April 4.


Manager's Profile; Robert J. Haber
Fund: Fidelity Balanced; $2.4 billion. (Sponsor: Fidelity Investments, Boston)
Born: Jan. 27, 1958


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:1 MONDAY  Carolina Frght Corp Phillips Pete Co Pitney Bowes Inc TUESDAY  AAAR Corp Crompton &amp; Knowles ITT Corp Procter &amp; Gamble Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt WEDNESDAY  Dayton Hudson Corp Philadelphia Elec Co Shelby Williams Inds Supervalu Inc WPL Hldgs Inc THURSDAY  Gillette Co Oneok Inc Pall Corp Parker Hannifin Corp Pope &amp; Talbot Inc PPG Inds Inc Shopko Stores Inc Weyerhauser Co FRIDAY  Comm Satelite Corp J M Smucker Co Twin Disc Inc


Film Preserves Haig's Words on Murders
To the Editor:
To me, as the brother of Ita Ford, one of four American churchwomen murdered in El Salvador by National Guardsmen of the United States-backed Salvadoran Government, Alexander Haig's denial of United States knowledge of a cover-up, and his attempts to distance himself from testimony he gave Congress, ring hollow (letter, March 31).
On March 18, 1981, Mr.
Haig testified to Congress on the "investigation" in El Salvador into the murders.
His videotaped testimony can be seen in "Roses in December," a 1982 documentary directed by Ana Carrigan and Bernard Stone.
Mr.
Haig stated:


Bank of Granite reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Stumbling Macmillan on the Auction Block
On Friday, Price Waterhouse, the administrator for the Maxwell Communication Corporation, got the first idea of how much Maxwell's crucial American asset, Macmillan Inc., might fetch.
Prospective buyers submitted their first round of offers for the giant publisher.
The sale is being closely watched both by publishing executives and those involved with Maxwell.
Publishing companies were sold for very high prices in the 1980's, but there have not been many major transactions in the sober 90's.


Alias Research Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


That Wheeze You Hear Is the Rangers Still Breathing
There are days when it seems as if it will never end.
Weren't the Rangers out of this playoff race two weeks ago?
Ten days ago?
Wasn't it over last Monday, when they were humiliated by the Hartford Whalers?
Wasn't it over last Wednesday, when the Rangers blew a chance to gain ground on the Devils?
The answer is no, it's not over.
Not yet.
The Rangers have won only one of their last nine games -- not exactly behavior befitting a team that's fighting for a playoff berth -- but they are still alive in the Patrick Division playoff race.
Mathematically, at least.
Who Would Have Thought?
The latest reprieve came Saturday night, when the Islanders suffered a huge upset at the hands of the Ottawa Senators, a team that had never before won a game away from home.
Had they been victorious, the Islanders would have been poised to seize the final Patrick Division berth tonight with a victory or a tie against the Devils, who secured their playoff spot with a victory over the Washington Capitals Saturday night.


Car-Theft Advice
To the Editor:
"Anti-Theft Device Talks, Squeals and Stops Car" (Business Day, April 2) had me enthralled -- until the last sentence.
Was it necessary to quote the device's spokesman on how easy it is, and how, to break The Club anti-theft device?
I understand why the spokesman for the $300 device would like to see sales cut down on the $20 car-theft device.
But why would you publish information telling how to steal a car?
MARLENE ROBERTS  Boca Raton, Fla., April 2, 1993


Franz Schneider, 105, an Investor Who Helped Start Gas Companies
Franz Schneider, a businessman and investor, died on Friday at his winter home in Key Largo, Fla.
He was 105 and lived mainly in Oyster Bay, L.I.
His daughter, June Occhiuto, said the cause of death was complications from hip surgery after a fall.


Agencies Replaced On Drackett Brands
Six months after S. C. Johnson &amp; Son Inc. acquired the Drackett Company from the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Johnson has replaced agencies on four Drackett brands with combined billings estimated at $40 million.
DDB Needham Chicago was selected to handle the Windex, Vanish, Drano and O-Cedar Carpet Science accounts in the United States, Canada, Europe and other regions.
DDB Needham, which already handles many Johnson brands in 12 countries, was selected after a review that included Bozell New York and J. Walter Thompson Chicago.
Bozell previously handled the O-Cedar Carpet Science brand, Grey Advertising in New York handled Drano, and LCF&amp;L in New York handled Vanish and Windex.


An Arrest Is Made in the Shooting of 12 in Baltimore


LaValliere Is Released
The Pittsburgh Pirates continued to slash veterans from their roster, releasing catcher MIKE LaVALLIERE yesterday despite owing him $4.05 million over the next two seasons.
The unexpected move hands the full-time starting job to DON SLAUGHT, who has platooned the last three seasons, and makes light-hitting TOM PRINCE the backup.


Greenwich Feels Pain of Change
If the Disney people wanted to update Main Street, U.S.A., they might copy Greenwich Avenue, a broad, sloping street of historic storefronts where police officers, not traffic lights, direct cars through busy intersections.
D.
W.
Rogers, descended from a local general store, is a neighbor of F. W. Woolworth.
Boswell's, Finch's and Grannick's pharmacies endure.
But Victoria's Secret and Banana Republic are also neighbors, and each end of the avenue is now anchored by an office plaza.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
March  Wednesday  Business Inventories . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Merchandise Trade . . .
Feb.
Industrial Production . . .
March  Capacity Utilization . . .
March


METRO DIGEST
A HAMLET DEFIES THE PATH OF PROGRESS
On a small mountain ridge in the Adirondacks known as the Hollow, indoor plumbing was first installed six years ago and many people still do not have telephones.
There are a few signs of modernization in the area just 35 miles from Saratoga Springs that social workers call the Appalachia of the North, but most people in the Hollow, home to several hundred descendants of two farming families that settled there in the early 19th century, continue to make their living as the woodsmen and trappers they have been for nearly 200 years, selling firewood or serving as guides.
A1.
MEETINGS WITH ISLAMIC GROUP DISCLOSED
Officials from the United States Embassy in Cairo have had meetings since 1991 with militant leaders of the Islamic Group, the organization whose leader has been linked to suspects in the World Trade Center bombing, said two members of the group who took part in the sessions and Western diplomats who said they were aware of the contacts.
The militants, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the initial meetings had been held at the embassy's request and centered on allegations of human rights abuses committed by the Egyptian Government.
A3.
NEW YORK CITY


CHRONICLE
ROSIE PEREZ, the actress, has lost eight friends to AIDS, but she is determined not to stand helplessly by and watch more die.
"I've got a big mouth," said the star of "White Men Can't Jump" and "Untamed Heart" in an interview with The Associated Press.
"I'm going to put my drop in the bucket and go to AIDS dance-a-thons in as many cities as I possibly can."


Dance in Review
Junko Kikuchi  Dia Center for the Arts 155 Mercer Street, SoHo
Junko Kikuchi has long been singled out for the quality of her dancing, and maturity has not dulled her clarity, simplicity and focus.
Back from Tokyo after a nine-year absence, Miss Kikuchi presented two works on April 4 that were less unerring.
But there was much to admire in them.


He's No Longer a Saint: Heyward Goes to Bears
The Chicago Bears have agreed to terms with New Orleans fullback CRAIG (IRONHEAD) HEYWARD, sending an apparent farewell message to incumbent BRAD MUSTER.
Bears spokesman BRYAN HARLAN said yesterday that Heyward will sign in the next day or two.
He reportedly will get $3 million for three years plus a $200,000 bonus each season if he reaches accepted weight levels.
Heyward has weighed close to 300 pounds in some seasons.


A Bar Owner, Fatally Shot, Is Sadly Saluted
The longtime owner of a Bronx bar was shot and killed Saturday night as he was picking up a supply of liquor with his wife and one of his employees, the police said yesterday.
James Kevin Ahern, 58, the owner of the Derby Pub in the Norwood section, was confronted by four men in what was apparently a robbery outside a liquor store in the Fordham section about 10:40 P.M. and was shot once in the chest, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti.


Bonilla Goal: Stop the Press
The continuing Mets saga that General Manager Al Harazin calls "soap opera baseball" paused for a literary moment yesterday.
Bobby Bonilla, saying he was concerned with "the integrity of the sport," explained why he threatened a Daily News reporter in the locker room after Saturday's game.


U.S. Aides in Egypt Said to Have Met With Group Tied to New York Blast
Officials from the United States Embassy have had meetings since 1991 with militant leaders of the Islamic Group, an organization that is being scrutinized in connection with the World Trade Center bombing, said two members of the group who took part in the sessions and Western diplomats who said they were aware of the contacts.
The militants, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the initial meetings had been held at the embassy's request and centered on allegations of human rights abuses committed by the Egyptian Government.


Cable Company Plans a Fiber-Optic Network
In the biggest gamble yet that Americans want an "information superhighway" to their homes, the nation's largest cable television company is embarking on a $2 billion program to lay fiber-optic cable throughout more than 400 communities across the country by 1996.
The plan, to be outlined Monday by Tele-Communications Inc. of Denver, marks a sharp acceleration in the race between cable and telephone companies to provide homes with everything from hundreds of television channels to home-shopping and high-speed information services.


Easter Is Commemorated in the Old City of Jerusalem


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Beats Gilbert  Pete Sampras beat Brad Gilbert, 6-2, 6-2, 6-2, in an all-United States singles final to win the Japan Open championship yesterday in Tokyo.
The second-seeded Sampras had become the world's No. 1 player Friday, replacing American Jim Courier, who was upset early in the tournament.
"It really worked out well for me this week," Sampras said.
"Being No. 1 is a great achievement, but I think the most important thing is to win the big tournaments. My next goal is the French Open, although clay is not the best surface for me." (AP) Medvedev Wins in Spain: Eighteen-year-old Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine beat Sergi Bruguera of Spain, 6-7 (7-9), 6-3, 7-5, 6-4, to win the $875,000 Trofeo Conde de Godo ATP Tour clay-court tournament in Barcelona, Spain.
It was Medvedev's fifth career title, and his second this year.
Ranked 19th in the world and seeded ninth in the tournament, Medvedev is considered one of the top clay-court players on the circuit.
He won $126,000 for the victory.
It was Bruguera's second loss in a Conde de Godo final.
In 1991 he lost to fellow Spaniard Emilio Sanchez. (AP)


Files Said to Show Hanoi Lied in '72 On Prisoner Totals
A document described as a top secret report written by a senior North Vietnamese general and delivered to the Communist Party Politburo in Hanoi in September 1972 says that North Vietnam was holding 1,205 American prisoners of war when Hanoi maintained that the number was only 368.
A copy of the report, a Russian translation of the Vietnamese document, was recently discovered here in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party.


Michigan Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HORSE RACING: Kentucky Derby '93 -- In the Running; Loblolly Stable Stands 1-2 Turning for Home on the Road to Louisville
On the day after the Blue Grass Stakes scrambled the cast for the Kentucky Derby one more time, Living Vicariously and Halostrada dropped out, Sea Hero waited for word from his owner, Dixieland Heat kissed his five-race winning streak goodbye and Corby gnawed the wood on his stall door while his handlers tried to figure out how their No. 1 horse could run No. 7.
But in the debris of the most important Derby prep race, one colt stood tall: Prairie Bayou, who won the $600,000 Jim Beam Stakes two weeks ago and returned to win the $500,000 Blue Grass at Keeneland on Saturday.
And he was already back in his barn at Churchill Downs today with a four-race winning streak and undisputed leadership among 3-year-olds traveling the tortuous road to Louisville, where the 119th Derby will be run on May 1.


Midlantic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


R. C. Failla, Justice and Leader On Gay Rights Issues, Dies at 53
Richard C. Failla, the first acknowledged homosexual elected to the New York State Supreme Court and a leader on gay rights and AIDS issues, died yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 53 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was complications from AIDS, said Tony Picard, a family friend.


Quipp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Ideal Auto: 6.8 Plush Seats?
Under the Clean Air Act's formula, Manhattan has an average vehicle occupancy of about 6.8.
This does not mean that there are 6.8 people in each car, but that the number of people arriving at work by bus, subway, train, bicycle and shoe, divided by the number of cars at worksites, comes to 6.8.
People who work in their homes are counted as arriving at the work site in zero vehicles.
People who drive from home to the train station are counted as arriving by train, even though they may add substantial pollution because cars cause the most pollution in the first mile or two of driving.


An Immigrant Finds Death At a Brooklyn Playground
It began as a balmy spring afternoon, so fine that the temptation to shed jackets and backpacks and shoot hoops was irresistible.
It sent Christian Abakpa and his two immigrant brothers to a Brooklyn playground to hone their newly acquired skill at the foreign sport of pick-up basketball.
Across the courts, Kenneth Parks and "his boys" were dribbling away at a rougher version of the game -- "Utah," as they call it in Brooklyn, a wide-open street game that requires deft touches, dazzling streaks to the hoop and heavy doses of every-player-for-himself macho posturing.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Make Congress Obey Itself
Congress is quick to impose new laws on hapless states, cities, corporations and just plain citizens.
But it is woefully derelict in applying those laws to itself and its members.
Laws that protect racial minorities and women against discrimination do not apply equally on Capitol Hill.
The same inequity exists in legislation on workplace safety, family leave and freedom of information.


Review/Music; Serkin and the Guarneri Offer Henze and Dvorak
Concerts by the Guarneri String Quartet are joyless affairs these days.
Musical sympathy among the four musicians is difficult to detect, and although passages fall nicely into place now and again, more often one hears four musical lines that either keep their distance or seem locked in an angry battle.
Individually, the players sometimes make appealing, shapely sounds.
But together their timbre is usually an uninviting shade of gray.
The pianist Peter Serkin was moderately successful in his attempts to light a fire under the quartet on Wednesday evening at Alice Tully, when he joined the group for a new quintet by Hans Werner Henze and the Dvorak Quintet in A (Op. 81).
In both works, Mr.
Serkin's colorful, textured playing was the glue that held the performance together and a catalyst point for the kinds of responses that the Guarneri players seem not to evoke from each other.


Back on Track in Aiding Nicaragua
Nicaragua's failure to please Senator Jesse Helms, the hard-right North Carolina Republican, will no longer cost it American support.
The State Department says that $50 million in blocked U.S. aid will now be released because Nicaragua is making progress on human rights and other matters in dispute.
Senator Helms's oft-repeated complaint is that President Violeta Chamorro yielded too much power to the Sandinistas she defeated in 1990.
Granted, Mrs.
Chamorro opted for conciliation by retaining Humberto Ortega, brother of former Sandinista President Daniel Ortega, as head of the armed forces.


Rome Prize Winners Are Announced
The winners of the 97th annual Rome Prize Competition have been announced by the American Academy in Rome, an overseas center for independent study, advanced research and creative work in the arts and humanities.
The prizes, administered by the academy at its headquarters in New York City, include stipends, travel benefits and living and working accommodations at the academy's 11-acre Rome campus for six months to two years.
Financing for the academy comes from private donations and from the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
The costs of the Rome Prize Competition have been partly underwritten for 10 years by the Philip Morris Companies.
These are the 1993 winners:
Architecture: Sanda D. Iliescu, Charlotte, N.C.
Design Arts: Kevin Walz, New York
Phillip R. Baldwin, New York
Margaret Holben Ellis, New York
Bettina A. Raphael, Santa Fe, N.M.
Landscape Architecture: Gary R. Hilderbrand, Cambridge, Mass.
Literature: Thomas Bolt, New York.
Musical Composition: Sebastian K. Currier, New York
Kristin Jones and Andrew Ginzel, New York
Clifton S. Peacock, Charleston, S.C.
Classical Studies and Archeology: Gregory S. Bucher, Providence, R.I.
Katherine E. Welch, New York
Guy M. Hedreen, Williamstown, Mass.
History of Art: Brian A. Curran, Princeton, N.J.
Carol A. Rusche, Old Brookville, L.I.
Carmen Bambach Cappel, New York.
Post-Classical Humanistic Studies: Christopher S. Celenza, Durham, N.C.
Susan V. Nicassio., Birmingham, Ala.


Man, 62, Stabbed to Death
Joseph Greene, a 62-year-old resident of the Kingsborough Houses in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, was stabbed to death yesterday in his apartment, the police reported.
Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a Police Department spokesman, said Mr.
Greene, who was been stabbed in the neck, ran into the hallway seeking help and then collapsed there shortly after 5 P.M.
The spokesman said detectives were investigating the possibility that there had been a dispute in Mr.
Greene's apartment at 120 Kingsborough First Walk.
Some residents of the apartment house, who described Mr.
Greene as a truck mechanic, said the slaying was the first instance of serious crime in the building in years.


Review/Dance; Juilliard in Spring: Angels and a Lark
The annual spring performances of the Juilliard Dance Ensemble allow students in the Juilliard School's dance division to show their mastery of many styles.
This year's series, which ran through last Monday at the Juilliard Theater, featured two major modern-dance works.
"Diversion of Angels," which dates from 1948, is Martha Graham's affectionate tribute to young love.
It has its moments of sorrow, but they are bittersweet, and joy inevitably triumphs.


Query Is Rebuffed By Continental Air
The national advertising division of the Council of Better Business Bureaus Inc. said Continental Airlines Inc. had refused to participate in an inquiry about the new campaign for the airline's Business First service, which was challenged by Virgin Atlantic Airways.
The dispute centers on advertising for Business First created by Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York.
The ads compare Continental's business-class service with that of five other international airlines, but not Virgin.
The omission led Virgin to complain to the advertising review division because it says that Continental's Business First is a virtual replica of Virgin's Upper Class service, which has been available for several years.


Gabor Peter, 86, Dies; Led Hungarian Police
Gabor Peter, who headed Hungary's powerful State Security Authority in the late 1940's and early 1950's, has died in Budapest, a Hungarian newspaper reported Thursday.
He was 86.
The newspaper, Reform, said Mr.
Peter had died on Jan. 23.
The Associated Press reported that a Hungarian historian, Tibor Zinner, who confirmed Mr.
Peter's death, said he had interviewed him in recent years and had found him to be unrepentent.


Escalade Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 20


Cruising Killer With Shotgun Terrorizes Washington Area
In the last few weeks, Betty Henderson, like other residents of two adjacent neighborhoods here, says she has become a captive in her own home.
"I don't go out anymore," said Ms.
Henderson, who is 63 and lives on the street where a man was killed when he was shot in the face on Saturday morning, just after midnight.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about an agreement in Russia to limit the growth of the money supply referred incorrectly in some copies to a 30 percent limit on the growth of credits issued by the central bank in the second quarter of 1993.
The percentage is based on total credits existing at the end of March, not on credits issued in the first quarter of 1993.


3 Cabdrivers Slain in Weekend Shootings
Three cabdrivers were fatally shot in a 26-hour period over the weekend, bringing the number of cabbies slain so far this year in New York City to at least 16, the police said yesterday.
Forty cabdrivers were killed in 1992, according to Police Department statistics.
Thirty-five of them were livery-cab drivers and five were medallion cabbies.


Rams Get Bills' Conlan
Buffalo linebacker SHANE CONLAN has agreed to a three-year guaranteed contract with the Los Angeles Rams.
The pact is worth about $1.8 million a year, Conlan's agent, BRETT SENIOR, told The Buffalo News.


Liberty Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Traffic Alert
Because of Passover and Orthodox Holy Thursday and Good Friday, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended this week.


Bankers Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SouthTrust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
Defensive play can be technically difficult, and the difficulties are compounded if there is an ethical component.
Consider, for example, the diagramed deal played in December in Century Village in Boca Raton, Fla.
It was reported by Stan Slater, a snowbird from Brooklyn, who held the West cards.
His partner was Bernard Gottheim, who heads the bridge activities in the senior citizen community.
The obvious move for West, when his partner's weak two-spade bid was overcalled with three clubs, was to bid three spades.
But the club nine looked as if it would be a good card in defense and the opponents were vulnerable, so he ventured a double.
This was a match-point game, and collecting 200 would probably be worth a top score.


Berlin Journal; Ghost of Protest Past, Red Rudi's Haunting Spirit
A cast of new and old German leftists gathered today to mark the 25th anniversary of the shooting of one of their heroes, Rudi Dutschke, and to name a building in his honor.
At a time when Europeans are reassessing the legacy of the 1968 protest movement, the midday gathering was an assertion that anti-establishment leaders like Dutschke, who won international fame as "Red Rudi," changed German society for the better.


Review/Television; Nostalgia for 150-Year-Olds: 'The Class of '61'
David Lynch watched as "Twin Peaks" dribbled away ingloriously.
George Lucas is still struggling to salvage "The Chronicles of Young Indiana Jones." And tonight at 9 on ABC, Steven Spielberg comes a cropper with "Class of '61." Message to powerful Hollywood directors and producers: television isn't as easy as it looks.
Created and written by Jonas McCord, who is also co-executive producer with Mr.
Spielberg, "Class of '61" clearly owes its existence to the success on public television of the award-winning documentary series "The Civil War." Shelby Foote, the novelist and historian, has a credit as a consultant on both projects.


Jefferson Is America -- And America Is Jefferson
Thomas Jefferson embodied the most powerful contradiction of the American legacy.
His declarations on individual liberty, which remain a moral and political compass, showed the brilliance of a transcendent mind.
But he also believed in the inferiority of black people, demonstrating how even a great thinker can remain captive of the racist stereotypes of his time.
That one man could simultaneously possess such vision and such blindness is intriguing; that his attitudes on race should persist in the culture at large, as they have, tells a troubling story about American society.
It is a perspective that schools, universities and libraries should adopt as they celebrate the 250th anniversary of Jefferson's birth today, , for he can be just as instructive about the wounds of racism as the nobility of democracy.
And his statements about blacks are rarely taught in history courses.


Points Well Taken: Islanders Just a Tie Away From Playoffs
The Islanders, moving closer to a playoff berth, squandered a three-goal lead, but came back for a 5-4 triumph over the Devils tonight.
The victory brought the Islanders to within 1 point of clinching a playoff spot and prevented the Devils from taking another step toward their next goal, which is second place in the Patrick Division.


Empire Blue Cross Deserves Better Treatment; Not the Economy
To the Editor:
Contrary to statements attributed to me in "The Blame for Empire's Mess" (editorial, March 31), I have never blamed the "poor economy" for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield's problems.
Nor have I, the Insurance Department or the Cuomo administration been inattentive to the real problems.
The state's landmark community rating-open enrollment legislation, proposed by Governor Cuomo in 1991, was designed to address many of the concerns you implicitly raise.
Moreover, an Arthur Andersen audit of Empire, encouraged by my office, will speak to the direct management concerns.


New York Needs Special Prosecutor's Office for Police Cases
To the Editor:
The difficulties of the New York City Police Department in policing its own has led to creation of a special unit in the Manhattan District Attorney's office to handle only police cases (news article, March 26).
Those difficulties also make a strong case for re-establishing the special prosecutor's office for criminal justice to investigate and prosecute cases of police corruption more effectively.


Preventing Violence at School
Fear for their personal safety impedes learning for far too many New York City students.
But now an advisory panel of law enforcement experts, established by Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez, has recommended sensible revisions in school security.
The Board of Education already spends some $72 million a year on unarmed security officers and metal detectors.
Even so, there were 1,880 assaults and 388 robberies reported in schools last year, reflecting violence on the streets.


Books of The Times; A Life of Love, Pizza and Theoretical Physics
Particles and Luck  By Louis B. Jones 305 pages. Pantheon Books. $22.
Mark Perdue, in Louis B. Jones's richly comic new novel, "Particles and Luck," is a 27-year-old physicist so absent-minded that Audrey, his wife, who is a lawyer, must put "signs on everything" to help him navigate an evening when she has to be away from the house on business.


Clinton Gas SystemsInc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ohio Welfare Bonuses Keep Teen-Age Mothers in School
The first major study of new efforts to use welfare payments to promote positive behavior has found that a program in Ohio is increasing the school attendance of young mothers.
The study's results come as supporters of such programs are arguing that incentives could be used more broadly -- to encourage welfare recipients to avoid having children, for example, to seek health care for their families or even to pay the rent.


House Panel To Examine Air Fare Suit
Responding to an unlikely alliance of airlines and consumer groups, Congress plans to investigate the merits of a pending antitrust case filed by the Justice Department.
The department has accused the eight largest United States airlines of using a computerized reservation system to fix air fares.
Specifically, the airlines are accused of signaling proposed changes in their future fares, thereby alerting other airlines that then decide whether to match, underprice or ignore their rivals.


Women and War
They wear uniforms, they often perform risky tasks and they are ordered, not asked.
Nevertheless, women in the armed forces have one thing in common with almost anyone who has ever held a job: they want to go as far as their talents will take them.
So far, they haven't had the chance.
The 35,000 women who served in the Persian Gulf war -- not to mention female cops, firefighters and astronauts -- have shown that competence has nothing to do with gender.
But all too often, reason flees and emotion takes over when there's talk of women in combat.


Langer Soars on Wings of an Eagle
With a serene exterior but a pugnacious spirit, Bernhard Langer took scant notice of the tepid challenges thrown at him today and put on a clinical display of mistake-free golf to win the 57th Masters.
Using a 22-foot eagle putt at the apex of Amen Corner as the clincher, the 35-year-old German shot a two-under-par 70 over the Augusta National course for a 72-hole total of 11-under-par 277, four drama-killing strokes ahead of Chip Beck and six better than Lanny Wadkins, Steve Elkington, John Daly and Tom Lehman.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $3 billion in debt securities through Dean Witter Reynolds.
Dean Witter, Discover sold 20 percent of its stock in an initial public offering in March, with Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. holding the remaining 80 percent. *
Legg Mason Inc., a Baltimore company engaged in investment banking and broker-dealer services, has filed for $50 million of convertible subordinated debentures.


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Day of Renewal And Revelry
Glenn Bressa, cradling his sleepy daughter during Easter Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral yesterday morning, broke away from the throng of worshipers to compose himself.
His eyes a bit red and teary, Mr.
Bressa paced by the entrance, deep in thought.
"This is a day to look at your life and see where it's going," he explained a few minutes later.
"It's a new start and a time to release some pent-up anxieties. The day is very good for people."


Nagle Knows He Still Has Some Convincing to Do
The young waitress isn't certain who Browning Nagle is, but she is convinced he is not who he says he is.
As he tries to identify himself as the Jets quarterback, the incredulous crinkle of her eyebrow is only exceeded by the skepticism in her voice.
Muscular young men, perhaps students from Hofstra University, which is a couple of deep-fly patterns from the restaurant, frequently come in and hand her the line that they are members of the New York Jets.
She doesn't believe them and she's not buying Nagle's story today.


Nationwide Health Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MGIC Investment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nets Still Eye Fourth, But Fifth Is No Given
The Nets had yesterday off and got some much-deserved, as well as much-needed, rest.
In fact, they don't play again until Wednesday, when they travel to Indiana.
Lots of time to think.
Lots of time to get their act together to make a run for that fourth Eastern Conference playoff spot.
But please, if anyone sees Coach Chuck Daly, comfort him.
He's been upset lately -- and understandably so -- as he has watched a team that had a realistic shot at doing something special in the playoffs fall apart because of injuries.
At one point Nets players openly talked about getting 50 victories.
Several devastating injuries later, Daly was talking as if the Nets might not make the playoffs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.N.
FOOD DRYING UP IN BOSNIA  United Nations officials are warning that there is virtually no food left in warehouses in and around Bosnia and that the entire food relief program there may collapse.
A1  NATO pilots are told to fire only as a last resort over Bosnia.
A8


Finally, Seles Feels Fit Again
Where's that girl?
Monica Seles, current queen of the women's tennis scene, has been quietly but conspicuously absent from it for 50 days now.
She has withdrawn from as many 1993 events -- three -- as she has competed in.
After winning the first two, the Australian Open and a Chicago tournament, she fell to Martina Navratilova in the Paris final in February and hasn't struck a ball since.


BESIEGED BOSNIANS FACING A NEW PERIL AS U.N. AID DRIES UP
Civilians who survived the Serbian nationalist campaign of "ethnic cleansing" and the cold, lean winter are facing another emergency: the virtual exhaustion of the food supplies that have kept 2.3 million Bosnians from starvation.
Since the Serbian forces launched the war a year ago, Western governments that have led the way in making United Nations policy have shunned Bosnian requests for military intervention.
They have promised instead that if Muslims cannot be saved from Serbian artillery bombardments, they will at least be saved from starving.


F&amp;C Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Executive Brief: THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT; Bentsen Remembers Way Around the Hill
The Lloyd Bentsen who is Treasury Secretary is proving to be little different from the Lloyd Bentsen who was chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
Mr.
Bentsen, his colleagues report, remains a good listener, still knows how to horse-trade and has not lost his knack at pushing the right button at the right time to move legislation along.


Essay; Progress In Ismailiya
On Wednesday in the Egyptian town of Ismailiya, which was the headquarters for the digging in 1863 of the Suez canal, Israel's Yitzhak Rabin and Egypt's Hosni Mubarak will open the way for the Clinton Round of the Mideast peace talks.
Confounding analysts who saw him following a "Syria first" strategy, Prime Minister Rabin will formally accede to a key Egyptian request, transmitted via the U.S. -- that the Palestinian leader Faisal al-Husseini be permitted to represent the West Bank and Gaza Arabs.


Sports of The Times; The Future Is Now Continues for Langer
SOME golfers have all but disappeared after a memorable mistake.
When the biggest putt of their life didn't drop, it was almost as if they crawled into the hole.
Ed Sneed dropped out of sight after missing a 5-foot putt on the 18th green that would have won the 1978 Masters, then losing to Fuzzy Zoeller in a playoff.
Tony Jacklin of England never was the same after three-putting the 17th green from 15 feet in the final round of the 1972 British Open that Lee Trevino won at Muirfield.


Rheaume: Another Shot?
MANON RHEAUME's first start in goal for the Atlanta Knights was impressive enough for her coach to say she has a chance to do it again.
Rheaume, the first woman to play professional hockey, stopped 25 shots and allowed 6 goals against the Cincinnati Cyclones Saturday night before a sellout crowd of 15,179 at the Omni in Atlanta.
The sixth goal was the worst: Rheaume knocked the puck into her own net to give the Cyclones a 6-5 lead in the third period.
She was later pulled for an extra skater and the Cyclones scored two empty-net goals to clinch the victory.


Review/Opera; The Decline of a Queen, in Concert
The Opera Orchestra of New York, led by Eve Queler, specializes in the revival of obscure or neglected operas.
Donizetti's "Anna Bolena," which Ms.
Queler conducted on Wednesday night at Carnegie Hall, isn't exactly obscure: it was first revived in 1957 with Maria Callas in the title role, and has become one of the five or six better-known Donizetti operas.
But it has somehow failed to establish itself firmly in the repertory.
Its persistent underestimation is puzzling; this is possibly Donizetti's finest tragic opera, at the very least a more dramatically sound and musically fluid work than "Lucia di Lammermoor."
First staged in 1830, "Anna Bolena" was Donizetti's first major success, the opera that marked his emergence as a rival of Bellini.
The composer had the good fortune to receive a superb libretto from Felice Romani; the historical record of Anne Boleyn, Jane Seymour and Henry VIII was set aside in favor of psychologically precise character studies.
Anne turns away the advances of Lord Percy and the musician Smeton, but the king's infatuation with Jane guarantees that disaster will fall all the same.
The key to the piece is the king, whose patriarchal malevolence dooms the lyric strains of romance around him.


Fortunes and Fear in Mexican Stocks
Although still not totally comfortable with the volatility of the Mexican stock market, more United States investors are taking Mexico's stocks seriously, hoping for long-term returns and the completion of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Despite the Mexican market's lackluster performance this year, and despite the worries of some about the outcome of the nation's next election and even about economic stability, analysts remain optimistic about the Mexican stock market.
They expect several more years of solid growth.


Price Data and Supply Favor Lower Yields
Yields in the bond market are likely to move lower, following better inflation news last week than most traders had dared to hope for, and the scheduled release this week of retail sales and industrial-production data that are expected to be sluggish.
While investment markets were closed for Good Friday, the Labor Department was open, and it reported that the Consumer Price Index for March rose only one-tenth of a percent.


Weekly Treasury Auctions To Include Bills, 7-Year Note
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week includes the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills today and tomorrow's auction of a new seven-year note.
By the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, in a week shortened by the Good Friday holiday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.89 percent, with the rate for a six-month bill at 2.99 percent.
In when-issued trading, the seven-year note was being offered at a price to yield 5.58 percent.


Empire Blue Cross Deserves Better Treatment
To the Editor:
Your highly selective three-part profile of 20 years in the life of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield (front page, March 28-30) featured unsubstantiated allegations, unidentified sources and comments from individuals serving their own agenda at the expense of Empire.
I expected better from you.


Fielding Flubs Add Up And Do In the Yanks
The sequence of plays that unfolded in the sixth inning and turned the Yankees' afternoon into an afterthought was not unexpected.
It could have happened in the first inning, the second or even the third.
Danger was lurking around every inch of Comiskey Park in the game against the White Sox, and it merely took the Yankees until the sixth to disintegrate.
When the Yankees finally fell apart, it all happened at once.
Pat Kelly almost made a diving stop that became an infield single, Danny Tartabull did not corral a catchable fly ball that scored the tying and go-ahead runs, and Rich Monteleone made an embarrassing throwing error on an underhand toss to first base that might have been caught by a 10-foot-tall infielder.
The defensive flubs helped provide the White Sox with three runs and allowed them to beat the Yankees, 6-4.


Independent BankCorp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deer Hunt Off To Slow Start In Irondequoit
A bait-and-shoot plan to reduce the growing deer population here has so far yielded fewer deer than some expected but has generated plenty of protests and the plan's chief supporter even says he has been threatened.
"The only people we're really hearing from are the animal-activist screamers," said Arnold J. Eckert, president of the Monroe County Legislature.
"They could care less about the person who could get killed or injured in a deer-car accident."


An Easter Celebration Begins With a Song


Ornada Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Hooray, a Comeback! (Don't Look at Score)
The Mets keep coming back, which makes them happy.
And one of these days they may even win a game after trailing.
Despite their good intentions, though, despite Manager Jeff Torborg's happy spin on still another failed comeback, the Mets could not get away from one painful fact yesterday -- a 5-4 loss to the Astros.


After Four Decades of Bitterness, China and Taiwan Plan to Meet
An envoy from Taiwan today concluded five days of talks with mainland China officials, clearing the way for a historic meeting between senior representatives of each side to try to turn four decades of enmity into a cooperative future.
The meeting will mark the first time since 1949 -- when the Communists defeated the Nationalist Government and forced it to flee to Taiwan -- that top representatives of the two rival Governments get together to discuss their differences.
Officials from both sides said they expected the meeting to be held in Singapore, and China said it would take place on April 27 and 28.
Opening a Dialogue
The meeting is not expected to deal with the weightiest questions between Taiwan and mainland China, like possible reunification.
But it is intended to result in cooperation between the rival Governments to fight crime and smuggling and to protect the investments on the mainland by Taiwanian businesses.


Israel Will Keep Occupied Lands Shut Indefinitely
Convinced that it has found the key to curbing violent attacks against Israelis, the Government decided today to keep the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip sealed indefinitely and to slash sharply the number of Palestinians who eventually will be allowed back into Israel for work.
The 12-day-old measure that bans all but a few thousand Palestinians from entering Israel from the territories was opposed by several Cabinet ministers.
They argued that hundreds of thousands of people in the territories would be left without sources of income and that pent-up frustrations would explode at some point in renewed violence.


Patents
SINCE 1948, neurosurgeons have mapped the human brain by opening a patient's skull and literally laying numbered pieces of paper on the brain's surface.
Hoping to replace that cumbersome system, a self-educated inventor and neuro-scientist in California has won a patent for computer imaging of the brain.
Brain mapping is crucial for directing a surgeon's scalpel in an operation.
Before surgery to remove a tumor, for example, the brain's speech or motor-control centers have to be identified so they will not be cut.
The complication arises because there is no standard brain map.
While everyone's language area is in the temporal lobe, its size and position varies from person to person.


Homeowners Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Guess Who Is Behaving Like the Bully in Boston
There was a time when the Knicks couldn't buy a victory at Boston Garden.
Today, they acted as if they owned the place.
"When you break through in an arena, there's no more dread," said Knicks Coach Pat Riley after New York whipped the Celtics, 102-90, on the same parquet floor where they once lost 23 consecutive regular-season games.


Black's Killing Darkens South Africa's Dream
The neighborhood where Chris Hani, South Africa's most popular black militant, was gunned down on Saturday defies most stereotypes about the country, including those South Africans hold about each other.
Dawn Park, as the subdivision on the southeastern fringe of Johannesburg's suburbia is called, is racially mixed, quintessentially middle class and so tension free that Mr.
Hani often jogged through the streets unprotected.


Russia Seeks to Delay Vote on Further Sanctions Against Belgrade
Russia pressed tonight for further postponement of a Security Council vote planned for Monday on tightening the economic embargo against Yugoslavia, diplomats said.
Consultations continued between Council members over sanctions that are intended to press what remains of Yugoslavia to use its influence to help end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where Bosnian Serbs have been fighting Muslims and Croats for more than a year.
One diplomat involved in the issue thought postponement of the vote was likely, but others said a final decision on whether to proceed with the new sanctions probably would be made on Monday.


Falls Financial Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about British-oriented places in New York City referred incompletely to the Stephen's Green bar in Sunnyside, Queens.
Although it screens telecasts of English soccer matches, the bar is an Irish pub.


No Headline
"They still tend to be a very close-knit group and they take care of each other. Their ways don't change much. They're happy and that's their way of life. To you and me, our standards are much higher but they don't have those high standards and they're not striving to have them." -- EMILY SMITH, social services official, on Allentown, N.Y.  [ B8:2. ]


Accounts
*
Tandy Corp., Fort Worth, to Bloom FCA, Dallas, as the first agency to handle advertising for its Incredible Universe electronics and appliance stores.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $7 million. *
Wolverine World Wide Inc., Rockford, Mich., to CME KHBB Advertising, Southfield, Mich., to handle its Hush Puppies account, which Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, resigned last summer because of a client conflict.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


CHRONICLE
When the Soviet Union split apart and the Communist Party collapsed, cultural institutions were left floundering without the financial and legal help of a monolithic dictatorship.
On Wednesday, a team of 12 American leaders in the arts, government, foundations and real estate, leave for five days in St.
Petersburg to meet with Government and cultural officials there, and, hopefully, impart some American know-how.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yankee Stadium: the Bronx's Diamond in the Rough
In the scruffy blocks around Yankee Stadium, spring blossoms today in the form of the Bronx Bombers' home opener.
At Vega Alta Bar at 880 Gerard Avenue, daily receipts will jump from the usual $200 to something like $1,200.
At Stadium Hardware next door, the plumbers' helpers in the window will be totally supplanted by Yankees caps and T-shirts.
The trade at River Cigars at East 161st Street and River Avenue will perk up, the owner confidently predicts.


Press Freedom Cited by Pole in U.S. Court
As a journalist in Poland in the 1980's, Andrzej Krajewski recalls, he evaded demands by the Communist regime's secret police to reveal the sources of the American and Japanese correspondents he worked with.
Now, he says, he is waging another battle for journalistic integrity -- in the United States.
Mr.
Krajewski, a Polish citizen, is now a United States correspondent for the television network run by the post-Communist Polish Government.
He is resisting a Federal subpoena for tape recordings of interviews he conducted in New York City with an American defendant in an arms-smuggling case in Brooklyn in which five Polish citizens face trial.


Police in Los Angeles Feel Better Prepared for Unrest
Friends and relatives often ask Officer Maria C. Marquez if she is afraid, patrolling the South-Central Los Angeles neighborhoods that were at the center of the rioting that paralyzed this city last year.
"I say, 'Yes, just like every other day I put on a uniform and go out,' " she said.
"My brothers keep asking why I don't become a lawyer or something, but they're more scared for me than I am."


Federal National Mortgage Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Creative rulebreaking reunite in hopes of bringing 'feeling and personality' back to brand campaign
TWO of advertising's best-known and most-honored creative talents of the 1980's are teaming up again to start their own agency.
William J. Heater and Donald Easdon, who at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos produced provocative and widely discussed campaigns for clients like Infiniti, John Hancock and Wang, are opening, effective today, Heater/Easdon, in temporary quarters in the Boston suburb of Milton, Mass.
The partners, who begin with no titles, staff or clients, plan to relocate to Boston in the summer.


Review/Opera; 'Ring' Moves On to 'Siegfried'
The Metropolitan Opera's first performance of Wagner's "Siegfried" this season -- as the third entry in its Saturday matinee "Ring" cycle -- was a reminder that any mounting of this opera is a heroic effort that can seem as foolhardy as the title character's ventures.
The most imposing task is in casting: to find a tenor who, over more than five hours, is able to sustain good tone, often in a high tessitura, and create nuanced interpretations against an orchestra often blaring fortissimo.
This tenor must also seem hopelessly callow and blustery one hour ("a regular Li'l Abner type," Anna Russell once said) and incurably passionate the next.
And at the end of his quest he must find a soprano of surpassing power to justify the first love duet in Wagner's cosmic history, leaving far behind the opera's fairy-tale dragon, shattered sword and riddle-posing god.
There was a fair amount of heroism in this performance (as listeners to the radio broadcast would have heard), but there was also a fair amount of effort.
Siegfried, found after much scrambling around in the minuscule heldentenor circuit, was William Johns.
He has enough of the equipment and physical stamina to provide an often respectable rendering, itself no mean feat.
For all the artifice of the part and the posing, there was some palpable energy in the sword-forging, and even, in blunt fashion, in the final duet.


Dance in Review
Cinderella  New York Theater Ballet Gould Hall
Grown-up dance lovers know the New York Theater Ballet as a meticulously rehearsed little company that often revives small-scale pieces of great artistic importance.
But this troupe, directed by Diana Byer, also gives what could be called pint-sized productions for children: hourlong adaptations of famous works that are meant to hold the attention of very young balletgoers and, possibly, of some of the squirmy elders who accompany them to the theater.


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television
RARELY have so many been so impassioned about something so arcane.
Ten days ago, the Federal Communications Commission overturned the major provisions of the financial interest and syndication rules, known to their friends and foes as the "fin-syn" rules.
The decision was the climax of a battle the big Hollywood studios and the networks have been zealously waging for 20 years.
But it by no means meant the end of the invective.


Empire Blue Cross Deserves Better Treatment; A Battle for Payment
To the Editor:
Finally, a series of articles critical of the excesses and management of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield (March 28-30).
Empire's continual cries for rate increases should be closely scrutinized.
As one of the many subscribers forced to do battle with the Empire system, I consider further rate increases without increases in service a travesty.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A more permissive bankruptcy code has become a refuge for incompetent executives and a cornucopia for greedy lawyers, a growing number of critics say.
Hundreds of publicly held corporations have sought shelter from creditors in bankruptcy court since the recession began, and many cases remain mired in the courtroom.
Economic Watch.  [ Page A1. ]
Congress plans to investigate the merits of an antitrust case filed by the Justice Department, in response to an alliance of airlines and consumer groups.
The agency accused the eight largest U.S. airlines of using reservation systems to fix air fares.  [ D1. ]


Traveling Miami Roads Without Becoming Prey
As tourists wait in line for their cars at an Alamo Rent-a-Car office near Miami International Airport, they are given a flier and hear a recorded message that repeats a warning about the dangers lurking ahead.
"We have just handed you a safety-tip brochure," a woman's voice calmly intones every five minutes.
"We ask that you read it before leaving the premises."


Review/Theater; Caryl Churchill's Early View Of Life
With "Cloud Nine" Caryl Churchill achieved her first breakthrough, but behind that remarkable work were many radio and stage plays in which the author explored themes of sexism and power.
By presenting a fascinating two-play repertory of "Owners" and "Traps," the New York Theater Workshop confirms the fact that early in her career Ms.
Churchill was experimenting in form and committed to plays of social action.
In "Owners," her first play to be produced professionally, she attacked the right of ownership, as it applies to real estate and marital relations.
When the work was staged in the 1970's, critics were put off by the anarchic storytelling.
In Mark Wing-Davey's imaginative revival, "Owners" seems like an unnerving cross between Joe Orton and Bertolt Brecht.
As in Brecht, the events are programmed toward a political purpose.
As with Orton, the outrageous becomes commonplace and highly comic.


Dance in Review
'Faith Healing'  Jane Comfort and Company Performance Space 122
The five performers who make up the cast of "Faith Healing," seen on Thursday night, are all gifted dancers.
But the theater-dance piece by Jane Comfort, based on Tennessee Williams's play "The Glass Menagerie," also reveals what extraordinary actors they are.
Ms.
Comfort is clearly a sensitive director.
She has the perfect collaborators in David Ferri, who created the lighting, and Liz Prince, who designed the costumes and set.
And Ms.
Comfort has found unusual and inspired ways to physicalize some of the central events in the play.
But in the end it is the performances that strike one most forcibly.


One Who Shaped Domestic Issues
You should read a paper a day.
I got this habit, the first thing I do is see who died.
I learned a lot from that because only people who were somebody get in the paper when they die.  -- Carolyn Reed
ON the very weekend that President Clinton's second choice for Attorney General withdrew in a second controversy over household help, Carolyn Reed died in a Westchester hospital.


Astros' Free Agents Come Up Weekend Winners
Two expensive off-season acquisitions have already paid dividends for the Houston Astros, helping produce a three-game sweep at Shea Stadium this weekend.
Doug Drabek, the right-hander who spent the last six seasons with Pittsburgh, signed with Houston as a free agent last December for a four-year, $19.5 million deal.
On Saturday, he got his first victory of the season in a complete-game performance.


Economic Watch; Critics of Bankruptcy Law See Inefficiency and Waste
As the economy has slogged its way through recession and a slow recovery, hundreds of large publicly held corporations -- from Continental Airlines to R. H. Macy -- have sought shelter from their creditors in bankruptcy court.
Now, with many of these cases mired in the courtroom, complaints are rising that a more permissive Federal Bankruptcy Code, adopted in 1978, has become a refuge for incompetent executives and a cornucopia for greedy lawyers.


Sanchez Vicario's Tenacity Translates Into Sabatini's Loss
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the human version of the little engine that could, sometimes has trouble searching for the proper verb when asked to describe her style of play.
"I am confidence," she says.


Adirondack Hamlet Defies Time, and Help
On a small mountain ridge known as the Hollow, in the foothills of the Adirondacks, indoor plumbing was first installed six years ago and many people still do not have telephones.
There may be a few signs of modernization in the area, which social workers call the Appalachia of the North: Subsistence farmers no longer keep animals inside their homes.
Sales people sometimes venture in now.
And more parents are sending their children to school, although they say heavy snow on the mountain roads often keeps them from reaching classes during the long winters.


NATO Jets in Bosnia Told to Shoot as Last Resort
In an effort to minimize the chances of a clash with Serbian forces, NATO planes policing the no-flight zone over Bosnia have been instructed to refrain from firing on Serbian aircraft that violate the ban, except as a last resort.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is to begin enforcing the zone on Monday.
But NATO's rules of engagement stand in sharp contrast to the aggressive enforcement of the air-exclusion zones over northern and southern Iraq by the United States and its British and French allies.


Pulse Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Peoples Bancorp (Ind.) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Racial Lines Seen as Crucial in Mississippi Runoff
Before Mike Espy became Secretary of Agriculture, he did something unprecedented in Mississippi politics: he put together a potent coalition of blacks and whites that bridged the racial divide in a way no other black politician has achieved.
If the race to succeed him as Representative from Mississippi's Second Congressional District is any indication, it could be a while before anyone else accomplishes the same thing.


Brooklyn Court Bears Signature of Tragedy


CLINTON CONTINUES OLD DRUG POLICIES
When President Clinton moved into the White House in January, specialists in academia, health care and law enforcement around the country were expecting big changes in the way the Federal Government dealt with the national drug problem.
But Mr.
Clinton surprised and disappointed many specialists last week by presenting a $13.04 billion anti-drug budget that offered little change from the widely criticized approach followed for 12 years by Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
That approach relied heavily on law enforcement instead of emphasizing rehabilitation and prevention.


Reitmans (Canada) reports earnings for Year to Jan 30


A Fig Leaf on Serbian Genocide
A moment of truth has arrived in Bosnia.
It is not the illusionary one diplomats have in mind.
They believe that with the Bosnian Muslims' and Croats' signing of the U.N. peace accord, the pressure on the Serbs has mounted, and that the Serbs will risk further isolation and condemnation unless they sign.
Not since Neville Chamberlain's capitulation at Munich has the world expected so much of war criminals.
The homilies and promises of a new world order will not be worth the countless hours of speeches, voluminous contents of foreign policy journals, mountains of U.N. documentation and talking heads' pieties on TV if the world fails its straightforward test.
Genocide is being carried out on TV news every day; this is not Cambodia, where we could pretend we did not see it.


LeMond's Slow Climb Toward the Tour de France
Driving through the flat Belgian countryside 10 days ago, Otto Jacome nodded to his right, where a barge canal ran dark and straight to the horizon.
"That's where we work," Jacome said.
"You come looking for us, the canal is where you find us."
"Us" is Jacome on a Vespa motorcycle and Greg LeMond just behind him on a bicycle.
For a month they have traveled the narrow road alongside the canal for as many as 220 kilometers (136 miles) daily, with Jacome turning the speed higher, bit by bit, and LeMond pushing that much harder on the pedals to stay right behind him.


RB&amp;W Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Howe's Plaque Is Back
Two contrite hockey fans have returned the stolen Michigan Sports Hall of Fame plaque honoring Red Wings great Gordie Howe.
The bronze plaque was stolen more than four years ago from Cobo Hall in Detroit, site of the Hall of Fame.


Show About the Eternal Dietrich Attracts Germans From All Over
A new entertainment era may have dawned in Germany with the unveiling of the country's first homegrown mega-musical, a lavishly promoted romp through the life of Marlene Dietrich called "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?," which opened here on Wednesday.
For months Berliners have been inundated with advertising for the show, ranging from radio commercials to full-page newspaper ads to placards that seem to have sprouted on every downtown corner.
Much of the city appears gripped by what one columnist called "Marlene fever."


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abroad at Home; The Clinton Challenge
Apart from humanitarian concern, President Clinton has a profound stake in the horror of Bosnia.
It is the world's belief in his will to use American power.
Belief in American power has for many years been the most effective deterrent to international aggression.
It is more crucial than ever in an increasingly chaotic world, a world with only one superpower.


Starks Suffers Bruised Ribs
An injury to John Starks was the only negative aspect of the Knicks' victory today.
He suffered bruised ribs in the third quarter when Sherman Douglas slammed into him.
Starks didn't return to the game.
X-rays tonight were negative, and Starks hopes to play Tuesday night against Washington.
He suffered a broken nose last month, but he continued to play.


Waco Easter: Barbecue, Bikers and Barbed Wire
Easter weekend blew through Waco like a mild spring storm: some clouds, some wind, and when it was over, everything continued along pretty much as before.
Water skiers fought a light chop on Lake Waco, barbecues all over town smoked whole herds of brisket and ribs, and out at the Branch Davidian compound near here, Federal agents unspooled coils of barbed wire in the latest tactic in law enforcement's standoff with the cult.


Review/Piano; Schubert's Music and His Mysteries
In principle, the 92d Street Y's Schubertiade project was a great idea.
Unlike Lincoln Center's Mozart Bicentennial, which crammed Mozart's works into 18 months, the plan here was to offer Schubert's works chronologically, taking from 1988 to 1997 to present them.
That proved commercially unworkable, at least in the short term: the early seasons drew connoisseurs and revealed a few gems, but as with Mozart and Beethoven, the works likely to draw big audiences come near the end.
The chronological approach was scuttled just as the series was heading toward the popular works, but at least the project has continued.
The new format has its own logic.
Instead of tracing the big picture, the Schubertiade now offers glimpses into specific aspects of the composer's work, with early and late works performed side by side.
This year the focus was on Schubert's piano sonatas, and instead of distributing the works among several players, Andras Schiff played them all (except for a few fragmentary ones) in a six-concert series that ended on April 3 evening.
A master class the next afternoon was a kind of extended coda.


Dance in Review
Donna Uchizono  The Kitchen
Donna Uchizono brought several generations of dancers together in "A Sage Passage." She thereby affirmed that all men and women on this earth are partners in the dance of life.


Emmy 'Treachery' Roils TV's Waters
The Emmy award, which is supposed to stand for achievements in television, now stands for something else: grievances in television.
The Television Academy of Arts and Sciences, which gives out the Emmys, decided in February to sell the broadcast rights to the annual ceremony to ABC for the next four years.
This greatly upset the other networks, which had previously agreed with ABC and the academy on a rotating plan under which each network would broadcast the Emmys every fourth year.


Empire Blue Cross Deserves Better Treatment; Time to Go
To the Editor:
I just read the third and final article about the mismanagement of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New York (front page, March 30).
It's crystal clear to me that it's time for Albert A. Cardone to go.


Automatic Data Processing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Commander Aircraft Co., Bethany, Okla., 1.1 million shares. Hanifen &amp; Imhoff Inc.
Edunetics Ltd., Israel, an initial public offering of 1.8 million shares.
Furman Selz Inc..


Market Place; Lotus counts on its new Notes software to rekindle growth
INVESTING in the Lotus Development Corporation these days is a bet that its future will arrive in time.
For the Cambridge, Mass., software company finds itself precariously placed between a franchise business in decline (its 1-2-3 spreadsheet programs) and a promising new product that is just starting to take off (its Notes software for information sharing by groups).
For the most part, investors have tended to focus on the erosion of Lotus's spreadsheet business, which accounts for roughly 60 percent of its revenues.
Their skepticism is reflected in the stock's price-to-earnings ratio, which hovers at about half the 30-plus level of software-industry favorites like the Microsoft Corporation and Novell Inc.
Lotus's shares closed at $26.50 Thursday, down 25 cents, in over-the-counter trading.


Review/Music; Jazz in Shambles for Artistic Reasons
Ned Rothenberg's music at Roulette on April 2 followed an avenue American composers should find legitimate and promising.
While so many of his colleagues begin with European doctrines and redirect them with a New World spin, most of Mr.
Rothenberg's music here evolved from his own surroundings.
It is a process that begins with popular music, continues with jazz and tentatively explores a world beyond both.
"Epistrophical Notions," with the composer playing the bass clarinet, served as an introduction.
In this remembrance of Thelonious Monk, a jazz monologue is shattered into fragments and the snippets are punctuated with percussive attacks, rude trills and ornaments.
Mr.
Rothenberg is not practicing a traditional genre, nor does he excerpt jazz for local color as did Ravel and Stravinsky.
Rather, he examines an art for its further possibilities, pulling it apart and attempting a reconstruction that holds to its roots but moves toward a genre of its own.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Electric said its NBC network was not for sale, squelching two years of speculation about a possible sale.
The announcement came a week after the F.C.C. freed the television networks from regulations that had prevented them from sharing in the billions of dollars of profits generated by the syndication of former prime-time programs.  [ Page D1. ]
Time Warner and Silicon Graphics are discussing the development of computer equipment for the interactive television networks that are expected to revolutionize home entertainment before the end of the decade.  [ D1. ]


InterWest Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Decision Soon On Schools In Newark
The state Education Department is taking steps that could lead to a takeover of the Newark public schools, the largest system in New Jersey.
Although such a takeover has been talked about for years, officials in the department and in the State House said today that it was still too early to tell whether a takeover or some other, less stringent action might be carried out to help improve a system that has failed to meet virtually every minimum educational standard since the state began monitoring in the 1970's.


Senior Official Shot Dead
Islamic militants today shot and killed a senior police official in southern Egypt and tried to blow up a bus carrying German tourists, officials said.
The gunmen killed Brig.
Gen.
Mohammed al-Shaimi, who was deputy head of security in Asyut Province, and his driver and an assistant in a car ambush in Abu Tig, about 250 miles south of Cairo, the officials said.


Companies Encourage Employees To Carpool
When Congress passed the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990, it had in mind people like Bert Adams, who climbs behind the wheel of a white, 15-passenger Dodge van each weekday morning at 6:45 and sets off on a 32.5-mile drive to his job here as a manager at Champion International.
Along the way he picks up more than a dozen passengers.
Mr.
Adams's van pool seems at first glance to be a working model for the clean air remedy specified in the new law: cutting down on the number of people commuting alone in cars.
But his experience is actually a sobering illustration of the obstacles that will face thousands of companies across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, as well as other areas with severe air pollution, as they try to change a basic habit: the way people get to work.


INSIDE
Langer Wins Masters
Bernhard Langer of Germany captured his second Masters golf championship, winning by four shots.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Corralling Commuters
In trying to comply with the Clean Air Act, thousand of employers must also try to change a basic habit: the way people get to work.
Page B1.


People
*
Fred Golden, Don Josephson and Jon Bierman, who led the Golden Group, a boutique shop specializing in theatrical advertising, returned to AC&amp; R Advertising, New York, after the closing of Great Scott Advertising, New York, which they joined after leaving AC&amp; R. Mr.
Golden, the president; Mr.
Josephson, the executive vice president, and Mr.
Bierman, the senior vice president, bring with them accounts like the Circle in the Square Theater in New York, with billings estimated at $2 million to $3 million. *
Stuart Agres was named to the new position of senior vice president and manager of the corporate research group at Young &amp; Rubicam, New York.
He was previously the executive vice president and director of strategic planning at Lowe &amp; Partners, New York.
At Lowe, Martyn Straw was appointed to assume Mr.
Agres's duties; Mr.
Straw was formerly the executive vice president and director of strategic services at Geer, DuBois, New York, which has gone out of business.


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


A Battle Over Truck Safety With No Winners in Sight
By asking the General Motors Corporation to recall 4.7 million full-size pickup trucks, the Federal Government has set in motion a process that may drag on for years, with lawyers, regulators, consumer groups and auto makers debating the industry's safety obligations.
The Government's request also dealt a serious setback, although not a decisive one, to the auto maker's efforts to emerge from a legal, political and public relations quagmire.
Before the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration issued its preliminary finding on Friday, G.M. had hoped that the agency would close its nine-month defect investigation with a finding that the full-size pickups did not have fuel system safety defects.
Instead, G.M. must now explain to the Government by April 30 why it thinks the model, built between 1973 and 1987, should not be recalled.


Tina Brown's Progress At the New New Yorker
Despite the lamentations of loyalists last summer that Tina Brown would tart up The New Yorker and destroy its very soul, six months into her tenure as editor in chief, subscription renewals are strong, newsstand sales have doubled, and advertising pages are up a hefty 16 percent just since Jan. 1.
However, what no one knows except S. I. Newhouse, the magazine's owner, and a few top executives at the parent company, Advance Publications Inc., is whether The New Yorker has begun to stanch its losses.
Ms.
Brown, asked her timetable for turning around The New Yorker economically, replied, "We would like to see it in profit in five years."


As Tax Day Nears, a Kinder I.R.S.
They just don't make April 15 the way they used to.
Thursday is still the deadline for filing personal income tax returns, and yes, there are still penalties for people who don't file or who don't pay what they owe.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Living Section on Wednesday with a profile of Bruce Cutler, lawyer for John Gotti Sr., misidentified Mr.
Gotti's brother in some editions.
He is Peter Gotti, not Jerry Gotti.


Newark School-Takeover Talk Called Premature
Any discussion of a swift and complete takeover of the Newark school system is premature, the State Education Commissioner said today.
Speaking at a news conference in Trenton convened to rebuff any notions to the contrary, the Commissioner, Mary Lee Fitzgerald, said: "I have made no decision to take over Newark. I have not even speculated. We all hope that school districts can solve their own problems."


An Informer Returns to Testify Against Two Gambino Brothers
Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano, the Mafia informer whose testimony helped send John Gotti to prison for life, returned to the witness stand yesterday to testify in a packed courtroom against two brothers accused of running a major heroin ring for the Gambino crime family.
His voice low and raspy, Mr.
Gravano described his criminal career in a matter-of-fact manner, again admitting his participation in 19 murders.
A team of at least eight marshals provided security as he testified against John and Joseph Gambino in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


Banks Seek Big Victory On Accounting Today
A vote today by the Financial Accounting Standards Board on whether to force financial institutions to report changes in the market value of some of the securities they hold could produce a major victory for bank lobbyists.
Four of the seven board members have indicated support for the proposal, which is being fought by the banks.
But a simple majority is not sufficient to take action.


Barkley Is Out For Five Games
CHARLES BARKLEY, the leading scorer and rebounder for the Phoenix Suns, was placed on the injured list yesterday because of a strained and bruised shoulder.
He will miss at least five games.
To fill his roster spot, the Suns activated forward TOM CHAMBERS, who has not played since March 26, when he tore muscles in his left leg in a game against Milwaukee.


A Union Chief Leaves Big Shoes to Fill
In many ways, he was an unlikely leader for New York's city and state workers: He headed a relatively small union, Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, yet he became the unofficial spokesman for nearly 200,000 municipal workers.
His local represents perhaps 100 state employees, and yet for two decades he led the Public Employee Conference, the labor coalition that lobbies in Albany on behalf of 1.1 million government workers.


Saudi Takes A Big Profit In Citicorp
Cashing in on what may be one of the smartest investment moves in recent years, Prince al-Waleed bin Talal of Saudi Arabia sold more than 8.9 million shares of Citicorp stock yesterday for $268.1 million, nearly two and a half times what he paid.
In late 1990 and early 1991, Prince Waleed, one of 4,000 members of the Saudi royal family, invested nearly $800 million in Citicorp when its shares were depressed because of the bank's problems with bad real estate loans.


Books of The Times; A Hero So Very Very Vile He's Virtually a Villain
Among the Dead  By Michael Tolkin  273 pages. William Morrow &amp; Company $20.
Griffin Mill, the conniving studio executive-turned-killer in Michael Tolkin's much acclaimed novel and movie "The Player," seems like a positively sunny, sentimental guy compared with Mr.
Tolkin's latest hero.
In fact, the new hero, Frank Gale, must surely rank as one of the most repellent characters to come along in recent literature, right up there alongside Patrick Bateman, the deranged narrator of Bret Easton Ellis's "American Psycho." Frank's story, set forth in "Among the Dead," is a grisly, distressing one, a story of cold-blooded calculation, inhuman detachment and appalling self-absorption.


'You Do What You Have to Do'
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q
Is there strength in numbers?
Do you feel compelled to form a group to survive?
BERNARDO VASQUEZ , 17, Manhattan (A. Philip Randolph High School): If you want to understand gangs look at rap music. . . .
There's a group called the Geto Boys.
And one of the guys, Scarface, has a song where he's a little kid.
And he explains how that little kid found family and togetherness. . . .
How you find togetherness and family and support from a gang.
You know, like your mother's probably whoring around or something like that.
She ain't giving you that hug and that love.
Every human being needs love. . . .
So if you get it from your brothers and you form a gang.
ZAIRE GRAHAM , 17, Bronx (High School of Fashion Industries): I definitely think there's strength in numbers, whether it's negative or positive.
The more it is -- the more people it is the more stronger you are whatever you're about to do.


Corrections
A report and a picture caption in the Guide column of the Westchester Weekly on Sunday about a zydeco concert in Mamaroneck misstated the date.
It is Friday, not Saturday, at 8:30 P.M., at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church Hall.


Security Council Delays Sanctions Against Serbs
At Moscow's urging and with the support of the Clinton Administration, the Security Council today postponed voting new economic sanctions against the Yugoslav Serbs until after a referendum in Russia on April 25.
The postponement is an effort to help President Boris N. Yeltsin win his struggle with the Russian Parliament.


Relative Puts Rare European Duck at Edge of Extinction
THE sexual prowess of the American ruddy duck is threatening an endangered European relative, the white-headed duck, scientists say.
Europe's rarest duck, the white-headed Oxyura leucocephala, used to live throughout the Mediterranean region, but hunting and habitat destruction have wiped out most of the population since the beginning of the century.
In 1977, only 22 white-headed ducks remained, surviving on three lagoons in southern Spain.


Brazil Won't Slip Back Into Monarchy
To the Editor:
"Tired of Presidents? Brazil Can Vote for King" (front page, March 29), on the April 21 plebiscite in Brazil, might lead readers to conclude that most Brazilians do not have pride in their republican, civilian and antislavery traditions.
You state that today's situation results from an unresolved transition from monarchy to republic in the last century.
The nostalgic desire for the return of monarchy, according to you, has been revived as a result of a general despair concerning Brazil's history of crisis.
The origins of this double plebiscite -- when Brazilians will choose between a parliamentary and a presidential system of government, and between monarchy and republic -- are not to be found in the way monarchy was revoked 103 years ago.


Health Planners' Radical Idea: Same Coverage for All
At the core of President Clinton's health-care plan is a radical new concept: a standard package of health benefits that would be guaranteed to all Americans and perhaps be more generous than the health insurance most have now.
The idea of a uniform benefit package appears to have immense appeal.
It could improve health care for many people,, including the 37 million who now have no health insurance, and it could help reduce administrative costs by standardizing policies.


Kidnapping Suspect Seeks More Counseling
John Esposito, who is charged with kidnapping Katie Beers and holding her in an underground bunker for 16 days, wants more psychological counseling, his lawyer said today.
"John recognizes that he is ill and he desperately wants help," said his lawyer, Andrew B. Siben, who said his client has been experiencing periods of depression and sees a therapist once a week in jail.
"He is receiving psychological counseling, but he would like more complete care."


CHRONICLE
For GEORGE and BARBARA BUSH and their entourage, it was not the most auspicious way to begin a trip to Kuwait.
Mr.
Bush had accepted an invitation from the Kuwait Government to visit, "issued shortly after the liberation," Andrew Maner, a spokesman for the former President, said from Houston.
"He and Mrs. Bush always wanted to see the country, and since he's out of office now, he has the time," he added.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Capitals Find the Open Net  Mike Ridley scored into an empty net at 4 minutes 12 seconds of overtime last night to give the Washington Capitals a 3-2 victory in Montreal, all but ending the Canadiens' hopes for home-ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs.
Needing a victory more than a tie in this game, Canadiens Coach Jacques Demers lifted goaltender Patrick Roy in the final minute of overtime.
But Ridley, who had missed the open net seconds earlier, tapped in a pass from Kevin Hatcher.
Washington's Bob Carpenter scored at 16:52 of the third period to force the overtime.
The third-place Canadiens and the second-place Quebec Nordiques will play in the first round of the playoffs.
Montreal, 2 points behind Quebec in the Adams Divsion, can now only get home-ice advantage with a victory in its final game tonight in Buffalo, combined with an unlikely Quebec loss at home to Ottawa.
The Capitals ended a four-game losing streak and moved 3 points ahead of the third-place Devils in the Patrick.
The Canadiens have won only one of their last six games.
Washington veteran Dale Hunter became the 90th player in league history to play 1,000 career games. (AP)


At Last, a Movie Fits On a CD-ROM Disk
SOME computer users can now go to the movies without leaving their desks.
The Voyager Company has figured out a way to compress a motion picture onto a standard CD-ROM disk that can be played on any Macintosh equipped with a CD-ROM drive and Apple Computer Inc.'s Quicktime video software.
The quality of the picture is crude by the standards of laser disks and video tapes played on a regular television set, the picture window is only about the size of a credit card, the sound is monaural instead of stereo, and the film library so far consists of just one film, "A Hard Day's Night," the 1964 black-and-white movie directed by Richard Lester and starring the Beatles.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page on March 29, about Home Box Office's production of "Barbarians at the Gate," referred incorrectly to the rating received by the television movie.
"Barbarians at the Gate" received a 14.1 rating on March 20 in the roughly 20 million homes that subscribe to HBO.
This is a higher rating than those received by the big three broadcast networks in those homes that night.
But in the total television audience, with 93.1 million households, the movie received a 3.1 rating, below the rating of each of the three networks that night.


2-WEEK CEASE-FIRE BROKEN IN BOSNIA AS SERBS ATTACK
Serbian nationalist forces unleashed intense artillery attacks on Sarajevo and the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica today, shattering a fragile cease-fire that had prevailed across most of Bosnia and Herzegovina for two weeks.
The new Serbian attacks began within minutes of 2 P.M., the time set by the United Nations for NATO fighter aircraft to begin patrolling the skies over Bosnia in support of the ban on flights by Serbian aircraft imposed by the United Nations.


Vietnam's 1972 Statement on P.O.W.'s: Triple the Total Hanoi Acknowledged
Following are excerpts from a report said to have been written by Gen.
Tran Van Quang of North Vietnam to the Communist Party Politburo, dated Sept. 15, 1972, saying Hanoi was holding far more American prisoners of war than it had acknowledged.
The English translation was provided by Stephen J. Morris, a researcher for the Harvard Center for International Affairs and the Russian Research Center at Harvard, who discovered the report in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party in Moscow.
Because the report had been translated from the Vietnamese to Russian and then into English, the spelling of the names of Americans in the report is dubious.


New Supernova
Astronomers around the world are studying the supernova that appeared last month and have seen a shower of X-rays from it.
Page C11.


Texas Cult Fortress Is Becoming Prison Behind Barbed Wire
Forty-four days into their standoff with an apocalyptic cult, the Federal authorities are laying coils of concertina wire around the perimeter of the armed compound near here, indicating a new approach toward David Koresh and his nearly 100 followers barricaded inside: in essence, to treat the compound like a prison.
Frustrated that weeks of psychological warfare and the constant vigil kept by hundreds of armed Federal agents have failed to induce a surrender, the Federal Bureau of Investigation is now surrounding their home with the razor-sharp barbed coils to guarantee that cult members stay in, at least until they run out of food or decide for some other reason to give up.


Americans Support The Space Shuttle
To the Editor:
Reports of the demise of the space shuttle are greatly exaggerated, as Mark Twain might say.
A redesigned space station may indeed cut the number of space shuttle missions.
But the shuttle will continue to be a workhorse for the United States space program and its myriad missions for years to come.
Ask President Clinton.
Ask Dan Goldin, the National Aeronautics and Space Administrator.
Ask Congress.
Most important, ask the American people, who continue to provide strong support for the shuttle program.


CHRONICLE
SALLIE BINGHAM, a member of the Louisville newspaper dynasty and a philanthropist and writer, has helped start a fund at the Feminist Majority Foundation to aid the children of Dr.
David Gunn, who was shot to death in Pensacola, Fla., last month by an anti-abortion protester.
The 47-year-old doctor, who performed abortions at clinics in Florida, Georgia and Alabama, was the first person killed because he performed abortions.
"I was horrified when I read about Dr. Gunn's murder," Ms.
Bingham said yesterday from her home in Santa Fe, N.M.
"And I knew Ellie Smeal from years back, so I called her to ask whether it would make sense to set up a fund for his two children."


Talks Go On Over Hostages at Ohio Prison Where 6 Inmates Died
Hundreds of inmates who have seized a cellblock at a state maximum-security prison here negotiated intermittently Monday and early today with corrections officials seeking the release of eight guards and an end to an uprising that has left six prisoners dead, apparently at the hands of the rioters.
But the authorities said the talks, conducted by telephone, had failed even to identify any inmate leaders who officials could be sure were directing events inside Cellblock L, where the 450 or so insurgents were holed up with their hostages.


53 Skiddoo: Rangers Exit With No Goals and One Explanation
The Rangers hung their heads when they left the ice at the Spectrum this evening.
It was an appropriate gesture.
They should be ashamed.
Even for a franchise legendary for its Stanley Cup futility, these Rangers are an embarrassment of epic proportions.
With the biggest payroll in the National Hockey League, with more talent than most general managers dream of, the Rangers could not make the playoffs.
And, in this league, that is a hard thing to do.


U.S. Abortion Protesters Shunned by the British
When they arrived here more than two weeks ago, the small cadre of American militants opposed to abortion sought to establish a European beachhead, an outpost for pressing their emotional campaign to nations like Britain, where abortion rarely provokes the raw, confrontational debate it does in the United States.
But no sooner had Don Treshman, the combative head of the Texas-based group, Rescue America, planted his flag in Britain, than he found himself under heavy fire, not only from abortion-rights groups, but also from newspapers, judges and the Government itself, which promptly served a deportation order describing his presence as "not conducive to the public good."


Greenberg Leaves
Completing his 90-day notice of termination, STEVE GREENBERG stepped down as baseball's deputy commissioner yesterday.
Greenberg announced his resignation Jan. 13, three years after FAY VINCENT, then the commissioner, named him as his successor.


COMPANY NEWS
BDM FEDERAL INC.  received a five-year contract worth up to $362 million to consolidate large mainframe computer systems for the United States Air Force Materiel Command.
CENTURY TELEPHONE ENTERPRISES INC., Monroe, La., and San Marcos Telephone Co. said that Century had completed the acquisition of SMTC and its affiliate, SM Telecorp Inc., for 2.15 million shares of Century's common stock and approximately $32 million in cash.


Let's Not Take $100 Million Nuclear Gamble
To the Editor:
"Seeking a new path to East-West disarmament, Russian and American experts have agreed to team up to develop and build a new type of reactor that can burn plutonium from nuclear warheads and turn the deadly bomb fuel into electricity" (news article, April 6).
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary should view with caution the request from General Atomics of San Diego to gamble $100 million more on nuclear power.
Under the false cloak of nuclear disarmament, General Atomics wants to help build a $1.5 billion nuclear reactor to be fueled by plutonium retired from bombs.
Such a proposal pours money into nuclear pockets, but wastes taxpayer dollars.


With Words to Spare, Schenkel Strikes a Chord
Confession: during my Wonder Years, more hours than I care to remember (because I clearly did not have a life out of doors) were spent watching and listening to ABC's Chris Schenkel and Billy Welu chronicle the bowling exploits of Don Carter, Dick Weber and Ray Bluth.
In the 32d season of the Pro Bowlers Tour on ABC, Schenkel remains the gentle baritone of bowling who is still capable of excitement about the exploits of Del Ballard Jr. and Walter Ray Williams, still adept at setting up his partner (now Nelson Burton) and proud of the success of Pete Weber, Dick's son, whom he recalls holding in his arms.


Edward Latch, 92, A Minister Who Led The House in Prayer
The Rev.
Edward Gardiner Latch, a retired Methodist minister who was Chaplain of the House of Representatives from 1967 to 1978, died Friday at Asbury Methodist Village in Gaithersburg, Md.
A resident of Gaithersburg, he was 92.
Mr.
Latch led the House in morning prayers through the troubled days of the Watergate scandal.


At the Monnaie, a Rude Budgetary Intrusion
One might think that Brussels, which along with Strasbourg is one of the two capitals of the new, semi-united Europe, would have its political and economic houses in order.
But to judge from the current crisis at the Theatre Royale de la Monnaie, Belgium's leading opera company, that is hardly the case.
The theater's troubles -- which have not yet dampened its tradition of distinguished performances -- stem partly from the inevitable difficulties of replacing its charismatic former director, Gerard Mortier, who has moved to the Salzburg Festival.
But they are also the consequence of an interlocking web of factors that tell much about the recessionary constraints and tribal politics of Europe today.


Voice Is Star In Feast Of Jazz
The 1993 JVC Jazz Festival will be a thinner, sleeker event than those of recent years.
It will concentrate on singers and tributes; absent will be both the afternoon piano concerts and the smaller events at the Equitable Center.
"The cost of the halls we had been using became prohibitive, making these smaller events impractical," said George Wein, the founder and director of the festival.
He announced the festival yesterday.


Cairo Journal; Egypt Holds No Terror for Pilgrims
John Anthony West spread a white towel over the floor of the burial chamber inside the Great Pyramid of Cheops, sat down and asked his tour group to be quiet.
Men and women unlaced their shoes, assumed the lotus position or lay on the floor, and waited until the workman at the outside entrance of the narrow tunnel, leading up to the muggy crypt, flicked off the light switch and plunged the room into inky, darkness.


Luxury car maker aims to burnish its image by putting the Cadillac stamp on luxury goods.
CADILLAC.
Standard of the world, according to its longtime advertising slogan.
Symbol of the hegemony and excesses of the American automotive industry.
Inspiration for singers from Aretha Franklin to the Playmates.
A line of leather handbags, wallets and luggage.
Unusual as it may seem, those goods, bearing the familiar crest-and-wreath logo and the name of the luxury car, are now selling in Japan.
Other items, like apparel, are expected later this year in Taiwan and China.
The premium products -- about $80 for a wallet or $200 for a duffle bag -- all carry hangtags stating "Officially licensed product of the Cadillac Motor Car division, General Motors Corporation."


Time Warner Seeking Deal On Gear for Interactive TV
Time Warner, a leader in cable television, is in discussions with the computer work station maker Silicon Graphics Inc. to develop computer gear for the interactive television networks that are expected to revolutionize home entertainment before the end of the decade.
Silicon Graphics' work stations are widely used by movie producers for special effects like the apparent transformation of Arnold Schwarzenegger's nemesis into mercury in "Terminator 2: Judgment Day." An inexpensive television set-top computer based on the same technology for home use could bring such special effects within the reach of even the ordinary couch potato.


Nissan's U.S. Chief Resigns, Apparently Under Pressure
The president and chief executive of the Nissan Motor Company's American operations resigned today, after months of rumors that Nissan executives in Japan were unhappy with his performance.
The chief executive, Thomas D. Mignanelli, had been one of the first Americans to receive wide authority at a Japanese auto company.
He cited "personal reasons" for leaving Nissan.
In February, he underwent quadruple-bypass heart surgery, but a spokesman said that had no connection with the announcement today.


Distribution Of Condoms Is Advocated
Westchester County's health commissioner said today that he will press high schools to make condoms available to students as a way of preventing AIDS.
Condom distribution programs have been started in New York, Philadelphia, Los Angeles and a handful of other cities, usually over vehement protests from religious groups and parents who believe the program fosters tolerance of teen-age sex.
Fourteen towns in Massachusetts have adopted condom programs after being urged to study the issue by the state's education department.


Clinton Adopts Tougher Tactics In Pushing His Stalled Jobs Plan
President Clinton used the annual White House Easter Egg Roll today to step up his campaign against Republicans who are blocking his $19.5 billion jobs bill.
Pointing to the thousands of children rolling eggs on the South Lawn, Mr.
Clinton said they would benefit from the child immunization funds in his legislation but instead are the "hostages" of a Republican filibuster.
White House officials said the President's remarks, his harshest yet in the debate over the jobs plan, were the opening salvo of an intensified drive to salvage as much as possible of the package, which has been frozen in the Senate by a Republican filibuster.


Ancient Greek Shipwreck Found; Cargo Was Fine Wine
IN the early fourth century B.C., the time immediately after the golden age of Pericles, Sparta had defeated Athens for Greek supremacy, while to the north Macedonia was on the rise.
Socrates had taken the cup of hemlock, but Plato was only just founding his academy, Aristophanes was still writing plays, Hippocrates was practicing medicine and Aristotle was a young boy.
These were the years when classical Greece continued to spread its culture and influence through the Mediterranean and into the Black Sea with a flourishing trade in wine, olive oil, ceramics and dried fruits.
Sometime between 400 and 380, a Greek merchant ship with a cargo of wine foundered and sank in the Aegean Sea off the southern coast of the island Alonisos.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about support for Ellie Nesler, who is accused of having fatally shot the man charged with molesting her son, misstated the relationships of the people shown.
Florence and Loren Nesler are Ms.
Nesler's parents-in-law, not her parents; they were comforting Ms.
Nesler's sister Jan Martinez, not their daughter.


INSIDE
Standoff at Ohio Prison
The day after six inmates were killed at a prison in Lucasville, Ohio, prisoners negotiated with officials seeking the release of eight guards.
Page A12.
Crackdown on Street Selling
New York will step up its efforts against an estimated 10,000 unlicensed street vendors.
Page B1.


U.S. Hopes for Breakthrough on Atomic Waste Site
Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary said yesterday that state and local utility officials may have a better chance of finding temporary storage sites for nuclear waste than the Federal Government, which is supposed to start accepting the material in 1998 but has no idea where to put it.
Mrs.
O'Leary, a former lobbyist for the Northern States Power Company, which operates three reactors in Minnesota, said that as a result "any day I expect some of my old pals to sue me."


Anger at Tokyo Grows in Asia
After decades of focusing its exporting sights on the United States and, to a lesser extent, Europe, Japan is now in a race to dominate trade in East Asia, the world's fastest-growing region.
And it is succeeding with a strategy that is as well crafted as it is irritating to many of the region's countries.
What is emerging is a new source of anger over Japan's trading practices that goes beyond the war of words between Washington and Tokyo to Japan's already difficult relations with its Asian neighbors.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Jeff Kaiser, pitcher, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
Designated Dwayne Henry, pitcher, for reassignment.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Announced the resignation of Jim Fanning, special consultant.


Supernova Is Shown in Full Detail
A POWERFUL new X-ray camera was shot into orbit just in time to focus on the newly discovered supernova, an exploding star, and scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology report that the camera is yielding astonishingly detailed information about the cosmic explosion.
Supernovas near enough for observation are rare events, and the new arrival, which appeared in the galaxy M-81 on the night of March 27-28, lies only some 12 million light-years from the Earth.
Its brightness and relative proximity have riveted the attention of virtually all observatories in the Northern Hemisphere.
Although the supernova cannot be seen by the naked eye, it is dazzlingly bright when viewed by moderately large telescopes.


Dedication, Not Money, Keeps Doctors Going; The Wrong Target
To the Editor:
Your March 31 article on a national telephone poll of 1,000 households conducted for the Families U.S.A.
Foundation reports that those surveyed underestimated the income of doc tors and health care professionals, but resented them just the same.
This is both factually inaccurate and misleading.
Here are the facts:
*
The mean income for the hard-working local family practitioners in the United States, according to American Medical Association data, is $111,500 a year, while the mean pay for all physicians is $171,600.


Reputed Mafia Leaders Charged in Killings
Two reputed Mafia leaders were charged yesterday in the 1989 killings of two men who had fought the mob cartel that authorities say dominates the private trash-collection industry on Long Island.
The slain men, Robert M. Kubecka and his brother-in-law, Donald Barstow, were shot to death in the office of their garbage-hauling business in East Northport.
For years they had assisted in investigations of organized-crime involvement in the garbage-hauling industry on Long Island, and at the time of his death Mr.
Kubecka was providing yet more information to Federal prosecutors.


Mixed Signals
President Riverboat Casinos Inc. surged yesterday, but the stock remained below its recent high of $67.50.
The company, which operates a riverboat casino on the Mississippi, recently reported sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings.
But its chairman, John Connelly, is involved in a court battle with the Pratt family of Dallas over a valuable berth.


Sears Said to Be Near Pact to Sell Coldwell Banker
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is nearing an agreement to sell its Coldwell Banker Residential Services unit to the subsidiary's management and two investment groups, one of which includes the Texas investor Robert Bass, people close to the negotiations said yesterday.
Sears said in September that it was planning to sell the unit, which has more than 2,000 brokerage offices nationwide and a mortgage servicing group, as part of its effort to shift its energies back to its core business of retailing.
No estimate was available on what Coldwell Banker might fetch.


U.S. Backs Russia on Embargo
Bowing to Moscow, Washington defended delaying a Security Council vote on sanctions against Belgrade until Russia's referendum.
Page A9.


New York Teamster Chief Agrees To Giv Up Union Posts for Life
Abruptly ending a 30-year career in which he became one of New York City's most politically influential labor leaders, Barry Feinstein has agreed to a lifetime banishment from all of his teamsters' union posts, Federal officials disclosed yesterday.
The agreement with Federal investigators resolves noncriminal charges that Mr.
Feinstein had embezzled and misused as much as $500,000 in union funds.
The Government accused Mr.
Feinstein of improperly using union money for a luxury apartment, travel and other personal expenses.


Stocks Surge on Positive Inflation News
The stock market came to attention yesterday, mainly because of hard-to-ignore good news on consumer price inflation.
The rising stock tide lifted, if not all the boats, at least a fair number of them.


Review/Music; 'In Praise of Women,' a New Feminist's Tribute
By her own account, the pianist Ilana Vered came to feminism only recently, having belatedly read Carolyn Heilbrun's 1979 book "Reinventing Womanhood." Miss Vered was already something of an entrepreneur: she has directed summer festivals at Rutgers and in East Hampton, L.I., and has a series at the 92d Street Y. Now, combining the zeal of the newly converted and an impresario's instincts, she has started "In Praise of Women," an organization devoted to acknowledging women's contributions to the arts.
The organization is presenting two concerts this season.
The first, an embarrassing music theater piece, "My Heart's Voice: A Journey Through the Lives and Music of Women," was offered at the 92d Street Y on Saturday evening.
Around a group of works that should have been allowed to stand on their musical merits, Ms.
Vered, Victoria Clark (a director) and Heidi Waleson (a writer) wove a series of vignettes in which the ghosts of Cecile Chaminade and Clara Schumann bemoaned their fates, Pauline Viardot flirted with her sometime librettist Ivan Turgenev, and Nadia and Lili Boulanger chattered and giggled.


Sports of The Times; A New Yank Appreciates The Stadium
HE used words like "neat" and "cool" because that seems to be the kind of person Paul O'Neill is.
He knew he would have exactly one first game at Yankee Stadium, and he had enough good sense to enjoy it.
He was enjoying it yesterday long before he batted 4 for 4 and helped the Yankees beat Kansas City, 4-1, and reminded everybody what it was like when the world was simpler, and, for better or worse, the Yankees usually won.


Crackdown On Vendors In the Streets
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that the city would step up its efforts against the 10,000 unlicensed street vendors who have flooded New York City sidewalks with everything from tube socks to fake Rolex watches.
The problem of illegal vendors, long the bane of Fifth Avenue retailers, has now become a hot economic and political issue in the bustling retail areas on 125th Street in Harlem and on Fulton Street in downtown Brooklyn, where the vendors have taken over sidewalks, crowding out and undercutting small black and Hispanic shop owners.
The illegal vendors, mostly poor immigrants, now account for 10 of every 11 sidewalk peddlers and cost the city as much as $300 million a year in unpaid sales taxes, officials said.


Worker Slain in Robbery
John Mooney, a 38-year-old construction worker, was shot fatally yesterday when he interrupted a robbery at a construction site in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, the police said.
Mr.
Mooney died about 8 P.M. last night in Kings County Hospital, three hours after a man wearing a jumpsuit and a construction helmet entered a trailer owned by the Monadnock Construction Company, Mr.
Mooney's employer, produced a pistol and demanded money, the police said.
When Mr.
Mooney discovered the robbery in progress at the site at 490A Lexington Avenue, the gunman shot him and escaped with $60, the police said.


Wachovia Notes
The Wachovia Corporation, Winston-Salem, N.C., yesterday priced $250 million of 6 3/8 percent subordinated notes due in 2003 at 99.23, to yield 6.481 percent, through Merrill Lynch.
The spread over a Treasury security with a comparable maturity was about 60 basis points.
Underwriters said the notes were noncallable through maturity and rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


Green Takes Leave of Absence for Bid as Council Chief
Mark Green, New York City's Consumer Affairs Commissioner, says he wants to run for the City Council President's office, but he also wants to protect his current job.
In a rare move that leaves him with a political safety net, Mr.
Green said yesterday that he would take a temporary leave of absence from his post to begin assembling a campaign for what will be the Public Advocate.
And Mayor David N. Dinkins obliged him, saying that Mr.
Green would be welcomed back to the administration's fold if fate handed him a defeat.


MOTOROLA INC. (N)
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that robust worldwide demand for portable communications devices, semiconductors and other advanced electronic products helped it achieve record first-quarter earnings of $204 million, or 75 cents a share.
While the company reported net income of only $2 million, or 1 cent a share, in the comparable 1992 quarter, the year-earlier figure included a $123 million accounting charge for future pension liabilities.
Excluding that charge for the 1992 period, Motorola's earnings in the 1993 quarter were still 63.2 percent above the year-earlier profit of $125 million, or 47 cents a share.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. is offering $100 million of 7 1/2 percent first and refunding mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 99.56, to yield 7.537 percent, through Lehman Brothers.
Callable in five years, the bonds are rated A-1 by Moody's, A+ by S.&amp; P. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Glendale, Ariz., is offering $72.9 million of tax-exempt bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The general obligation bonds were initially priced to yield from 2.40 percent in 1993, to 5.50 percent in 2007, while the street and highway user bonds were priced to yield from 2.50 percent in 1993 to 5.20 percent in 2003.
The general-obligation bonds are rated AAA by Moody's and S.&amp; P. because they are insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Co.
The street and highway bonds carry an uninsured rating of A-1 and A+, respectively.


A Mercury Cleanup Leaves Disruption and Fear; Contamination Found in One Family's Home Leads to a $2.2 Million E.P.A. Project
The Environmental Protection Agency has spent almost $2.2 million over the last two years digging up a wooded, residential neighborhood here and carting away 79 truckloads of soil contaminated with mercury, a chemical that is toxic in extremely small doses.
In sharp contrast to other hazardous-waste cleanups handled under the E.P.A.'s Superfund program, the cause of the pollution is not thought to be a giant corporation, a sprawling landfill or an abandoned factory.
Instead, the agency believes the polluter is a 79-year-old chemist, Edmund Barbera, who, unbeknown to his neighbors on Hillandale Road, spent two decades working with mercury in a makeshift laboratory inside the garage behind his Tudor-style home.
Dispute About Source
The remedy -- which has entailed tearing up the yards of Mr.
Barbera and eight of his neighbors and is continuing with the demolition of his garage -- has made clear how disruptive an environmental cleanup can be for those already reeling from the discovery of contamination in their midst.


Big Intel Profit Delights Wall St.
The Intel Corporation today announced record revenue and earnings for the first quarter of 1993.
Strong sales of 386 and 486 microprocessors pushed quarterly revenue at the world's largest computer chip maker to the $2 billion level for the first time in the company's 25-year history.
For the quarter that ended on March 27, Intel had earnings of $548 million, or $2.48 a share, more than twice its earnings of $184.1 million, or 86 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Revenue rose 63 percent, to $2.02 billion, from $1.24 billion in 1992.


Review/Television; Iran and the A-Bomb: Fears Despite Denials
Iran already ranks high on the ever-lengthening list of countries whose prospective possession of a nuclear bomb sends a chill along the global spine, and tonight's "Frontline" report will do nothing to stop the shivers.
The picture that emerges from "Iran and the Bomb" is of a Government bent on acquiring the ingredients of a nuclear weapon even as it makes peaceful overtures to the West.
The technique is to buy a reactor here, some fuel there and other elements anywhere they can be found in the international arms bazaar.


Bridge
There are some bidding conventions that are barred in most tournament play because they are unfamiliar to most of the players.
But the reason that they are unfamiliar is, ironically, because they are barred.
It reminds one of the days when the earliest autos were restricted to a walking pace because they might frighten pedestrians or horses.
A prime example is the Multi Two Diamonds opening which is commonplace in Europe but restricted on this side of the Atlantic.
It cannot be played on the first day of many national events, but is allowed on subsequent days when the nerves of the opponents are assumed to be stronger.


Market Place; Maytag faces a load of problems both at home and in Europe.
THE MAYTAG CORPORATION, which once advertised that its products were so durable they needed no repairs, may need a handyman for its stock.
Most recently, the company ran a disastrous promotional campaign in which it offered two free trans-Atlantic tickets for any European customer who bought as little as $375 in merchandise.
The overwhelming response to that offer, and a similar and equally generous promotion involving intra-European airline tickets, forced the company to take a $48.8 million charge against pretax earnings in the first quarter.


Anheuser-Busch Seen Sponsoring Olympics
Anheuser-Busch Inc., the world's largest brewing company, is expected to be introduced today as the fifth company to pay about $40 million to become a national sponsor of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
In their joint marketing effort, the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games and the United States Olympic Committee may eventually sign up to a dozen corporations.
They have already attracted I.B.M., Home Depot, Sara Lee and Nationsbank, a Charlotte, N.C.-based company with a large presence in Atlanta.


Carroll Cloar, a Realist Painter Of Rural America, Is Dead at 80
Carroll Cloar, a Realist painter whose 1966 painting of children holding an American flag was reproduced on a poster commemorating President Clinton's inauguration, died on Saturday at his home in Memphis.
He was 80.
He had cancer for several years and died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound, said his wife, Patricia Sandstead Cloar.


Dedication, Not Money, Keeps Doctors Going
To the Editor:
While driving to school one morning, I was listening to the weather forecast on the radio and heard, "Well, the doctors won't be on the golf courses today."
The public opinion of doctors today makes me sick (no pun intended).
Growing up with my father a doctor and my sister in her third year of medical school has shown me the true definition of dedication.
My father has missed almost every one of my dance recitals, piano recitals, teacher meetings and sporting events.


CHRONICLE
The divorce lawyer MARVIN MITCHELSON was sentenced yesterday to 30 months in prison and ordered to pay $1.8 million restitution for his conviction on tax-evasion charges, The Associated Press reported.
Judge WILLIAM D. KELLER of Federal District Court in Los Angeles, who imposed the sentence after a three-hour hearing, allowed Mr.
Mitchelson to remain free on bail pending an appeal.


Political Memo; Senate G.O.P. Tastes Success, but It Probably Won't Be a Diet
So the Senate's 43 Republicans have logged a Cinderella-rank upset, knocking off both the White House's $19.5 billion jobs bill and its reputation for political savvy last week with a single filibuster.
Politics is a blood sport, and a party is only as good as its next victory.
The question then is this: Where can the Republicans strike next?


Saving New York's Libraries
What's Johnny to do when the subject is space flight and the ancient encyclopedias at his school don't even say that man has landed on the moon?
Often he'd borrow a book through interlibrary loan, and therein lies a story.
In 1986, students statewide borrowed only 120,000 items through interlibrary loan.
By the end of 1992, the yearly total had reached 537,000, a dramatic indication that local libraries no longer keep pace with the student's need to know.


Corrections
An article on the Law page on Friday about the Resolution Trust Corporation's effort to hire minority and female lawyers referred incorrectly to the agency's review of its affirmative-action program.
Although the agency is reviewing the balance between minority members and nonminority women in some areas of its affirmation-action program, it is not reviewing the share of its legal work channeled to minority lawyers, as compared with white female lawyers.


At the White House, Easter Lasts 48 Hours


Large Role For Russia Expected On Station
STRIKING new details have emerged about the plan announced last week to invite Russia's collaboration in designing a sharply smaller outpost for American astronauts.
It now appears that Russian aid will amount to far more than mere ideas, as a pivotal ground rule of NASA's proposed redesign makes clear.
If at all possible, the redesigned space station is to fly in an orbit where the angle of inclination to the equator is 51.6 degrees, according to NASA experts and internal agency documents.
That seemingly obscure figure speaks volumes, for it is a path through space that has been used exclusively by Moscow for virtually all its manned voyages.


Patterns
Sound of a Collection
Stephen Sprouse is happy to say that on Wednesday he will introduce the loudest clothes of the season.
"It makes a very good noise," he explained, giving a hard yank on one of the Velcro closures that fasten every piece of his fall-winter collection.
"I wanted to mike all the models, so I could get the feedback on the rip." This collection marks the end of his one-year exclusive agreement with Bergdorf Goodman, and he'll trot it out for the first time at the club USA, near Times Square.
It's called Cyberglitter, as opposed to last season's Cyberpunk collection.


U.S. to Press Hanoi to Explain '72 P.O.W. Report
The White House promised today that a Presidential envoy would press Vietnam next week for an explanation of a previously secret document suggesting that Hanoi held 1,205 United States prisoners of war in 1972, three times more than it admitted then or later.
The document, found in January by an American researcher in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party in Moscow, could prove politically explosive if it is authentic, because it suggests that more than 600 American prisoners were killed, died of natural causes or remain in Vietnamese hands.


Murdoch Follows in Franklin's Footsteps
To the Editor:
"Teaching Mr. Murdoch," your March 31 editorial on Rupert Murdoch's return to publishing The New York Post, is an unbalanced and uncharacteristic personal attack.
The first United States media mogul was not Hearst or Pulitzer but Benjamin Franklin, who financed and controlled newspapers throughout the 13 colonies.
This country would have been very different had Franklin and his newspapers been nonpartisan on the great issues of the day!


Jordan, McGrath Gets Cold Medicine
Ciba Consumer Pharmaceuticals in Woodbridge, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc. in New York to introduce Efidac/24, described as the nation's first patented 24-hour timed-release cold medicine.


Publishers of Tax Software Agree to $58 Million Merger
The two leading publishers of popular tax software announced yesterday that they had agreed to merge.
Chipsoft Inc., which publishes Turbotax and Macintax, will buy MECA Software Inc., the publisher of Taxcut and Andrew Tobias's Managing Your Money, for $58 million in cash.


Review/Music; 'A Meditation on the Passion,' in an Apt Setting
Through the kaleidoscopic round of activities at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in recent decades, the constants have been spirituality and theatricality, often in wild imbalance.
But on Friday evening, spirituality and theatricality were precisely in tune in "A Meditation on the Passion," presented by the combined choirs of the cathedral under the direction of Bruce Fifer.
Billed as a concert, the hourlong event offered more or less straightforward performances of works by Schutz, Palestrina, Holborne and Allegri.
But it was also a Passion play, at once simple and stately, carrying all the solemnity and impact of a sacred service.
The audience dispersed slowly and quietly at the end, as if stunned; applause would have seemed beside the point.


G.E. Says NBC Isn't Up for Sale
After nearly two years of speculation about a possible sale of NBC, John F. Welch, the chairman of the General Electric Company, told staff members of NBC News yesterday that the network was not for sale.
The announcement was intended to stanch rumors of an impending sale that have dogged NBC, a division of G.E., and have contributed to a steep decline in morale among employees.
Robert C. Wright, the president of NBC, said, "This was General Electric saying: 'We're in this for the long haul.' "


The Dollar Sinks Further Against the Yen


PREMIER OF SPAIN CALLS AN ELECTION
Thrown onto the defensive by an economic slump and an embarrassing corruption scandal, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez called today for general elections on June 6, hoping to recover the initiative by going to the polls five months earlier than necessary.
In his bid for a fourth successive term in office, Mr.
Gonzalez is facing his most serious challenge since coming to power in 1982, with recent polls indicating that his Socialist Party and the conservative opposition People's Party are now running neck and neck.


Stella Adler Memorial
A memorial service for Stella Adler, the actress and drama teacher who died in December, will be held at noon next Tuesday at the Roundabout Theater/Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.


Review/Opera; A Death Clouds 'Zauberflote' Cast Changes
The news, both good and bad, in the partial recasting of the Metropolitan Opera's production of Mozart's "Zauberflote" on Wednesday evening was tragically overshadowed by a cast change that did not happen.
Brian Hilt, a 39-year-old tenor who was to have taken oven the role of the First Guard, died the day before of a cerebral hemorrhage.
The audience was informed only that the role would be taken by John Horton Murray, and all members of the cast carried on bravely under the circumstances.
Renee Fleming was the most notable new entry, singing Pamina for the first time at the Met and giving the character a more rounded and mature personality than most singers do.
She sang the role strongly and attractively, projecting freely in all ranges.


Iranians Deliver a Warning To Azerbaijan and Armenia
The President of Iran warned today that his Government might adopt "a more serious stance" if the fighting continued between Armenia and Azerbaijan, the official Iranian press agency reported.
In a meeting with a senior envoy from Azerbaijan, President Hashemi Rafsanjani urged the warring nations to withdraw troops to their previous positions and seek a solution through negotiations, the agency said.


Again, the Parking Violations Bureau
First the Dinkins administration settles on a tentative choice for a lucrative city contract.
Then Mayor David Dinkins suspends awarding the contract pending an investigation of the chosen firm's possible links to past wrongdoing -- just hours after an expose appeared in The Village Voice.
City Hall's stumbling over the contract with Lockheed Information Management Services raises fair questions about the judgment of Mr.
Dinkins and his top aides.


BARNETT BANKS INC. (N)
Earnings rose nearly 37 percent at Barnett Banks, largely because of lower losses from bad loans.
Barnett, based in Jacksonville, is the largest independent bank in Florida and the 18th largest in the country, with $38 billion in assets.
The bank's earnings of 88 cents a share were 5 cents more than analysts had expected.
Net interest income rose 4 percent, to $436 million, and noninterest income rose 6 percent, to $149 million.
Noninterest expenses were down 1 percent, to $395.4 million.


By Design; The Vest
When vests were first taken up by women, they were designed pretty much as a novelty item.
Either they were patterned after those worn by men or, more often, they were made more shapely and decorated with bows, medallions, dangling pins and such.
Instead of just being popular for a season and then fading away, the vest has not only survived but flourished.
Now simplified with the frills removed, it is made in every fabric and every length from midriff to mid-calf.


On My Mind; Cruelty and Silence
Since World War II, the Arab world has failed to produce a single government that shares power with its people, a single government that holds itself accountable to its people, a single government based on genuine parliamentary process, religious freedom and democratic restraints.
Of all political realities, all the causes of sorrow for Arab, Jew and Christian in the Mideast, that is the most important.


PRO BASKETBALL: Notebook; Dudley May Rebound Faster Than Expected
Chris Dudley, the Nets' backup center, was originally expected to miss the rest of the season because of a stress fracture in his left foot.
But now it's beginning to look as if Dudley, whose healing powers are apparently as strong as his rebounding, could rejoin the team in time for the playoffs.
Of course, there is no guarantee, and as Dr.
William Hamilton, the orthopedic surgeon who is working closely with Dudley, said, it's the foot that will ultimately make the decision about when Dudley will come back.


Bonds Enters With a Bang But Exits With a Leg Injury
Giants 4, Marlins 3
The thrill of Barry Bonds's first home run in Candlestick Park didn't last very long.
Four innings after the San Francisco Giants' new outfielder homered in his first time at bat yesterday, he left the game in the sixth because of a tight right hamstring.
The Giants eventually beat the Florida Marlins by 4-3 in the 11th, but the injury put a damper on what began as a festive opening day with 56,689 fans in attendance, the largest regular-season crowd at Candlestick.


Fernando, 16, Finds a Sanctuary in Crime
Fernando Morales was glad to discuss his life as a 16-year-old drug dealer, but he had one stipulation owing to his status as a fugitive.
He explained that he had recently escaped from Long Lane School in Middletown, Conn., a state correctional institution that became his home after he was caught with $1,100 worth of the heroin known as P.
"The Five-O caught me right here with the bundles of P," he said, referring to a police officer, as he stood in front of a boarded-up house on Bridgeport's East Side.
"They sentenced me to 18 months, but I jetted after four. Three of us got out a bathroom window. We ran through the woods and stole a car. Then we got back here and the Five-O's came to my apartment, and I had to jump out the side window on the second floor." What Future?
Since his escape in December, Fernando had been on the run for weeks.
He still went to the weekly meetings of his gang, but he was afraid to go back to his apartment, afraid even to go to a friend's place to pick up the three guns he had stashed away.
"I would love to get my baby Uzi, but it's too hot now."


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Saturday about Harvard's choice of Gen.
Colin L. Powell as a commencement speaker on June 10 referred incorrectly to the topic he will address.
It has not yet been selected, a Harvard spokesman said.


Hormone Imbalance Linked to Behavior
CASTING a slender ray of light on a mystifying behavioral syndrome, researchers have linked an inherited defect in the body's thyroid hormone system to attention-deficit disorder, a common psychological problem in children.
The work is the first to identify a specific gene associated with attention deficit difficulties, and it suggests that a fraction of children with the problem may in fact have an undiagnosed thyroid disorder.
Child psychiatrists and other experts on the behavioral problem, however, emphasized that the finding was preliminary and that it was likely to be of relevance to only a small number of the millions of children who have the attention-deficit disorder.
Many researchers insisted that much work remained to be done before they would recommend that all children with an attention deficit diagnosis have their thyroid hormone levels checked.
Possible Clue to Other Ills
Nevertheless, they said that any possible insight into the cause and physiology of the ailment was welcome and that an understanding of how thyroid metabolism shapes brain development may yield clues to other neurological defects underlying other types of attention-deficit problems.


Behind U.N. Delay, Hope in Russia's Diplomacy
Despite its strong statements supporting new sanctions against the Serbs, the Clinton Administration bowed today to a Russian request that such a move be delayed to give Moscow more time to pressure the Serbs directly, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said.
The United Nations Security Council delayed voting on sanctions until after Russia holds a referendum on April 25 on constitutional revisions.


Chemists Learn Why Vegetables Are Good for You
CACHED away in the soul of every red-blooded American who fondly recalls when carnivory was a virtue, and supper wasn't supper without a centerpiece of pork chops or prime rib, lies the frail hope that all the recent emphasis on fruits, grains and vegetables, vegetables, vegetables, will somehow turn out to be a terrible mistake.
Well, abandon that hope, ye who harbor it.
The truth is that the more researchers understand about the ingredients found in fruits, vegetables, beans and herbs, the more impressed they are with the power of those compounds to retard the bodily breakdown that results in cancer and other chronic diseases.
Nutritionists and epidemiologists have long observed that people who eat a plant-rich diet suffer lower rates of cancer than do meat loyalists, and now scientists are beginning to figure out why.


Q&amp;A
Yellow Laundry
Q.
Why does washing my clothes make them turn yellow?
A.
It is probably not washing that leads to the yellowing, but incomplete laundering, said Dr.
S.
Kay Obendorf, a physical chemist who is head of the department of textiles and apparel at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.


Fear and Cynicism Fight for Space, in a Neighborhood and in Hearts
On a sunny morning this week, Patricia LeBoeuf stood selling homemade gift baskets at a curbside in South-Central Los Angeles and explained why there will be no riots this time.
"People are tired," she said.
"Even those bad people are tired. I'm just sick of the whole Rodney King thing. We all just want to get back to normal."
After dark in a nearby parking lot across from a burned-out service station, moody young men said that nothing would stop people like them from venting their anger as they did last year.
"If we don't work, ain't nobody going to work," said one of them.
"If we aren't happy, ain't nobody going to be happy."


U.S. Cracks Door to World Forest Agreement
THE Clinton Administration will offer an olive branch this week to tropical countries on the bitterly divisive issue of protecting the world's forests, according to Administration and State Department officials.
Environmentalists say the move might eventually open the way for negotiation of a world forest treaty.
It could also be one of a series of actions this spring and summer signaling an Administration intention to reassert American leadership on international environmental issues after the Bush Administration's diplomatic floundering at the Earth Summit last year in Rio de Janeiro.


Meeting of Minds on Pine Barrens' Future
After years of bitter confrontation, developers and environmentalists held peace talks today on the future of the Long Island Pine Barrens, a 100,000-acre expanse that sits above the purest drinking water left on the Island.
"We've checked our guns at the door and are giving conciliation its first real chance," said Edwin M. Schwenk, executive director of the Long Island Builders Institute.
"The time has arrived for us to settle our differences peacefully."


Starks Hopes Next Game Isn't Laugher
In less than three progressive seasons, John Starks has gone from being an escapee of the basketball bush leagues to an indispensable Knick with celebrity ribs.
A small crowd of reporters followed Starks into the parking lot today after practice to find out how much pain the mercurial guard was in after a hard foul by Boston's Sherman Douglas Sunday sent him to the hospital with what was originally feared to be a broken rib.


Angolan Rebels Rebound, Within Reach of a Victory
Nearly six months after the elections that were supposed to cement the peace in Angola, the rebel leader who lost in the vote has resumed the civil war and scored such enormous advances that there is talk he might engineer an outright military victory.
The rebel leader, Jonas Savimbi, seemed poised in September to pass into history after he lost his bid to be the country's first elected President to his longtime rival, Jose Eduardo dos Santos.
Within weeks, many leaders of the rebel group, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, were either killed or captured by Government forces, and the group had lost the support of its main backers, the United States and South Africa.


Lions Toss Their Wallet Into the Montana Sweeps
Two more teams entered the Joe Montana sweepstakes over the weekend: the Detroit Lions and the Los Angeles Raiders.
The Lions, according to someone familiar with the negotiations, are an intriguing possibility for Montana, the 36-year-old San Francisco 49ers quarterback who is shopping for a new team.
Detroit has a dynamic running back in Barry Sanders, has signed three free-agent offensive linemen, plays indoors, has a reliable defense and plays in the mediocre National Football Conference Central Division.
The Lions' only negative is that they deploy the one-back, Washington Redskins' offensive scheme.


Murdoch Follows in Franklin's Footsteps; Surely Not Mudslinging
To the Editor:
Re "Teaching Mr. Murdoch" (editorial, March 31): Why are you criticizing The New York Post for reflexive conservatism, printing anything to influence elections, pushing a political agenda and inserting editorial positions into its news pages?
So correct an institution as The New York Times could not possibly be engaging in mudslinging, so there can be only one other purpose for the editorial -- self-parody.
DAVID C. FISCHER  Chappaqua, N.Y., March 31, 1993


Chess
In a round-robin tournament where each player encounters every other, those who fall out of the running for the top prizes should persist in trying to do their best.
If they let their frustration and disappointment destroy their competitiveness they give their later opponents the advantage of easy victories against them, an advantage their earlier opponents did not have.
As brilliant as the Austrian grandmaster Rudolf Spielmann (1883-1942) could be at his best, he was notorious for losing one game after another following a poor start; at his worst he was not a model to be emulated.


Bills Retain Wright
The Buffalo Bills yesterday matched the San Francisco 49ers' contract offer to nose tackle JEFF WRIGHT.
Wright, who was paid $225,000 last season, agreed to a four-year deal valued at $6 million. (AP)


Outside the Capitol in Hartford, the Issue Was Gun Control


Putting Ideas (Old and New) to Work
DAVID COUTU and Dale Plummer are both entrepreneurs, both struggling to build small manufacturing businesses in a bad economy, and both tenants in one corner of the old Ponemah Mill complex here.
On most other fronts, however, they might as well be in different universes.
Mr.
Coutu's company, Intelligent Motion Systems, hits technology at its leading edge, an offshoot branch of robotics, while Mr.
Plummer's shop, called the Quinnehticut Woolen Company, uses 75-year-old textile machines, which were bought for the price of scrap, to make wool yarn that is sold in knitting hobby stores.


Review/Music; A Jazz Singer With Backup By Accordion Band of One
If anyone can gain acceptance for the accordion as a jazz instrument as versatile as the piano, it is probably Eddie Monteiro, the dazzlingly proficient one-man orchestra who pilots the jazz-duo of Marano and Monteiro.
In his hands the electronically enhanced accordion approximates the sound of a full swing band playing four- and five-part harmonies.
It delivers springy acoustic bass lines that are indistinguishable from the real thing.
And it has a timbral warmth missing from the sounds produced by its technologically more sophisticated cousin, the synthesizer.
Mr.
Monteiro's abilities wouldn't count for so much if he and his partner made music that was a shallow technical display.
But the duo, who began an open-ended engagement at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street) last Tuesday evening, has a fine taste in songs, a rich grounding in jazz traditions and a remarkable musical rapport.


NATO Jets Start to Enforce Ban on Illegal Bosnia Flights
United States, French and Dutch warplanes flying from bases in northern Italy and from the American carrier Theodore Roosevelt patrolled over Bosnia and Herzegovina today to enforce a United Nations ban on unauthorized flights.
But a French Mirage jet was reported tonight to have crashed in the Adriatic Sea as it returned from its mission.


Trial-Induced Anxiety in Los Angeles
If Los Angeles were on a couch, psychologists here said today, they would treat the city for "anticipatory anxiety" as a crescendo of press coverage arouses growing fears of civil unrest.
"It's just like Indian war drums, drumming up anxiety," said Chaytor Mason, a psychology professor at the University of Southern California.
"It makes the pulses beat harder, and the anxiety climbs and mounts as the time goes on."


Milestone at Mike
With the words, "Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Candlestick Park," the first full-time female public address announcer in major league baseball made her debut yesterday.
SHERRY DAVIS was behind the microphone for the first time for the San Francisco Giants' home opener against the Florida Marlins.


TV Channel Supports Management
Home Shopping Network Inc. said yesterday that it intended to keep its management in place, despite a decision by Liberty Media Inc., the company's controlling shareholder, to withdraw its offer to buy the balance of the company for about $640 million.
In reaction to Liberty's weekend announcement, Home Shopping's stock plunged $1.50, or 22 percent, to $5.25, in brief trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday.


New Studies Agree: Eat Your Vegetables
Chemistry has begun to catch up with what nutritionists and epidemiologists have long observed: vegetables and fruits are good for you.
People eating a plant-rich diet have lower cancer rates than meat loyalists do.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.94
3.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.89
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.99
3.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.53
5.59
6.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.79
6.85
7.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.80
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
6.00
6.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Glamorous Collection For Bendel's
They look like the slinky clothes Carole Lombard and Joan Bennett wore in the golden age of the silver screen, but their designer, Don Simonelli, describes them a little differently: "They're the kind of evening dresses the Duchess of Windsor was photographed wearing in the late 1930's, and they didn't disappear until after World War II."
Sexy, romantic, glamorous are descriptions that come to mind.
Susan Falk, the president of Henri Bendel, where the dresses made their debut last week, has some other, more practical, observations.


No Headline
"They be saying you can live anywhere and it don't affect you -- that's stupid. It would have made a difference if we would have had somebody taking care of us. My father would always say, 'Stay in school, don't drop out, don't drink or do drugs.' But he never did anything about it himself, so what's the use? It's funny how you can learn to memorize those words." -- BERNARD MORALES,  a Bridgeport, Conn., teen-ager.  [ B6:3. ]


Review/Fashion; Openings Without the Fanfare
Carolina Herrera gave a series of mini-shows every day for two weeks, including 10 last Monday.
Pauline Trigere, who has been introducing her new styles in her showroom with the tiny stage since 1952, had decided to skip a show this season.
But so many people called that she had a tiny presentation anyway.


Observer; Prognosis: Unheavenly Dirt
Every day brings a new "study," sometimes called a "survey," meant to prove that "the situation" is worse than ever.
Here's one, for instance, from Sunday's New York Times, about a decline in the nation's housecleaning habits.
A surveyor in College Park, Md., has found that in 1985 women spent 90 minutes fewer per week cleaning house than women did in 1965.
Men during that period increased their housecleaning time by only 60 minutes per week.
In short, over a 20-year span, the American household suffered a 30-minute-per-week loss of dusting, mopping and scrubbing.


Tougher Masters Course Not So Formidable for Langer
The 57th Masters will be remembered for Bernhard Langer's clinic in textbook shotmaking and composure under pressure, and forgotten for just about everything else.
Beginning with a four-under-par 68 on Thursday, the 35-year-old German seemed to be playing on a level of his own all week as he floated past the early leaders to build a four-stroke lead after three rounds.
On Sunday, he stayed patient even as his putts weren't dropping early and used his extraordinary resolve to bring home a remarkably easy victory.


Debate Force on Bosnia. Now.
A lot of serious and decent people are now urging President Clinton to use American military force to protect innocent Bosnian populations from further murderous Serb assaults.
But any such step must take account of political realities in this country.
Neither in the Congress, nor in the population at large, is there now any real constituency for U.S. military engagement.
And the President himself comes from a tradition, and a generational experience, that says you don't go to war unless and until that kind of public support exists.


Boggs and Cone Confront a Tough Audience
Wade Boggs didn't know quite what to expect, but he knew he had to get it over with, much like a fraternity pledge who knows the hazing is going to be rough, but he'll likely survive.
David Cone, once a Met, then a flirtatious free agent whose advances never paid off in a failed romance with the Yankees, didn't have to guess.
The right-hander for the Kansas City Royals knew how the fans in the Bronx would greet him yesterday.


Reviews/Theater; Looking At Guilt, Present And Past
Whether he is dealing with the Spanish Inquisition or the Nuremberg Tribunal (as in his play "2"), Romulus Linney has often been concerned with questions of guilt and the nature of evil.
Last year in "Ambrosio," he tellingly explored the effects of the Inquisition on a passionate young monk.
In his small, intriguing new play, "Spain," he returns to the 15th century to look squarely at Torquemada, the Grand Inquisitor himself.
In this two-part work at Theater for the New City, Torquemada is a calm but wrathful tyrant who can find the devil in every corner of the kingdom, even in a priest's attempt at treating cases of schizophrenia.
The Inquisitor relentlessly attacks those who challenge his authority and his retributive code of morality.
Fred Burrell plays the character as a reasonable man with a will of iron.


Snow in Colorado Buries Tourism Boycott Threat
The mountain slopes of Colorado, buffeted by boycott threats over the state's vote against gay rights laws, were instead hit this season with something more powerful than protest: luxurious blankets of snow, drawing a record number of skiers.
"Colorado really had a banner winter," said James Cammisa, the Miami publisher of a newsletter on travel trends.
The tourism boycott "was more of a celebrity boycott," he said, adding that its impact was "very low."


Ex-Housing Policeman Seized in Tax Case
A former New York City housing police officer was arrested yesterday on charges of fraudulently obtaining at least $150,000 in tax refunds from New York State over three years, the Attorney General's office said.
The man, Calvin Wright, 46, who lives at 67-40 Parsons Boulevard in Flushing, Queens, is accused of filing bogus W-2 income statements from 1989 to 1991, falsely claiming that he earned $2 million a year as an employee of the United States Marine Corps, according to the Attorney General's office and the State Department of Taxation and Finance.


With Fishes, Sake and Silk, Japan's Prince Plights His Troth
Helicopters hovered overhead, beaming to television viewers the path of her car through the morning traffic, and newspapers carried front-page articles with sketches showing where everyone sat for the ceremony as an American-educated commoner came one step closer to Japan's version of the ultimate fairy tale.
Masako Owada accepted two red fish, six bottles of sake and five bolts of silk today to signify her formal engagement to Crown Prince Naruhito, 33.
June 9 was set as the wedding date.


A Fresh Start For Helmsley Palace
The New York Helmsley Palace hotel said yesterday that it had awarded its account to the Zimmerman Agency in Tallahassee, Fla.
The account was previously handled by Creative Marketing in Northbrook, Ill.
Billings were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
FINDING A SANCTUARY IN CRIME
Fernando Morales was glad to discuss his life as a 16-year-old drug dealer, but he had one stipulation because of his status as a fugitive.
"Could you bring a photographer here?" he asked.
"I want my picture in the newspaper. I'd love to have me holding a bundle right there on the front page so the cops can see it." A1.
NEW YORK CITY  TEAMSTERS LEADER AGREES TO RESIGN
Abruptly ending a 30-year career in which he became one of New York City's most politically influential labor leaders, Barry Feinstein has agreed to a lifetime banishment from all of his Teamsters union posts, Federal officials disclosed.
A1.


Couple Are Found Dead In Park Ave. Apartment
A Park Avenue couple with titles of nobility from India and connections in Manhattan social circles were found dead at home yesterday morning, the husband in a pool of blood, the police said.
Their six-room apartment was in disarray, but investigators were unable to say whether the couple -- identified as Prince Khedker of Khed Anjanvel, India, a 57-year-old financier and industrialist, and his wife, Nenescha, about 15 years his senior -- were victims of a double murder or a murder-suicide.
The results of an autopsy were expected today.


Review/Critic's Notebook; Reaching Verdicts, Musical Or Other
Judging a murder case as a juror recently, I felt, peculiarly enough, just like a music critic.
The witnesses came and went: the eyewitness from the second-story window, the accomplice in a robbery gone bad, the jailhouse legal amateur whose hobby supplied him with convicts' marketable confessions.
But at least for a professional juror of more esthetic issues, if it hadn't been for the sobering task of determining the defendant's fate, it would have all seemed like a performance awaiting a crucial one- or two-word review.
No matter how often I have seen Perry Mason wrench confessions from least likely suspects, until it came time to sit in a juror's chair for more than two weeks I was unprepared for the fact that a trial really is a carefully fashioned performance mounted specifically for 12 of the defendant's peers.
Their verdict is, of course, about the guilt or innocence of the accused.
But it is also a judgment of the effectiveness of the trial itself.


Executive Changes
CE SOFTWARE INC., West Des Moines, Iowa, a unit of CE Software Holdings Inc., named Ford Goodman, the company's executive vice president, president and chief executive.
He succeeds Richard Skeie, who continues as president of the holding company.
ESTEE LAUDER U.S.A., New York, named John Demsey senior vice president of sales.


Sanderson Trial Opens
An eight-member jury was selected yesterday in United States District Court in Tuscaloosa, Ala., in a sexual discriminatiopn lawsuit by NANCY WATTS, the former secretary to WIMP SANDERSON, who alleges that Sanderson socked her in the eye last year, an incident that cost the winningest coach in University of Alabama basketball history his job nearly 11 months ago.
Sanderson maintains he was a victim of jealousy after breaking off a 15-year affair.
Testimony may not begin for several days because there are about a half-dozen cases on the docket. (AP)


Church Unit Seeks Shelter In Bankruptcy
So short of cash that it almost had to close its cathedral for Easter, a holding company for the Episcopal Diocese of Long Island filed for reorganization Friday under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The diocese said that it was about $7 million in debt, and it traced its problems to the costs of operating several schools that have failed.


South Africa Tense as Slain Black Leader Is Mourned
An angry shudder passed through the townships of South Africa today as blacks mourning the killing of Chris Hani, the charismatic black leader, put up barricades, burned cars, looted stores and fired on police officers and journalists.
No deaths or serious injuries were reported in the sporadic violence, but black leaders and Government officials feared that the anger would escalate, fueled by new evidence that the pistol used to shoot Mr.
Hani on Saturday in front of his suburban home had come from a military armory.


Inflation News Takes Effect: Yield Falls on 30-Year Bond
Yields on Treasury bonds and notes dropped yesterday as investors and traders bought securities in a sharp but delayed reaction to positive news on inflation last week.
The surge in buying, which began on Thursday with a report showing restrained producer price inflation in March, has brought the yields on Treasury bonds and notes back within striking range of the lows reached at the beginning of last month.


Review/Theater; A Ghost-Hunting Country Weekend
In plays by Larry Ketron, small towns have quietly revealed a diversity of local character.
The author has a particular affinity for slightly off-center humor as people meet in resale shops, liquor stores and boarding houses and swap stories about their dreams and their defeats.
There are hints in Mr.
Ketron's recent work that he is becoming restless with his aptitude for low-key regionalism and is increasingly interested in adding plot and action.
In this mode, he remains irresolute.
"Laureen's Whereabouts," at the WPA, is ostensibly a ghost story that takes place in a haunted house in a South Carolina woods.
But the author seems halfhearted about the mystery.
The play is balmy rather than chilling.
It dawdles instead of heading in a direct dramatic line.


Right Clubs And Friends In Society
Though they were nobility in name only, the Prince and Princess were certainly high society.
They had a Park Avenue apartment furnished with expensive antiques, a summer home in New Hampshire, memberships in the right clubs in New York and a host of friends in the Social Register.
The Prince -- tall, distinguished, with jet-black hair -- traced his title to Indian royalty and said his full name was Chitresh Rao Vasant Rao Jadhav Khedker.
But bowing to the democratic mores of his adopted home, he described himself as an international financier and had friends call him Teddy.


Vikings Keep Salisbury
The Minnesota Vikings yesterday re-signed the free-agent quarterback SEAN SALISBURY, who spent last year alternating as the team's starter with RICH GANNON.
The Vikings signed the free-agent JIM McMAHON last month and also have second-year passer BRAD JOHNSON.
Gannon remains a free agent.
Terms of the deal were not announced, but KFAN radio in Minneapolis reported the one-year pact was in the $1.5 million range. (AP)


Couple Found Dead in Their Park Avenue Apartment


For One Day, It's the House That Abbott Owns -- A Brilliant Outing Stifles the Royals at Stadium Opener
The pomp and paegantry of opening day was unpredictable.
George Steinbrenner remained ensconced in his private box in his first game back in 32 months.
Six women in shorts danced on the Yankee dugout between innings.
But Jim Abbott did not throw any curves into the mixture.
He was quite predictable.
Though the start of another season in the Bronx would have attracted a sellout crowd anyway, the pitching matchup of Abbott versus the Royals' David Cone made yesterday's game even more appealing for the 56,704 spectators, a record total for the refurbished Yankee Stadium, on a crisp afternoon.
It was the courageous left-hander in his first start in his new home against the former Met who wanted to be a Yankee, or at least made it sound that way, before he returned home to Kansas City.


Law Has Its Own View Of Mental Illness
To the Editor:
Re "To Be Mentally Ill Doesn't Mean Raving" (letter, April 4):
Notwithstanding the many years of experience of Joan Wachtler as a certified social worker, she (like most mental health professionals) does not understand how a defendant's mental illness is dealt with at the pretrial and trial stages in our criminal justice system.


Miscellany
*
TBWA Advertising Inc. said that it had taken a minority position in its Portuguese affiliate, EPG, Lisbon.
The new name of the agency will be EPG/TBWA.


Should You Dial .111, Johnson Will Answer
It is one of the more curious campaigns of April: Howard Johnson, hitless in the Mets' first two games and then futile in the clutch throughout the weekend, evidently is determined to present himself as the most relaxed man ever to hit .111 in the first week of a season.
The third baseman went 0 for 6 against the Colorado Rockies, only to say he was satisfied with the walks he worked out.
Johnson then had a hand in the weekend surrender of a three-game series to the Houston Astros by coming up empty during late-inning threats, but told the public it was nothing to get nervous about.


Allied Research Receives $76 Million Offer
The Allied Research Corporation, an ammunition and weapons system supplier based in Baltimore, said today that a Florida businessman had made an unsolicited $76 million takeover offer.
The company said Malcolm I. Glazer, president of the First Allied Corporation of Boynton Beach, Fla., had expressed his interest in a letter on Friday.
The letter said Mr.
Glazer was seeking "the endorsement and support of the board" before making his bid official.


Taylor's Wheelbarrow Gets Its Gold Plating
It's official.
Lawrence Taylor and the Giants agreed yesterday on a two-year, $5.05 million contract that will keep the 34-year-old Taylor with the team where he became perhaps the best linebacker in pro football history.
Steve Rosner, Taylor's agent, said he settled the final details of the contract yesterday morning with George Young, the Giants' general manager.
The agent said Taylor was out of town and would sign the contract later in the week.
The Giants do not confirm contract agreements until the contracts are signed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  SERBS BREAK BOSNIA TRUCE  Serbian nationalist forces unleashed intense artillery attacks on Sarajevo and the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica, shattering a fragile cease-fire that had prevailed across most of Bosnia for two weeks.
A1  NATO warplanes began enforcing a flight ban over Bosnia.
A8


Guides to MS-DOS 6.0
NO sooner was MS-DOS 6.0 made available on March 30 than books were being rushed to market to take account of this latest evolution of the operating system used on perhaps 100 million personal computers.
The authors get advance looks at new software; books are not produced in days.
And while there are noteworthy new features in 6.0, most features carry over from the previous versions.


Populist Eggs Go Rolling Across the Clintons' Lawn
When Hillary Rodham Clinton was about to become First Lady, Merrie Spaeth, a former aide to Nancy Reagan, offered this advice: "Until you've lived through a White House Easter egg hunt, you don't know what hell is."
But the Clintons were all smiles at their first Easter Egg Roll today as they greeted swarms of children trampling the manicured White House lawn.


Japan Leader Takes Hard Line on Trade
Despite growing pressure from the Clinton Administration on trade issues, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa today rejected the idea of establishing new specific targets for Japanese imports of American goods and cautioned that trade tensions could not be solved quickly.
In a wide-ranging interview with American correspondents today, Mr.
Miyazawa said that in his first meeting with President Clinton this week, he would offer what Japanese describe as a step that could improve the trade imbalance, a plan to stimulate the Japanese economy with more than $100 billion in new Government spending.


Islanders And Devils Seek Third
With the Islanders having been assured the final Patrick Division playoff spot by the Rangers' loss in Philadelphia last night, there remains for both the Islanders and the Devils one goal before the regular season concludes on Friday: avoid finishing in fourth place and facing the Penguins, winners of the last two Stanley Cups, as first-round opponents.
The Penguins and Mario Lemieux have been on a tear approaching the playoffs, which start Sunday.
Both have been unstoppable over the last month and a half, with Lemieux closing in on another scoring title and the Penguins on a record 17-game winning streak.


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


OFFER OF AMNESTY REMOVES OBSTACLE TO ACCORD IN HAITI
Removing a final major obstacle to settling Haiti's 18-month political crisis, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide has reversed himself and extended an offer of amnesty to his most bitter opponents among the army leadership, diplomats and advisers to the ousted President say.
United Nations mediators are expected to present the offer to Haitian military leaders on Wednesday in a meeting that diplomats have described as pivotal to the resolution of the crisis.
Mediators have said they hope to have Father Aristide return to office within 60 days of a settlement.


GOVERNOR'S TRIAL OPENS IN ALABAMA
Guy Hunt, the Primitive Baptist preacher who in 1986 became Alabama's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction, looked on calmly today as prosecutors in the first day of his felony trial accused him of illegally using his office to collect $200,000 for his personal use.
Deputy Attorney General Steve Feaga said the state would prove that Governor Hunt, deep in debt, used the money raised for his inauguration for personal needs ranging from mortgage payments to cattle feed and failed to report the transfer of money as required under state ethics laws.


Indy Making Room for Stock Cars
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway has scheduled a news conference for this morning in Indianapolis at which it is expected that the track will announce that for the first time since the Indianapolis 500 began in 1911, the historic oval will be the site of a second race.
Speedway officials and Nascar, stock-car racing's major sanctioning body, are expected to say that the track will hold a Winston Cup stock car race in mid to late August 1994.
Last June, before the track was closed for renovations, several top stock-car teams held a two-day test session at the two-and-a-half-mile oval to see whether stock cars could successfully race there.


Unitrin Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Checkers Drive-In Restuarant (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Molex Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vance, Leaving, Sees Hope for Bosnia Plan Despite Fighting
Winding up nearly 19 months as a peace negotiator in the Balkan conflict, Cyrus R. Vance said he thinks that the plan he helped frame for ending the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still "very much alive" despite a new surge in fighting.
Though he spoke of his "horror" and of "agonizing that tears at your insides," on hearing the latest reports of fighting around Srebrenica and Sarajevo, Mr.
Vance said in an interview on Monday evening that "on the whole the amount of fighting is clearly less than when we went to Geneva" last September to start the negotiations.


Edmund H. Kellogg, Professor Emeritus And Diplomat, 81
Edmund Halsey Kellogg, a retired Foreign Service officer, conservationist and professor emeritus at Vermont Law School, died Friday at the Kendal retirement community in Hanover, N.H.
He was 81.
His family said he had been in declining health after a series of strokes.


An End to the New York Games?
The New York Road Runners Club was awaiting an 11th-hour rescue yesterday from an undisclosed international sponsor, or it would have to cancel the New York Games track meet scheduled for Wien Stadium in northern Manhattan on May 22.
RALEIGH MAYER, the Road Runners' director of media and public affairs, said yesterday that the club expected to hear from the potential sponsor within the next two days, after already extending the deadline on two occasions.
"We have to know whether to print and sell tickets," Mayer said.
"We're all on pins and needles here."


Abortion-Rights' Scorned Prophet; Hated by Both Sides, Bill Baird Raises Hackles, Not Funds
Mention his name on the phone and Betty Friedan's gravelly voice turns into liquid vitriol.
Then she hangs up.
Robin Morgan, the feminist author and editor, who is usually attracted to publicity like an iron filing to a magnet, calls him a "chauvinist" and declines interviews if he's the subject.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  ARISTIDE ACCEPTS HAITI AMNESTY  Diplomats and advisers to Haiti's exiled President say the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide has reversed himself and extended an offer of amnesty to his most bitter opponents among the army leadership.
A1  U.N.
ASSAILS SERBIAN SHELLING  After months of restraint in their reaction to Serbian bombardments in Bosnia, senior United Nations harshly condemned the Serbian shelling on Monday that killed more than 50 civilians in the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica.
A1


As Los Angeles Tenses, Fears for Rights Grow
In a city where every conversation seems to turn to speculation about what last year's arsonists and looters might do, Paul L. Hoffman's fear has a different cast.
He is afraid of what the police might do.
"After what happened last year, clearly there's a lot of public sentiment to just crack down, regardless of the cost to people's rights," said Mr.
Hoffman, the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California.


First Comes Scoring, Then It's the Snoring
Perhaps, with a playoff berth clinched and all those potential post-season opponents scouting them at Nassau Coliseum tonight, the Islanders didn't want to reveal any secrets.
Perhaps that's why they lulled them into a false sense of security and dulled their fans nearly to sleep with a lethargic 3-3 tie with the Hartford Whalers before only 8,381 customers, including Devils Coach Herb Brooks and Capitals Coach Terry Murray.


Radio Receivers May Be Catching Echo of Big Bang, Scientist Says
A leading astrophysicist reported today that radio receivers in space and on the ground might be recording the passage of cosmic gravity waves, huge perturbations of space that echo the almost instantaneous expansion of the infant universe 15 billion years ago.
The scientist, Dr.
George F. Smoot of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in California, said gravity waves initiated by the "inflationary epoch" of the universe -- a split-second period during which many theorists believe the universe expanded at nearly the speed of light -- might be discernible in data now being collected.
If that is correct, scientists would have a powerful new tool for studying the birth of the universe.
He reported his findings in a lecture at the Carnegie Institution of Washington.


Drug Use by Younger Teen-Agers Appears to Rise, Counter to Trend
After years of declining drug use among high school students, researchers and rehabilitation specialists said yesterday that there are signs of an increase in marijuana, cocaine and LSD use among the youngest teenagers.
Researchers working under contract to the National Institute on Drug Abuse said a survey of 18,000 eighth graders at 160 public and private schools around the country showed that 7.2 percent of them acknowledged smoking marijuana last year, up 15 percent from the previous year.


International Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Eating Well
HERE'S why Americans are confused about nutrition:
Dr.
Walter Willett, the chairman of the department of nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health; Dr.
Gladys Block, a professor at the School of Public Health at the University of California at Berkeley, and Dr.
Michael Jacobson, the executive director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group, believe it is prudent to take supplements like vitamins C and E and beta carotene.
Studies suggest that such antioxidant compounds may help combat heart disease, cancer and other health problems.


Dow Maintains Momentum, Rising 15.94
The reviving stock market struggled yesterday to keep its momentum of Monday, with the Dow Jones industrial average rising 15.94 points, less than half what it gained the day before.
But airline and railroad stocks lifted the Dow Jones transportation average to its third record high in four trading sessions.


Katharine Casey Gerrity; Volunteer, 65
Katharine Casey Gerrity, a volunteer worker in Westchester County, died yesterday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
She was 65 and lived in Rye, N.Y., and Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Photo Control (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Pulitzer Prizes


TRC Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Huge Stimulus Package Is Announced by Japan
Japan announced on Tuesday a $116 billion stimulus plan, the biggest in its history, to rescue its faltering economy.
The announcement gave a furious boost to the recent rally in the Tokyo stock market as a feeling spread here that an end to the nation's persistent recession, while not around the corner, is at least in view.
The stimulus package, consisting of increases in public works spending and various business incentives, had long been expected, but its size, 13.2 trillion yen, was higher than the 12 trillion yen figure that had been anticipated lately.


No Headline


SynOptics Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Fresh Choice Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Church Groups Asked to Assist Homeless Effort
The Dinkins administration, facing contempt charges because of a shortage of shelter for homeless families, is asking religious groups for help.
One group, The Council of Churches, said yesterday that it would answer the city's plea by offering 40 apartments in which families can stay for a night or two until the city finds room for them in its own bulging shelter system.


Traveling Down
The Marietta Corporation has nothing to do with the military contractor or the Georgia town of the same name.
It makes personal hygiene products, including soaps and shower caps, mainly for hotels and motels.
Since early March, its stock has been trailing downward, reflecting sluggish prospects for the travel and lodging industry.


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


60-Minute Gourmet
WITH the first gentle breezes of spring comes one of the great delicacies of the sea: soft-shell crabs.
The season has arrived once again in the Northeast, having gradually spread north from ocean waters off the Middle Atlantic States.
When a blue crab sheds its shell, it expands by as much as a third.
This is the point at which the crabs are most meaty and tender, a fact that does not go unnoticed by hard-shell crabs, which often devour them.


D. F. Elmendorf, 69, Pulmonary Specialist
Dr.
DuMont Frelinghuysen Elmendorf Jr., a retired physician who specialized in pulmonary diseases, died on Saturday at St.
Peter's Hospice in Albany.
He was 69 and lived in suburban Menands.
His death followed a brief illness, his family said.


Review/Television; A Light Look at Working After Dark
"All Night Long," a brisk tour of after-dark life in New York City, offers glimpses of people who work, people who play, people who talk and people who toss and turn.
The subject brings out the literary in Dan Rather (or his scriptwriter), who calls this edition of "48 Hours" "a journey through the heart of darkness." But no fear, it is much less ominous and considerably more fun than Joseph Conrad's vision of Africa.
Two "48 Hours" regulars, Bernard Goldberg (who quotes Dickens) and Richard Schlesinger, are abetted by the hosts of "CBS This Morning," Mark McEwen, Harry Smith and Paula Zahn, who are themselves among the city's early-hour workers.
They report on the night-shifters who answer 911 emergency calls and exist on Tums; a man who makes his home under the Brooklyn Bridge; two women who say they never sleep; a father-son team at the Fulton Fish Market; the late-night club crowd; talk-show gabblers; a Harlem baker, and a Greenwich Village jazzman.


Review/Film; Cinematic Portrait Of the Life Of an Artist
The best thing about Marion Cajori's study of Joan Mitchell, the Abstract Expressionist painter who died in October at the age of 66, is the way it makes a complete emotional portrait of the toweringly acerbic artist by interweaving her conversation with shots of works that reveal her vulnerable inner life.
Ms.
Mitchell had the demeanor of a formidable grande dame, 1950's bohemian-style, who was as imposing in her way as Jackson Pollock was in his.
Reminiscing in an imperious baritone, in sentences that are clipped but loaded with emotional baggage, she recalls growing up in a well-to-do Chicago family.
From early childhood, she says in the film, "Joan Mitchell: Portrait of an Abstract Painter," she was an achiever who won athletic medals to the delight of a father who drove her hard.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Sonic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Market Place; A venture capital fund for healthcare companies with few options
WHEN he was chief financial officer of the Immunex Corporation, Alan Frazier learned firsthand about the voracious capital demands of biotechnology companies.
Now, as head of a new investment fund, he is trying to supply some of that much needed capital to emerging health-care companies.
Disappointments with key drugs at several biotech companies and uncertainty about the Clinton Administration's health-care proposals have effectively closed the stock markets to new biotech issues since February.
Frazier &amp; Company, through a fund called Frazier Healthcare Investments, will invest in companies that might have gone public in more expansive times, or companies that have already gone public and need more funds.


Delchamps Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Petrovic Returning to Nets In Time for Playoff Run
Chuck Daly was joking with reporters during an impromptu break in today's Nets practice.
"Think we can get anybody else hurt?," the coach was saying with a laugh as he re-entered the gym.
Usually, the series of devastating injuries that have turned hopes of a 50-victory season into a struggle for the home advantage in the first round of the playoffs would not be something to smile about.
But on this occasion Daly had reason to be happy because the Nets finally got some good news: Drazen Petrovic is healthy enough to play.


Review/Theater: Three Men on a Horse; An Odd Couple Take to the Track For Love and Luck
In its two seasons on Broadway, the National Actors Theater has often seemed like the greenest of expansion teams.
Can anyone here play this game?
Among the victims were Feydeau and Chekhov (although Shaw fared better with "St. Joan").
But nothing can equal "Three Men on a Horse," which opened last night at the Lyceum Theater with a reunion of Tony Randall and Jack Klugman, television's "Odd Couple." This time, Mr.
Randall's company is defeated by a double burden of miscasting and maladroit acting.
The way to revive "Three Men on a Horse" would be to rejuvenate it with an ensemble of young actors and clowns.
Instead, the approach is the opposite: a geriatric production.
Since its Broadway premiere in 1935, the John Cecil Holm-George Abbott comedy has proved to be a durable staple and has also inspired two musicals.
After the troupe's experience with classics, this lightheaded farce should have been the easy one.
In John Tillinger's production, however, the show is as dim and contrived a play as could be imagined.
It is far less viable than "The Show-Off," the 1924 George Kelly comedy presented this season at the Roundabout Theater Company.


46 Arrested in Drug Raids
More than 200 police officers broke up what they described as a major heroin ring yesterday in Lower East Side housing projects, arresting 46 people.
Among those arrested in the raids shortly after dawn was Richard Rodriguez of Union, N.J., who was described by Drug Enforcement Administration officials as the leader of the group.
The suspects included suppliers to dealers who, police said, operated in the Riis, Wald, Baruch, Campos Place and Bracetti Place projects in Manhattan.
In addition to the arrests, nine guns and one pound of heroin were confiscated.
John Dowd, a special agent of the D.E.A., said the raids were made after a nine-month investigation.


Keystone Consolidated Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mississippi Democrat Is Elected to Congress
Bennie Thompson, a liberal Democrat turned back a surprisingly strong bid by a conservative Republican today to win the Congressional seat vacated by Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy.
Mr.
Thompson, who is black, rolled up 54 percent of the vote in the mostly black district, which runs for 230 miles along the Mississippi River, to turn back an early bid by Hayes Dent, 31, a white former aide to Gov.
Kirk Fordice.


U.S. Judge Upholds Population Count
A Federal judge dealt a final rebuff today to a coalition of major cities seeking to force an adjustment of the 1990 census to make up for the acknowledged undercount of more than five million people, many of them black or Hispanic.
The judge, Joseph M. McLaughlin of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, said in a decision released late this afternoon that the Bush Administration's Commerce Secretary, Robert A. Mosbacher, had not acted arbitrarily or capriciously in 1991 when he refused to adjust the 1990 population count.


Paulson Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Old Fear Haunts Poles in South Africa
The first worshipers arriving for the Polish-language Easter Mass at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Pretoria found a banner strung across the door, painted with a warning: "We Will Kill You All for Our Leader."
The threat was immediately understood.
Though it was just 24 hours since Chris Hani, the black Communist leader, had been shot dead, there was probably no one among South Africa's 18,000 Polish immigrants who had not heard that the man arrested as the assassin was also a Polish immigrant, Janusz Jakob Walus.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
April 9
April 2
April10
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
225.8
228.6
215.5
Distillate stocks
99.9
97.9
90.5
Crude imports, daily
6.8
5.7
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.8
1.6
Crude stocks
335.2
342.7
346.8
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.5
88.7
86.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Canadian Plan
To the Editor:
May I add a patient's point of view to the discussion of Canada's health care system in "Follow Canada's Health Example" (letter, April 1)?


MathSoft Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mets Have The Rockies To Thank For This One
The best thing the Mets did tonight was keep their bats on their shoulders.
In an eighth inning that reminded Colorado fans that theirs is an expansion team, New York drew four consecutive walks, received a dribbling wild pitch, saw Rockies outfielder Dante Bichette badly misjudge a ball in the outfield, batted around, scored six times and suddenly forgot it was freezing outside.
The snow flurries, the sleet and the periodic 25 mile-per-hour gales had made it a miserable evening up until then.
But, in the end, the Mets paraded off with the 8-4 victory, stopping a three-game losing streak.


U.S. Shouldn't Export Mineral Industry Jobs
To the Editor:
Your April 1 editorial support for the proposal by the Clinton Administration and Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt to charge a 12.5 percent royalty on the gross income of the mineral producers from Federal lands is terribly simplistic.
Unlike oil, which can be processed into a salable commodity at little cost, hard-rock minerals have little value until after expensive smelting.


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


No Headline


Family and Friends Mourn Three Brothers Who Drowned


New York Has to Make School Board Elections Voter-Friendly; Concerned and Fed Up
To the Editor:
In "School Challenge From the Right" (editorial, April 6), your concern appears to be that a new religious social agenda may infect New York City's school boards.
However, you fail to express any concern regarding the liberal, gay agenda that has been banging on the schoolhouse doors for the last 10 years.


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Willamette Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Officials in Westchester Seeking Man Bitten by a Rabid Raccoon
In an extraordinary manhunt, Westchester County health officials searched today for an unidentified man who was bitten by a rabid raccoon on a Yonkers street on Friday and then fled before the authorities arrived to help him.
Scouring hospitals, homeless shelters and apartment buildings in Yonkers and the Bronx, health officials said the man could die within weeks if he failed to obtain immediate treatment.


Coca-Cola Co. (N)
The Coca-Cola Company reported strong results yesterday for the first quarter.
Operating profit increased 18 percent, to $454 million; per-share earnings advanced 21 percent, to 35 cents.
The increase in earnings does not take into account adjustments to accommodate charges of $146 million for post-retirement benefits and $73 million for equity investments.


Review/Music; Works From Jazz to Buzz
Thursday night's performance at Merkin Concert Hall meant to bring together radically different performing esthetics.
The first composer, Katrina Krimsky, presented standard post-hippie compositional ideas -- a little Indian music, a little jazz, a bit of violin -- and kept the normal concert etiquette, asking the audience to sit still and listen.
The second, LaMonte Young, brought a minor sort of ideological framework to his piece.
By situating his musicians around the hall, Mr.
Young asked the audience to participate in a non-traditional way.
In fact, everybody just sat there and listened.
Given the general revolution in the relationship between audience and performer wrought by African-American and popular American music, the whole thing seemed more than a bit innocent.
Mr.
Young's piece, "The Melodic Version of the Second Dream of the High-Tension Line Stepdown Transformer," part of a longer composition called "The Four Dreams of China," had more to do with the translation of technique into experience than with any sort of musical creativity.
Mr.
Young has long been interested in the sound of transformers buzzing, and he had his eight trumpeters use mutes to create hums and buzzes.
Playing with slight pitch variations, the trumpeters moved from consonance to dissonance; with passive long notes, the musicians allowed the frequencies of the notes to mesh and then jumble up, making clear the subtle interplay of intonations.
Marian Zazeela's lighting gave the hall an appropriate new-age glow.


Superior Industries International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Love or Harassment? Campuses Bar (And Debate) Faculty-Student Sex
America's college campuses may have no hardier cast of cliche characters than the ones who populate the faculty-student romance: mid-life professors, long-suffering faculty wives and a perennial crop of sweet young things.
But lately the plot has changed.
This month, the faculty of the University of Virginia will consider what may be the nation's strictest code barring sexual relations between professors and students of either sex -- even consensual relations, and even between professors and students they do not teach or supervise.
Similar policies, though less sweeping, have been enacted at dozens of campuses, large and small, and are being considered at many more.
Awareness of Harassment
Though a few, notably Harvard University and the University of Iowa, adopted such codes in the mid-1980's, the movement has picked up great speed in just the past year.
Experts say it has been propelled by growing recognition that sexual harassment is a serious problem that could land professors and administrators in court.


For Rangers, There Had to Be a Mourning After
Today, Mark Messier was publicly shunned by Team Canada.
There was no invitation to play for his country in the world championships in Germany.
Adam Graves was called, so was Mike Gartner.
Messier was not.
It did not surprise him, it did not even hurt his feelings.
The whole season has been like that for Messier.
He expects the insults now.
He expects the criticism.
He expects the little slap in the face.
He will not admit to being embarrassed -- he will not even admit to having second thoughts about this Ranger season -- but he has been humbled.
That, he could not avoid.


No Definite Findings In Park Ave. Deaths
Results of an autopsy on the bodies of a couple found dead in their Park Avenue apartment were inconclusive, the New York City Medical Examiner said yesterday, leaving open the question of why and how they died.
But a puncture wound in the neck of Prince Chitresh Rao Khedker, 57, of Khed Anjanvel, India, did not cause his death, said Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, a factor that added to the mystery surrounding the deaths.
Princess Nenescha, about 72, the wife of the financier and industrialist, had no discernible marks on her body.


Home Shopping Network reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Joint Recital Canceled
The pianist Maria Joao Pires and the violinist Augustin Dumay have canceled their Sunday recital at Alice Tully Hall because Miss Pires is ill.
Refunds are available at the box office Monday through Saturday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., or by mail: Alice Tully Hall Box Office, 1941 Broadway, New York 10023.


BSD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A picture caption with the Advertising column in Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the man at the left and carried an incorrect credit line.
The man was Frederick M. Teach.
The photographer was Glen Cochoran.


Auto Makers In Joint Patent
The Big Three auto makers said today that their research consortium had been awarded its first patent.
The patent covers technology that one day may permit auto makers to substitute parts made of lighter-weight plastic composite materials for parts made of steel, thus improving fuel economy.
The United States Council for Automotive Research, which was started by General Motors, Ford and Chrysler last year, said the patent represented the first time the auto makers together had produced an original technology.


POLL SAYS DOCTORS BACK CLINTON PLAN
A majority of American doctors are sympathetic to President Clinton's basic approach to a health-care overhaul even though they fear that it would cost them money and limit their authority, a new poll indicates.
The poll, conducted by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press, was the first survey of doctors that dealt with current proposals on health care.
It found that 64 percent believe that the nation's health-care system needs "fundamental changes," compared with 10 percent who think it has to be "completely rebuilt" and 24 percent who say it needs "only minor changes."


IP Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Pop Life
Benefits for a Waitress
After moving to New York City as a modern dancer in 1980, Allyson Paul found herself waiting on tables at Sweet Basil in Greenwich Village.
One night she heard the tenor saxophonist Pharoah Sanders perform, and she fell in love with jazz.
Jazz apparently loves her, too.
After learning recently that Ms.
Paul had fallen ill with leukemia, Mr.
Sanders and more than 50 other leading jazz musicians agreed to perform at benefits for her at Sweet Basil and two other jazz clubs where she has worked as a waitress.
The first tribute, at the Village Vanguard, was on Sunday afternoon; the others, also in Greenwich Village, will be at Bradley's at 10 P.M. on Sunday and Sweet Basil at 9 P.M. on Monday.
Among the musicians who are to perform are Tommy Flanagan, Cedar Walton, Roy Hargrove, Randy Brecker and the Gil Evans Orchestra.


CHRONICLE
How do you give a birthday party for someone beloved by friends and colleagues, who is known among them for her love of old songs and for more than a touch of hypochondria?
First, you invite lots of physicians, as the organizers of a birthday party tomorrow for NAOMI B. LEVINE, senior vice president for external affairs at New York University, have done.


INSIDE
New Buyers of S.&amp; L. Assets
The Government made it easier for smaller investors to buy real estate and other assets once owned by bankrupt savings institutions.
Page D1.
Limiting Campus Liaisons
Universities are raising barriers to sex between professors and students, and that is raising debate.
Page B9.
Florio Makes It Official
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey formally announced his candidacy for a second term after three years of sharp shifts in the polls.
Page B5.
Sharp Drop in Retail Sales
Retail sales fell 1 percent in March, the biggest monthly decline in more than two years and an indication that the recovery is weak.
Page D1.
Hints of Gravity Waves
Analyzing satellite data, a scientist reported detecting what may be gravity waves created in the first instants after the Big Bang.
Page A18.


New Basis For a Rally In Bonds
With concerns about inflation dampened by restrained price increases in March, a new theme is popping up in the bond market.
And if it catches hold, yields on the 30-year bond and other Treasury securities could break the historic lows reached at the beginning of March.
"The next story is going to be that the economy is running out of gas," said John Lipsky, the chief economist at Salomon Brothers.
"There is that body of thought out there and you can't ignore it."


Dieter Plage, 57, Dies Filming in Rain Forest
Dieter Plage, a German wildlife film maker whose documentaries brought attention to African conservation issues, died in an accident while filming in the rain forest in Sumatra on April 3, said a spokesman for Survival Anglia Ltd., a British film company.
He was 57 years old.
Mr.
Plage, who was filming a documentary project for the National Geographic Society and Survival Anglia, fell 150 feet from a small airship, the spokesman said.
He was trying to repair a jammed rudder on the craft, which he was using as a camera platform above the forest canopy.


Parts Were Denied, Satellite Developer Charges
Developers of the next generation of military reconnaissance satellites were denied access to computer parts they wanted to use because the manufacturer feared a military contract would jeopardize the company's chances of being sold to Japan, a Government contractor said today.
Bruce E. Thompson, the chairman of Mountain Optech Inc., said his company had sought the components from a unit of the Applied Magnetics Corporation.
The subsidiary, the Optical Products Division, was sold in late January to the Nakamichi Corporation of Tokyo.


A Lucrative Nike Deal for Krzyzewski
A change of emblems for Duke's basketball team could be worth millions to coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI.
The Blue Devils -- who for years have worn Adidas shoes, the ones with three stripes -- will switch to Nike.
Nike and Duke officials would not confirm the amount of money involved.
But a person familiar with the negotiations told The News &amp; Observer of Raleigh, N.C., that Krzyzewski will receive a $1 million signing bonus and an annual salary worth about $375,000 a year, plus stock options, for a 15-year contract.


ALC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Income at Westinghouse Dips 1.5% in First Quarter
The strengthening economy has not done much so far for the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, which reported today that net income from continuing operations in the first quarter of 1993 was down 1.5 percent from a year ago.
Improvements in Westinghouse's broadcasting, power-plant-construction and nuclear-fuel businesses were insufficient to offset sagging military-electronics orders and weak demand for the company's industrial repair services.


Lewis Takes a Verbal Shot at Bowe
LENNOX LEWIS led with his mouth yesterday as he began the defense of his World Boxing Council heavyweight title against RIDDICK BOWE.
But wait.
Lewis isn't fighting Bowe.
At least, not yet.
Lewis, the Briton who was named W.B.C. champion after Bowe refused that organization's demand that he fight Lewis, will actually make his first title defense in Las Vegas, Nev., on May 8.
It comes in a pay-per-view match against TONY TUCKER.


Regulators Tell of Clifford's Assurance on B.C.C.I.
As the bribery and fraud trial involving the Bank of Commerce and Credit International resumed in Manhattan yesterday, two former Federal bank regulators testified about Clark M. Clifford's statements regarding the bank's role in the takeover of another bank that would be controlled by Mr.
Clifford.
The two regulators testified that in 1980 Mr.
Clifford tried to allay the concerns of the Federal Office of the Comptroller of the Currency by playing down the role the foreign-owned B.C.C.I. would have in the takeover of what would become First American Bankshares.


Versus Technology reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


A. C. McGiffert Jr., A Seminary Leader And Educator, 100
The Rev.
Arthur C. McGiffert Jr., a retired Congregationalist minister who was president of two seminaries, died on Friday in a retirement community in Claremont, Calif.
He was 100.
Mr.
McGiffert served as president of the Chicago Theological Seminary from 1946 to 1958 and of the Pacific School of Religion in Berkeley, Calif., from 1939 to 1945.
He was also a professor, pastor and author of religious articles and books.


Calton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Recycling Answer Sought for Computer Junk
Eric Buechel tours his domain at a brisk pace, assessing his inventory with the pragmatic humor of an undertaker.
In his warehouse sit rows of hulking computers, each weighing tons.
They once whirred and flashed, but now they rest cold, unplugged, discarded.
"This is where mainframes come to die," Mr.
Buechel declared, smiling and patting one of the big metal boxes with mercenary affection.


Plan Is Afoot to Shift OTB Regulation
The chairman of the commission looking into the future of racing in New York State said yesterday that the group was concentrating on a plan to put racing in the hands of a corporation, a regulated monopoly that would also run offtrack betting in New York City, but not elsewhere in the state, at least for a while.
"We would hope that the others would eventually come aboard," said Vincent Tese, who heads the nine-member Advisory Commission on Racing in the 21st Century.
It was appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last fall to look into a possible restructuring of racing after the year 2000, when the New York Racing Association's franchise to operate the state's three major tracks expires.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST CHICAGO CORP., Chicago, a bank holding company, said that its venture capital subsidiaries sold a $300 million portfolio to Ifint Diversified Holdings Inc., owned by Ifint S.A., a Luxembourg investment company.


Compaq and Microsoft Plan Alliance
Two powerhouses in the personal computer industry, the Compaq Computer Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation, today announced an alliance to develop innovations intended to keep their momentum going.
The companies said they would work closely to develop small hand-held machines, easy-to-use technology like wireless communications, pen-based machines, and features for desktop models like compact-disk devices that many analysts regard as important growth areas.


Frequent Overdiagnosis Of Lyme Disease Found
LESS than one-fourth of 788 patients who were referred to a Lyme disease clinic in Boston during a four-and-a-half-year period actually suffered from the disease, a study has found.
It is the largest documenting previous reports that Lyme disease is greatly overdiagnosed, said the lead author, Dr.
Allen C. Steere of New England Medical Center and Tufts University School of Medicine.
"Lyme disease is a problem, and now over 40,000 cases have been reported since 1982, and the disease is continuing to spread," he said in a telephone interview.
But he said some symptoms were often confused with those of other ailments, mainly chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia, a malady involving dispersed aches.


New Questions on the P.O.W.'s
The long smoldering issue of unaccounted-for American prisoners from the Vietnam War has flared anew.
Hanoi has only its long history of duplicity on the P.O.W. issue to blame for this latest ambushing of its hopes for more normal ties.
If the latest document to emerge from Soviet archives proves accurate, the process of normalization will have to be postponed yet again.
No American interest in Vietnam ranks higher than keeping faith with the families of these missing servicemen.


Crestar Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Traded Mark Davis, pitcher, to the Philadelphia Phillies for Brad Hassinger, pitcher.
Assigned Hassinger to Durham of the Carolina League.


Xplor Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


State Urged To Rebuild L.I. Beaches
A task force appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called today for the quick restoration at public expense of major Long Island beaches that suffered severe erosion during the winter's bruising storms.
In an interim report released today, the task force began the complicated process of setting limits on the public's responsibility for rebuilding beaches and structures that are vulnerable to routine battering by storms and the constant pounding of the wind and tide.


New York Has to Make School Board Elections Voter-Friendly
To the Editor:
I read "School Challenge From the Right," your helpful April 6 editorial on voting in the coming New York City school board elections.
As a new voter in New York, I called the 718 number you kindly published to find out where to vote.


Steinbrenner Adds Randolph As an Assistant to Michael
Willie Randolph, the second baseman who defined class and stability during his 13 seasons with the Yankees, returned to the organization last night when George Steinbrenner named him an assistant general manager.
The announcement was made at a dinner in Manhattan to welcome the Yankees back to New York.
It was an appropriate theme for the night because Steinbrenner has always wanted Randolph back in the Bronx.
Randolph, 39, will not begin his new job until after the All-Star Game break because of family commitments.
He will work with General Manager Gene Michael evaluating major and minor league talent.
Jackson Works Part Time
Unlike fellow former Yankee Reggie Jackson, who was appointed special adviser to the general partner last month, Randolph will work full time with the Yankees and will have an office at Yankee Stadium.


EGYPT AND P.L.O. CONFER ON TALKS
President Hosni Mubarak met today with the P.L.O. leader, Yasir Arafat, and plans to see Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel on Wednesday as part of Egypt's effort to resume the Middle East peace talks.
Mr.
Arafat presented Mr.
Mubarak with the final changes he hoped Israel and the United States would make before resuming negotiations, Palestinian officials said.
The Palestinian position will be presented to the Israelis by Mr.
Mubarak on Wednesday in the Suez Canal town of Ismailiya.


Microwave Cooking
ITALIAN broccoli, or broccoli rape, one of the early, bitter greens that act like a tonic to our bodies, is a sign of spring.
It has longish stems and much smaller flower heads than conventional broccoli.
Locally grown broccoli rape is available in spring and fall, and it is now being grown almost year-round in Salinas, Calif., the broccoli capital of America.
Traditionally, it is served with pasta or Italian sausage or both, and it goes well with garlic and with hot pepper.
Olive oil is preferred, because of the flavor.
As with all green vegetables, microwave cooking preserves more vitamins and results in a brilliant color.
When using the broccoli rape pasta sauce, a sturdy non-egg pasta like perciatelli, cavatelli or linguine will give the best results.


Ballard Medical Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Retail Sales Fell Sharply In March
Consumers cut spending at retail counters by 1 percent in March, the biggest monthly decline in more than two years, the Commerce Department said today in a report that was considerably weaker than expected.
Although the midmonth blizzard that paralyzed much of the Northeast and South was widely acknowledged to have had an adverse impact, Government and private analysts said there was little doubt that the poor sales results also suggested a further slackening of economic growth.


Spacelabs Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Results Plus
GYMNASTICS  Dawes Is Off to Good Start  Dominique Dawes, the 16-year-old from Silver Spring, Md., registered a startling set of scores to win the first of six rounds of qualifying at the world championships in Birmingham, England.
First came 9.712 for her floor exercise, then 9.618 for the vault and 9.75 on the asymmetric bars.
The winner, ridden by Craig Perret, covered the seven furlongs in 1:212/5 to take two-fifths of a second off Black Tie Affair's stakes record set in 1991.
Alydeed paid $2.80 for $2 to win. (AP) BOXING  Holmes Stops Canadian in Seven Rounds  Larry Holmes, the 43-year-old former heavyweight champion, stopped a bloody Ken Lakusta of Canada in seven rounds in Bay St.
Louis, Miss.
The handlers for Lakuta (21-20-1) called off the bout before the eighth round because of a bleeding cut around the boxer's left eye.
Holmes (57-4) is 9-1 since coming out of a three-year retirement. (AP)


S.&amp; L. Agency Seeks Smaller Buyers
The Clinton Administration significantly expanded the opportunities today for smaller investors to buy the real estate and other assets once owned by bankrupt savings and loan associations.
The changes put a more populist stamp on the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency managing the savings and loan cleanup, and represent a reversal of the Bush Administration's policy of selling off sour investments as fast as possible, often by bundling them into large pools.
Placating Congress
The changes are also meant to mollify the many members of Congress who have complained, after hearing for years from constituents, that the agency was selling too much of its property in huge offerings beyond the reach of local investors.
Lawmakers have been balking at providing the $45 billion that the Administration has requested for completing the savings and loan cleanup unless those practices were changed.


Tenneco Inc. (N)
Tenneco Inc. reported a turnaround in its finances and a sharp gain in its operating profits yesterday as a result of its efficiency efforts and rising prices in some operating divisions.
The company said its net in come totaled $74 million, compared with a loss of $666 million a year earlier.
Revenues were flat, at $3.2 billion.
Operating income rose to $274 million, from $207 million in the quarter a year earlier.
The biggest improvement was in the company's J. I. Case division, a maker of farm machinery and construction equipment.
The unit's loss was narrowed to $17 million, from $70 million.


Judge Rebuffs Cities On Altering Census
A Federal judge dealt a setback to coalition of American cities that sought to force an adjustment of the 1990 census to make up for an acknowledged undercount of more than five million people, many of them black or Hispanic.


Metropolitan Diary
SCENE: The Department of Motor Vehicles on Hudson Avenue in Brooklyn on a recent afternoon.
Dramatis personae, among a cast of hundreds: Glenn Helmers, in line to have his picture taken for a new driver's license; the motherly clerk who hails him to the counter.


BHA Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Inmates Let Nosair Make Extra Calls, Prison Says
Two prisoners at the state prison in Attica, N.Y., were charged yesterday with breaking prison rules to help El Sayyid A. Nosair make surreptitious phone calls.
Mr.
Nosair, who is serving time on charges related to the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane, has also come under scrutiny by investigators in connection with the World Trade Center bombing.
The two inmates, Shakur A. Muqtadir and Ronald Fedrick, were accused of letting Mr.
Nosair call people on their own lists of approved contacts, using their own identification numbers, said James Flateau, a spokesman for the state Department of Correctional Services.
The action allowed Mr.
Nosair to make more than his allowed calls and evade identification.


Samuel Walker, 83, A Realty Executive And Developer, Dies
Samuel R. Walker, a real-estate executive who directed the development of Sterling Forest in Orange County, died on Friday at his home in Niantic, Conn.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Review/Music; An Oratorio Enhanced With Parallel Lives
It is impossible to hear Mendelssohn's first oratorio, "St. Paul," without considering the theological, historical and personal baggage that comes with it.
That and its having been overshadowed by its successor, "Elijah," made it an ideal work for Leon Botstein, a conductor who likes to resurrect rarities and who seems to relish peering into composers' baggage as much as performing their music.
The work's sacred character also made it well suited to Easter Sunday, when Mr.
Botstein performed it with the American Symphony Orchestra and the Pro Arte Chorale at Carnegie Hall.
The story of the conversion of Saul of Tarsus and his ministry under the name Paul resonated strongly with Mendelssohn for reasons that were at least partly autobiographical.


Dispute Over the Kahlo and Rivera Legacy
For almost two years, as the world's fascination with the Mexican painter Frida Kahlo fed a stream of pilgrims to the funny blue house in which she was born and died, visitors there were met by bolted doors and a guard mumbling about "repairs."
Angry graffiti appeared on the walls and artists protested in the press.
But it was the reopening of the 35-year-old Frida Kahlo Museum late last month that ignited the smoldering dispute over the management of the legacy that Kahlo and her husband, Diego Rivera, left in trust to the Mexican people.


Esquire Names New Publisher
Alan Stiles, advertising director of GQ and before that Vanity Fair, was appointed publisher of Esquire yesterday.
He replaces Nancy LeWinter, who will assume the new position of group director of beauty and fashion marketing for Hearst Magazines, Esquire's parent.


Bankruptcy Needs Reform
The airline industry has lost more than $10 billion over the last three years.
Even American, United and Delta -- the world's low-cost carriers -- have lost billions.
The fundamental problem is excess capacity: Too many seats chase too few customers.
Robert Crandall, president of American Airlines, and other airline officials allege another problem: lenient bankruptcy laws.
According to this argument, the courts allow bankrupt carriers like Eastern and Continental to linger, thereby adding flights to an already overcrowded schedule.
The bankrupt carriers trigger ruinous price wars and other desperate strategies to stay afloat.


Review/Television; An Apocalyptic Vision of Wall Street's Future
Last represented on "Great Performances" with a trilogy of Mozart operas that he set in 1980's Manhattan, Peter Sellars returns to the public-television showcase tonight at 9 with "The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez." This time, with an impish nod to the 1919 silent film "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari," he moves into the 1990's.
The film is pretentious, exasperating and thoroughly fascinating.
As writer and director, Mr.
Sellars uses "Ramirez" to convey an apocalyptic vision of this country following the boom-and-greed binges of the Reagan years.
Gliding through a world of empty Wall Street offices and dirty streets, the movie reeks of huge corporate layoffs, homelessness, violence and profound pessimism.
The cast, headed by Peter Gallagher, Joan Cusack, Ron Vawter and Mikhail Baryshnikov, is relentlessly grim.
In this context, who wouldn't be?


Gov. Jim Florio of New Jersey Announces His Candidacy for a Second Term


Columbus Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Personal Health
DURING a recent bicycle tour in Mexico, the tire of a passing truck turned a small stone into a potentially blinding missile.
As the stone struck the lens of my protective glasses, I recalled a similar near-mishap much closer to home years ago that had turned me into a devotee of eye guards.
Looking around at my 17 biking companions in Mexico, I was surprised to note that while all wore helmets as required by Backroads Inc., the tour sponsor, and nearly all wore sunglasses, no one else was wearing the polycarbonate eye protectors that had kept the stone from striking my eye.
Each year hundreds of thousands of sports enthusiasts, recreational, amateur and professional athletes alike, suffer sports-related eye injuries.
Yet only a small fraction wear glasses or face guards that can protect the most valued of sensory organs.
Squash players are now often required to wear eye guards. but tennis players, even those who play fast competitive doubles, rarely do.
Face shields that can keep fingers from poking eyes are becoming increasingly popular in the National Football League, but among basketball players, goggles seem to be worn only by players who have already suffered an eye injury.


7th Inmate Found Dead at Prison In Ohio as Rebellion Continues
Yet another inmate was found dead today at the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility here, where some 450 prisoners holding eight guards hostage have been in control of a cellblock since Sunday afternoon.
The body, discovered this morning in a cellblock adjoining the one seized by the rebellious prisoners, brought to seven the number of people, all inmates, who have died since the uprising at the maximum-security prison began.


Freedom of Choice Bill Protects Women
To the Editor:
I am disappointed that Nadine Strossen and Ira Glasser, my partners for choice, do not support H.R. 25, the freedom of choice bill (letter, April 7).


World Acceptance (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.11
3.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.83
2.89
3.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
3.00
3.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.53
5.53
6.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.78
6.79
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.82
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.95
5.99
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Starks Stylish Despite a Flak Jacket
With one eye on the Chicago Bulls and another on John Starks's injured ribs, the Knicks may have been looking past the Washington Bullets last night.
The Bullets (21-55), the worst team in the Eastern Conference and missing four players because of injuries, stayed close for three quarters before fading in the fourth and losing, 93-85, at Madison Square Garden.


Let France Disclose Complicity With Nazis
To the Editor:
Your April 7 front-page article on the appalling treatment of Jews in France during the Nazi occupaton and up to 1946 makes the Vichy Government basically responsible.
In the light of this report, without diminishing the moral burden of all people responsible for the atrocities, I submit it is important to call attention to the close relations President Francois Mitterrand had with the Vichy Government, whatever his present political position and views.


Bancfirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Park Communications Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


An auction at a fallen agency is a reminder of the industry's modern perils
GEER, DUBOIS died in February, but the funeral, such as it is, is being held this morning.
The agency's office in the Flatiron neighborhood of lower Manhattan will reopen a final time to sell its few tangible assets.
A public auction will offer computers, a telephone system and what a newspaper classified advertisement tersely called a "tremendous quantity very fine office furniture and equipment."


Pentagon Is Wary on Hanoi Text; Families See Proof of Lies
Pentagon officials cautioned today against putting too much stock in a newly unearthed document that suggests that North Vietnam lied about the number of American prisoners it held in 1972.
But advocates for the families of missing servicemen rushed to embrace the document's findings.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  FINAL REBUFF FOR BID TO REVISE '90 CENSUS
A Federal district judge in Brooklyn dealt a final rebuff to a coalition of the nation's major cities seeking to force the Commerce Department to adjust the 1990 census to make up for the acknowledged undercount of more than five million United States residents, many of them black or Hispanic.
A14.
NEW YORK CITY  A MOVE TO EASE RULES ON GUTTER CLEANING
The Dinkins administration, in a second move in two days to address complaints of small- and medium-sized business owners, said that it will suspend in some areas of the city a requirement forcing businesses to be responsible for sweeping the street within 18 inches of the curb in front of their stores.
The Mayor is apparently courting the support of owners of small and medium-sized businesses, which make up most of the city's business community.
B3.


E-Z Serve Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Rio de Janeiro Journal; The Collor Story (Cont.): Much Ado About Magic
For most Brazilians, more than enough drama was packed into the impeachment of the President last September on charges of profiting from a multimillion-dollar extortion ring.
But now a first wave of memoirs is renewing the national uproar by asserting that the President, Fernando Collor de Mello, tried bribery and black magic to ward off the first impeachment of a Brazilian President.
The controversy has transfixed Brazil, dominating television talk shows and occupying the covers of news magazines.


Review/Dance; On the Heels of Abstraction
H.
T.
Chen is a choreographer who tells stories.
He has perfected a style based on American modern dance and Asian traditional dance and theater, all of which the Shanghai-born Mr.
Chen has studied and performed.
But in "Opening the Gate," a work-in-progress presented on Friday night at La Mama E.T.C.
Annex Theater, Mr.
Chen comes uncharacteristically close to abstraction.
There are suggestions of animal life in the dancers' snaking arms and small pounces, and he hints at the imagery of birth, said to be the dance's theme.
But most of all, the fast-flowing piece is throbbing, swirling spectacle.
The tone is set by Bradley Kaus's electronic score, with a live drumming component performed by musicians and the dancers.
Dressed in loose white shirts and pants, the dancers rise and fall at a stately pace in handsome stage patterns, briefly holding poses with the look of calligraphic symbols.
There is a good deal of serene rising and punchy martial-arts forays.
But the most exciting moments come with propulsive runs, darts and pivoting turns for taut-bodied dancers alone, in small groups or in large whirling masses, with gatelike pyramids toward the end.


Court Upholds the Crazy Horse Beer Label
After months of uncertainty, the Original Crazy Horse Malt Liquor will be flowing again.
A Federal judge in Brooklyn ruled yesterday that a law banning the use of the name was unconstitutional.
The Government had argued that it was preventing "offensive exploitation" of Crazy Horse, a revered leader of the Sioux Indians.
As a result of the ruling, the Hornell Brewing Company of Brooklyn can get on with its "celebration" of the American West themes, with Crazy Horse and other beer products it intends to market, including Wild Bill Hickok Porter and Annie Oakley Lite.


Winners of the 1993 Pulitzer Prizes for Journalism, Literature and the Arts
GENERAL NONFICTION  Garry Wills "Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America"
In "Lincoln at Gettysburg," a scholarly study of oratory, Garry Wills argues that Abraham Lincoln, in the mere 272 words of the Gettysburg Address, was able to recast the tradition of oration, the Civil War, and the history of American political thought in a new and clearer light.
In offering new ideas about the structure and context of the speech, Mr.
Wills maintains that Lincoln used his words to win the war in ideological as well as military terms.
The 58-year-old Mr.
Wills, a classical scholar, Presidential historian and political scientist, is an adjunct professor of history at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., where he lives.
FICTION  Robert Olen Butler "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain"
In Robert Olen Butler's first collection of short stories, "A Good Scent from a Strange Mountain," each of the 15 intricate tales is told in the first person, from the viewpoint of different Vietnamese transplanted from the Mekong Delta to the Louisiana bayou.
Haunted by the past, and highly ambivalent about their American hosts, these fictional immigrants seek truces in their various personal wars, and their stories raise the literature of the Vietnam conflict to an original and highly personal new level.
Mr.
Butler, 48, served as an Army linguist in Vietnam, which was the setting for three of his six previous novels.
His first novel to be published, "The Alleys of Eden," was printed by Horizon Press after the manuscript was turned down 21 times.
Mr.
Butler teaches fiction writing and film theory at McNeese State University in Lake Charles, La.


Theater in Review
Carnival!
York Theater Company St.
Peter's Lutheran Church Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street Through May 2  Music and lyrics by Bob Merrill; book by Michael Stewart; based on material by Helen Deutsch; directed and choreographed by Pamela Hunt; music director, Darren R. Cohen; set by James Morgan; costumes and puppets by Michael Bottari and Ronald Case; lighting by Mary Jo Dondlinger; production stage manager, Joseph V. De Michele; associate choreographer, Laura Streets.
Presented by the York Theater Company, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director; Molly Pickering Grose, managing director, and One World Arts Foundation, W. Scott McLucas, executive director.
WITH: David Arthur, Robert Michael Baker, Glory Crampton, Bruce Anthony Davis, Teri Furr, Susan Guinn, William Linton, Robert Lydiard, Karen Mason, Sandra Purpuro, Rusty Reynolds and Paul Schoeffler.


Food Notes
For Orthodox Easter
In observance of the Orthodox Easter on Sunday, Food Emporium stores are offering a 10 percent discount on all products made by Peloponnese, a line of condiments from Greece.
The foods will be available for sampling in Manhattan on Friday at the Food Emporium at 32d Street and Third Avenue and on Saturday at the stores at 68th Street and Broadway and on Third Avenue at 82d Street, as well as the stores in Rye Brook, N.Y., and Greenwich, Conn.
Where Eating Helps
Eating so that others will not go hungry -- a paradox of Americans' affluent society -- is a part of several forthcoming benefits.
On April 22 the Food and Hunger Hotline, which supports food pantries and soup kitchens, will hold a dinner-dance, its first ever, at Landmark on the Park, 160 Central Park West (at 76th Street), starting with cocktails at 7 P.M. and dinner at 9.
An honored guest will be Susan Sarandon, who is to be recognized as an activist for social change.
Tickets for the cocktail reception are $75; for cocktails and dinner, $250.
Telephone: (212) 366-5400.
Share Our Strength will hold its annual Taste of the Nation campaign from April 25 to May 7 to raise money for hunger relief agencies like City Harvest and the Food and Hunger Hotline.
Events are planned in 65 cities.
In Manhattan, the benefit party will be held on April 26 at 7 P.M. on World Yacht, Pier 81 (41st Street and the Hudson), with chefs from 43 restaurants participating and Mumm's Champagne being poured.
Tickets are $135 and can be bought with a credit card by calling (212) 297-2508.
Those who buy $250 tickets get to start eating at 6 P.M.
In Connecticut, the Share Our Strength benefit will be held on April 28 at 6 P.M. at the Stamford Sheraton Hotel, 1 Stamford Place, with 40 chefs from the area doing the cooking.
Tickets, $60 each, can be reserved by calling (203) 254-2463.
And on Sunday, Subway sandwich shops around the country will hold a drive to benefit the needy.
Anyone taking a can of food to a Subway store will receive a six-inch sandwich free.
Where Drinking Helps
Perhaps even more paradoxical is drinking to help cure diseases, but that's what a couple of wine tastings have set out to do.
On April 22 from 6:30 to 9 P.M., the Sonoma County Wineries Association will pour more than 100 wines at the Sheraton New York, Seventh Avenue at 53d Street, to raise money for the New York chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
Tickets, at $30, can be reserved by calling (212) 986-8783.
The price at the door is $40.
On April 24, a tasting of wines from Long Island, California and Europe will be held to benefit the American Kidney Fund.
The tasting, from 8 to 11 P.M., will be held at the Huntington Town House, 124 East Jericho Turnpike, Huntington, L.I.
Light food will be served.
Tickets, at $50, can be reserved by calling (516) 467-2688.
Dominican Samples
A demonstration about food of the Dominican Republic is planned for Sunday from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Brooklyn Historical Society, 128 Pierrepont Street.
Samples will be served of dishes including desserts made with corn, coconut milk and sweet potatoes.
Tickets can be reserved by calling (718) 624-0890.
The cost is $7, or $3 for members of the society; if any tickets are available at the door, they will be $9.
Pastry Turnovers
Daniel Boulud, the former executive chef at Le Cirque who expects to open Restaurant Daniel at 20 East 76th Street in about a month, has hired as pastry chef Francois Payard, who was the pastry chef at Le Bernardin for two and a half years.
Mr.
Payard's sous-chef, David Carmichael, is also moving to Restaurant Daniel.
Mr.
Payard, 26, is a native of Nice, where his father has a pastry shop.
He first met Mr.
Boulud when he worked briefly at Le Cirque before joining Le Bernardin.
Mr.
Payard calls the layout and equipment of the kitchen at Le Bernardin the best in America but says he is very happy to be working with Mr.
Boulud again even though his kitchen is smaller.
"The restaurant is also smaller, so I will no longer have to make 2,000 cookies a day," he said.
Restaurant Daniel has started accepting reservations for lunch and dinner after May 17.
Telephone: (212) 288-0033.
Of Shad and the River
FRESH shad is on the fish menu in spring.
Shad is also on the menu on Sunday for a celebration of the Hudson River and its improved condition.
Tom Lake and Chris Letts, fishermen and naturalists, will talk about shad and the river and will serve samples of fresh-cooked shad.
And there will be singing and entertainment at the festival, from noon to 4 P.M., at Riverside Park, in the playground at West 74th Street.
The event is free.
It has been organized by the Riverside Park Fund and the Hudson River Foundation, both of which are nonprofit organizations devoted to environmental awareness.
For more information: (212) 870-3070.


Campus Journal; Retracing Freedom's Route to Oberlin
Somewhere in West Virginia, Michael DiAngelis began looking for the signs: a white stripe on a chimney or a hanging quilt with black in the pattern.
Either signal told escaping slaves that they had found a "safe house."
But 10-year-old Michael was not on the run.
He was aboard a bus with 28 other Boston fifth graders on a journey navigated by their own knowledge of history.
Some of the striped chimneys are still evident, and along the route of the underground railroad, some families still hang the signaling quilts as part of their heritage.


Spring Is The Excuse


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incompletely to violations of the no-flight zone.
The violations, which have involved transports and medical evacuation flights, have been committed by Serbs, Croats and Muslims, although the greatest number have been committed by the Serbs.


Electronic Toll Collection Still a Dream for Drivers
While drivers in Chicago, Dallas and Boston can breeze through some toll plazas without rolling down a window or stopping, drivers in the metropolitan New York area still face old-fashioned traffic jams when they approach a tunnel or toll bridge.
A plan for electronic toll collection istwo years behind schedule, delayed by a web of complications and technical obstacles.
The first of New York's electronic toll systems, which planners say will one day do for traffic management what automated teller machines did for banking, is scheduled to appear at the Tappan Zee Bridge by late summer.
But officials say that installing compatible systems for all of New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, a far-reaching effort that was originally scheduled to start in 1992, will not begin until 1994 at the earliest.


Dressing Up for Bush's Arrival


Hancock Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Giants' Baker Visits Bucs 2d Time
In their six seasons as wide receivers with the Giants, Mark Ingram and Stephen Baker were close friends and close in their football accomplishments.
Now Ingram has moved to the Miami Dolphins with a three-year, $4 million contract, and Baker is trying to get similar money in the National Football League's new era of free agency.
Yesterday, Baker paid his second visit to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
He has also visited the Chicago Bears, the Minnesota Vikings and the Atlanta Falcons.
The Giants want Baker to stay.
Harry Hulmes, the Giants' assistant general manager, said he made a contract offer March 26 and talked last week to Baker's agent, Bruce Allen.
Hulmes would say only that the Giants' offer was for more than one year.
Top Receivers Are Available
Many high-profile receivers are still available as free agents, and several will be available April 25 and 26 in the N.F.L. draft.
Two collegians -- Sean Dawkins of California and Curtis Conway of Southern California -- may go high in the first round.


Parking Rules
Because of Orthodox Holy Thursday and Good Friday, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City.


Ending Restraint, U.N. Aides Denounce Serbs for Shellings
After months of restraint in their reaction to Serbian bombardments of Muslim populations in Bosnia, senior United Nations officials today harshly condemned the Serbian shelling on Monday that killed more than 50 civilians in the besieged enclave of Srebrenica.
For many United Nations officials, the Serbian attack, which came immediately after the top Serbian military commander renewed pledges that there would be no more shelling of civilians in the town, was one of the most shocking events in a year of Serbian "ethnic cleansing" that has left tens of thousands of Muslims dead.
Even during some of the heaviest bombardments of Sarajevo, the United Nations officials strove to give a sense of neutrality.
Dismay in Sarajevo
Privately, many top United Nations officials said they hoped the attack would persuade President Clinton and other Western leaders that the time had come for a more resolute policy, possibly involving military force, toward the Serbian nationalists.


Infrasonics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Judge Approves Plan to Bar Leader From Teamster Posts
A Federal judge yesterday approved an agreement permanently banning Barry Feinstein, a prominent New York City labor leader, from holding office in the teamsters union.
Mr.
Feinstein, 58, has for 25 years been the president of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, a union that represents 20,000 city employees.
Over the decades he has become one of the city's most politically influential labor leaders.


ResourceCan reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Immucor Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Mayor Eases Regulations On Sweeping of Gutters
The Dinkins administration, in a second move in two days to address complaints of small- and medium-sized business owners, said yesterday that it will suspend in some areas of the city a requirement forcing businesses to be responsible for sweeping the street within 18 inches of the curb in front of their stores.
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced the action just one day after he said that his administration would step up its efforts to reduce illegal vending by the city's estimated 10,000 unlicensed vendors, another initiative long sought by business owners.


Review/Music; New Voices In 'Ariadne' At the Met
A number of singers entered the cast of Richard Strauss's "Ariadne auf Naxos" for the last performance of the season at the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday evening, but attention centered on Deborah Voigt in the title role.
Ms.
Voigt, a young American soprano, has already achieved acclaim in a variety of roles, including her Ariadne at the Boston Lyric Opera two seasons ago.
Vocally, Ms.
Voigt did not disappoint.
With an instrument seemingly made for the vast scale of the Met, she poured out rich, lustrous, nuanced tone with ease and security.
Dramatically, however, she seemed stiff and uncommunicative, even more ill at ease than might reasonably be expected in Elijah Moshinsky's elephantine new production of the opera.
But with voices of such grandeur in short supply, Ms.
Voigt will not lack opportunity to work on her stage presence.


CBS Has $54 Million Profit In 1st Quarter; Stock Rises
A strong performance by its television network helped CBS Inc. post a first-quarter profit yesterday that sent its stock soaring.
The company said that its net income for the first quarter rose to $54.2 million, or $3.50 a share, in contrast to a loss of $64 million a year earlier.
Sales, however, declined to $878.9 million, nearly a 19 percent drop from the $1.1 billion in the period a year earlier.


Model School Tries to Cope With Killing in a Classroom
Clusters of students wept and hugged each other today as they tried to come to terms with the mystifying violence of Monday morning, when three teenagers armed with a baseball bat, a billy club and a buck knife burst into a high school social studies classroom and fatally stabbed a 16-year-old freshman.
Students were bewildered that the violence they associated with urban schools could have occurred at suburban Dartmouth High, which had always reflected stability and security.
"The kids keep saying, 'This happens in city schools, not here,' " said the school principal, Donald King, who brought in a team of counselors to help restore calm.


Mattingly Slips a Rung on Yank Ladder
Don Mattingly still receives the most thunderous ovations at Yankee Stadium, he still receives the most autograph requests from fans, he is still the one player Manager Buck Showalter solicits information from most often and he is still the No. 3 hitter in the lineup.
Mattingly is the Yankees.
But even though no one in the Yankee organization wants to address it, Mattingly's position has changed in the last three years.
That is not news.
After two solid but hardly spectacular offensive seasons following his back trouble, coupled with the arrival of some renowned players, Mattingly has slid down the totem pole in the Bronx.


Kite Out With Herniated Disks
TOM KITE's back problem has been diagnosed as herniated disks and the United States Open champion will be out of action for an undetermined length of time.
The 43-year-old Kite, who was examined Monday at the Centinella Hospital in Los Angeles, said yesterday that he would not "even think about coming back before I get a go-ahead" from his physicians.
He said he was scheduled to receive the first of a series of cortisone injections today.


Clinton Finds a Friendlier Chamber of Commerce
Grabbing for a piece of the Republican coalition, President Clinton went to the United States Chamber of Commerce tonight, stoking a feud between the powerful business group and conservatives in Congress.
The chamber has infuriated many conservatives who contend that the organization has committed ideological treason by cozying up to the new Administration, particularly in informally supporting elements of its economic program.


Clean-Air Laws Push Big 3 To Cooperate on Electric Car
In an extraordinary collaboration by Detroit's auto makers, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler are discussing jointly building an electric car to meet the requirements of the clean-air law first enacted in California and recently adopted by several Northeastern states.
Officials of the companies said yesterday that they were considering the project because of impending deadlines.


Bond-Accounting Shift Is Approved
The Financial Accounting Standards Board, on a 5-to-2 vote, approved a new financial standard yesterday that will force banks and other financial institutions to report profits or losses when the market value of many bonds in their portfolios changes.
The board also moved toward issuing another standard, one that would require banks to take losses when they renegotiate loans with troubled borrowers.
It is hoped that final action on both rules will be completed by June 30, when the terms of two board members expire.


On Their Own, More Parents Raise Funds to Fight Disease
When she was only 4 months old, Morgan Gelblum was found to have a disease her parents had never heard of, a genetic deterioration of the brain that means the little girl is never expected to sit, crawl, walk or talk, or live through childhood.
That diagnosis was three years ago, and Morgan's parents, Seth Gelblum and Orren Alperstein Gelblum, now know more than many doctors about Canavan Disease.
One of the things they know best is that medical research is not moving quickly enough to help them.
So they are trying to help themselves by raising money and financing their own research.


Micropolis Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Angola's Killer of the Dream
Rarely has a sore loser in an election wreaked such havoc as Jonas Savimbi in Angola.
During a civil war that began with Angola's independence in 1975, Mr.
Savimbi insisted that his Unita rebels were democrats thirsting for a chance at the polls to unseat a leftist Government in Luanda.
He got his wish last September, but his rival, President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, won by a plurality in a generally fair first-round vote that was to be followed by a runoff.
But instead of contesting the runoff, Mr.
Savimbi resumed fighting, ferociously.
He has been able to do this, as The Times's Kenneth Noble reports, because Unita cheated on cease-fire terms by pretending to demobilize.
Western analysts estimate that Mr.
Savimbi kept a force of 30,000 to 35,000 soldiers, while the Luanda Government, with three times that number under arms, complied by downsizing its army to 10,000.
Unita's successes spring from treachery, not valor.


Administration Considers 'Penalty Tax' to Hold Down Health Costs
Groping for ways to carry out a crucial feature of President Clinton's health-care plan, the White House is considering a "penalty tax" on doctors and hospitals to constrain medical spending.
The tax would be imposed on hospitals, doctors and other health-care providers in states that exceed spending targets to be established by the Federal Government, according to Administration officials and White House documents.
The officials say such targets are essential to control costs.


HONG KONG TALKS ARE SET TO RESUME
Britain and China announced today that they would resume talks next week on Hong Kong's future, a decision that suggests a long and bitter impasse may have finally been broken.
The prospect of Beijing and London talking to each other instead of yelling at each other reflects the desire in each capital to defuse the uncertainty over Hong Kong's future.
The talks mean that it again seems possible for Hong Kong to have a moderately smooth transition to Chinese rule in 1997.


Vicor Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Family Tree Nurtures a New Generation of Chefs
FOR years, aspiring young chefs in this country would brag about having worked under some famous French chef.
Tossing a three-star French name around was like hanging an Ivy League diploma on the wall, a telling indication of how a young chef had been trained and where his aspirations might lead.
Now, more than 10 years into an era that has seen the emergence of self-consciously American cuisine, new heroes are being touted on resumes, and this time, they are natives not of Provence or Paris, but of Buffalo and Smyrna, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Jesse Jackson In the Sports Spotlight
THE story goes that a man was crawling on his hands and knees in the street at night.
When a passer-by asked what he was doing, he replied, "Looking for my wallet." The other man said, "Oh, you lost it here?" "No," said the first man, "I lost it on the next block. But the light is better here."
The tale made me think of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's picketing of Camden Yards in Baltimore on opening day of the baseball season.
He was picketing with a group from his Rainbow Coalition as part of his project to get greater representation of blacks and other minority personnel into the front offices of baseball and other team sports.


Cab Driver Killed After Kelly Announces Plan to Add Protection
A taxi driver was shot to death last night, only hours after Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said he would create a special detail to fight violent crimes against medallion and livery cabbies.
The victim -- fatally shot in the back in Brooklyn -- was the fifth cab driver killed since Wednesday night, and the 17th killed this year.


AT THE OFFICE WITH: Louis Begley; Inventing a Life, Then Living It
LOUIS BEGLEY sits in the posh and hushed offices of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the white-shoe law firm where he heads the international department.
He is the very picture of the successful lawyer, from the size of his executive suite to the self-consciously simple and obviously expensive gray suit he wears.
An interviewer could be here to talk about financing oil pipelines in the Far East or setting up a multinational corporation in Brazil.
That, after all, is the work of Mr.
Begley's life, the skill that earned him the comfortable office and the baubles that come so naturally with it: the Park Avenue apartment, the two houses in the Hamptons.


Educators Find a Lot to Like in a Little Increase
Even though President Clinton has proposed increasing Education Department spending by less than 2 percent for the next fiscal year, his new budget is winning praise from education groups because of its emphasis on those at either end of the public-school ladder: preschool children and high school students who need job training.
The $31 billion Education Department budget for the fiscal year that begins on Oct. 1 is up $511 million from this year's $30.5 billion.
But it does not tell the whole story.
The department's programs would be supplemented by others in the Departments of Commerce and Health and Human Services, in a spirit of cooperation between Federal agencies that analysts and educators say is rare.


Cypress Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Document Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A French Twist on an Italian Staple
IT will take no more than 20 minutes to put this very savory meal together.
Like the recipe last Wednesday for salmon, this recipe for polenta comes from one of Michel Rostang's bistros in Paris.
Leave it to the French to provide a different take on polenta, which they appear to have adopted, like pasta and other things Italian.


With the Death Toll at 4, Floods Begin to Recede in New York State


Florio Formally Announces Candidacy for Re-election
Gov.
Jim Florio today formally announced his candidacy for a second term after a first term marked by sharp shifts in his popularity.
"We made difficult decisions, many of which I hated to do," Mr.
Florio said.
"But the alternatives were worse, including the most expensive alternative of all -- the cost of doing nothing."


Selling the Remains of a Failed Advertising Agency


At Easter, Greece Celebrates the Fat (and Lean) of the Land
THE Greek Easter table reflects the country's regional culinary differences.
How recipes have evolved depends on the lay of the land, on what is available place by place, and on the tastes and origins of the local population.
The holiday -- Orthodox Easter, which is on April 18 this year -- is also a celebration of spring, a time when the normally dust-dry Greek landscape bursts with color and vegetation.
Fresh herbs and tender young greens -- dill, wild fennel, lemon balm, lettuce, sorrel and spinach -- crop up on island and mainland menus alike.


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


A High Court Fantasy: Kunstler Ponders a Fancy
NO, absolutely not, said William M. Kunstler over lunch, he had never imagined himself on the Supreme Court.
"My role is outside the system."
Then his questioner coaxed him into fantasy by asking whether he could imagine the confirmation hearings.


Office Depot Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


General Electric Co. (N)
The General Electric Company said yesterday that profits rose 9.6 percent in the first quarter, led by a strong performance at its financial unit, GE Capital Services.
The unit's net income was up 22 percent in the quarter, compared with a year ago.
John F. Welch Jr., G.E.'s chairman, cited double-digit earnings gains in six of the company's 12 businesses -- NBC, appliances, locomotives, motors, power systems and plastics.
But pretax profits were sharply lower in the aircraft engines unit.
The drop was attributed to product-development costs and a charge for previously announced layoffs as orders dried up from airlines.


Pulitzer Prize to a Play on AIDS and the 1980's
"Angels in America: Millennium Approaches," a play by Tony Kushner that explores the AIDS epidemic as a metaphor for spiritual decay in the 1980's, won the Pulitzer Prize for drama yesterday.
The play, which will open April 29 on Broadway, is the second in two years to win the award without having been performed on Broadway.
The award for biography went to "Truman" by David McCullough, and the fiction award went to "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain" by Robert Olen Butler, a collection of short stories told from the viewpoint of Vietnamese immigrants living in Louisiana.


Methanex Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


U.S. Shouldn't Export Mineral Industry Jobs; Green Effetists
To the Editor:
"Clinton the Conservationist Thinks Twice" (The Week in Review, April 4) incorrectly refers to the hard-rock mining industry as Government subsidized.
This is far from the truth.
The reality is as follows:


Laws May Change, but the Bible's Values Don't
To the Editor:
James A. Michener, in "God Is Not a Homophobe" (Op-Ed, March 30), interprets biblical laws that assign the death penalty to those who commit adultery, incest and homosexuality as crucial for ancient Israelites because "the Jewish community was in deplorable disarray," and "harsh measures were required." But, he continues, "as order was installed, the extreme penalties advocated in Leviticus were relaxed in the civilized nations that followed."


Public &amp; Private; Uniquely Perilous
Life over the course of the last half-century has been confusing for those people who manufacture and sell cigarettes.
Their product went from being an accepted part of daily life to a suspected carcinogen to the most reviled legal substance in America.
But now their position should be quite clear.
Tobacco companies fall into a separate and distinct category of business because they produce and market a product that has no redeeming value and that causes serious illness and death.


Larizza Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Comdial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


What You Reveal To a Psychotherapist May Go Further
MILLIONS of people in recent weeks have heard of psychotherapists testifying in court about intimate emotional details told to them by Woody Allen, Mia Farrow and their children, or by Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State.
So just how private is what a patient tells a therapist?
In principle, it is completely confidential, psychotherapists say, and the privacy includes secrecy about a person's being in therapy at all.


Winners of the 1993 Pulitzer Prizes for Journalism, Literature and the Arts
GENERAL NONFICTION  Garry Wills "Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America"
In "Lincoln at Gettysburg," a scholarly study of oratory, Garry Wills argues that Abraham Lincoln, in the mere 272 words of the Gettysburg Address, was able to recast the tradition of oration, the Civil War, and the history of American political thought in a new and clearer light.
In offering new ideas about the structure and context of the speech, Mr.
Wills maintains that Lincoln used his words to win the war in ideological as well as military terms.
The 58-year-old Mr.
Wills, a classical scholar, Presidential historian and political scientist, is an adjunct professor of history at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., where he lives.
FICTION  Robert Olen Butler "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain"
In Robert Olen Butler's first collection of short stories, "A Good Scent from a Strange Mountain," each of the 15 intricate tales is told in the first person, from the viewpoint of different Vietnamese transplanted from the Mekong Delta to the Louisiana bayou.
Haunted by the past, and highly ambivalent about their American hosts, these fictional immigrants seek truces in their various personal wars, and their stories raise the literature of the Vietnam conflict to an original and highly personal new level.
Mr.
Butler, 48, served as an Army linguist in Vietnam, which was the setting for three of his six previous novels.
His first novel to be published, "The Alleys of Eden," was printed by Horizon Press after the manuscript was turned down 21 times.
Mr.
Butler teaches fiction writing and film theory at McNeese State University in Lake Charles, La.


Vegging Out
Millions of Americans can still remember what it was like to have to eat a mess of overcooked carrots because they were good for their eyesight.
They can also remember what it was like to consume spinach,
yards
of spinach, because Popeye owed his muscles to it.
They remember all too well, and they passed their memories on to the next generation and yea, the generation after that.
Until they found their champion, at last, in a President of the United States who announced to the world that he didn't like broccoli.
Yes, that is a long genealogy, but we are talking about a long hatred here.
But how misplaced that hate!
How wrong those millions of Americans!
Because it is from stuff like broccoli and carrot and yes, spinach, that they may gain a brighter, healthier future.
If it isn't too late for them to acquire a taste for cabbage, or squash, or eggplant.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to March 13


Consolidated Papers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Book Notes
A Shocking Cover
Is the jacket of "A Dark and Bloody Ground," by Darcy O'Brien, just a compelling design or is it a shocking act of commercialization that exploits the victims portrayed in the book, the story of a savage 1985 murder in rural Kentucky?
Judge Joseph Hood of Federal District Court in Pikeville, Ky., ruled on Monday that the cover, which shows fake blood splattered over the victim's photograph, was done purely for "shock effect," and he issued a 10-day retraining order barring the publisher, HarperCollins, from distributing any copies of the book not already in stores.
He also prohibited any display of the book's cover in advertisements or promotion.


Unique Mobility Inc. (ECM) reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


C-Cor Electronics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Times Co. Reports Income of $10.9 Million
The New York Times Company yesterday reported first-quarter net income of $10.9 million, or 14 cents a share, in contrast to a net loss of $20 million, a year ago.
But after adjustments for accounting changes and special items, the company said earnings were 16 cents a share in both quarters.
Revenue for the 1993 quarter rose to $454.5 million from $435.9 million for the first quarter of 1992.


Arbor National HoldingsInc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
JOHN CASEY, winner of the 1989 National Book Award for his novel "Spartina," was about to leave his home in Charlottesville, Va., for a public appearance, "one of those things writers have to do," he recalled the other day, when "I heard a thunk on the front porch, and scurrying feet."
"I opened the door," he said, "and saw a hefty sheaf of documents from the American Academy of Arts and Letters. It started out, 'Dear Mr. Casey, it is my pleasure to inform you . . .' and my eyes glazed over. I knew it was not a tax bill or a draft notice."


U.S. to Double Aid for Russia, Diplomats Say
President Clinton told Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa Tuesday night that American contributions to Russia would increase by at least $2 billion, officials here said today.
The figure would more than double the original $1.6 billion the President had pledged to Russia.


A '72 Report on P.O.W.'s Is a Fake, Vietnam Asserts
Vietnam's senior diplomat dealing with United States affairs today described as a "clear fabrication" a document suggesting that 1,205 American prisoners of war were in North Vietnamese prisons in 1972, more than double the number eventually released.
The diplomat, Nguyen Xuan Phong, acting director of the Americas Department at the Foreign Ministry, said in a telephone interview from Hanoi that "we have very strong evidence" to prove "this document is not authentic -- a clear fabrication."


Brenco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Harleysville National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


France Will Replace Its General in Bosnia
The French Defense Minister today confirmed the imminent replacement of an outspoken French Army officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, as commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Although the 58-year-old officer has become a folk hero in France for his efforts to protect the Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica from Bosnian Serb militias, the Defense Minister, Francois Leotard, said today that General Morillon would "probably" be withdrawn before the end of this month.


A Feud and a Book Unplug the Cork On the Gallo Empire
IN the spring of 1983, Joseph Gallo Jr., the younger brother of Ernest and Julio Gallo, opened a cheese factory near his home in Livingston, Calif.
Joseph Gallo was a rancher and farmer who had grown rich selling grapes to his brothers' E. &amp; J. Gallo winery, 40 miles north of Livingston in Modesto.
He envisioned the cheese project as a way to use surplus milk from his large dairy farm.
In 1986, the winery sued Joseph Gallo, who had also previously managed vineyards for his brothers, for trademark infringement.
And for the first time, from documents and depositions, the public got an inside look at one of the biggest wineries in the world and the remarkable man who created it, Ernest Gallo.


Octel Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
"Those firing the guns at Srebrenica knew that the town was packed with many thousands of displaced people, mainly women and children. This kind of attack can never be justified, whatever the provocation. It is an atrocity." -- CEDRIC THORNBERRY, the top U.N. civilian official in what used to be Yugoslavia.  [ A8:5. ]


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; A Bush Admiral Tells Why He Helped Clinton
The Line of Fire  From Washington to the Gulf, the Politics and Battles of the New Military  By Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr. with David Chanoff.
Illustrated. 367 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
From midshipman to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the career of Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr. spanned the cold war and included a few of the hot ones.
Yet after the admiral's 47 years of military service, the present generation probably remembers him best as the retired admiral who served under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush at the Pentagon, then broke ranks and came out for Gov.
Bill Clinton in last year's Presidential contest.


U.N. Appeals for More Funds To Relieve Hunger in Bosnia
The United Nations issued an emergency appeal for more food for Bosnia and Herzegovina today as five Security Council members raised the flag of revolt against the attempt by the United States and Russia to delay new sanctions against Serbia.
In Geneva, Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, wrote to aid-giving governments expressing "deep alarm" at the shortage of food for the 2.8 million people now dependent on United Nations rations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Settlement in Sanderson Case Stops Trial
The secretary who accused former Alabama basketball coach WIMP SANDERSON of punching her in the face accepted a $275,000 settlement yesterday in Tuscaloosa, Ala., just as the case was going to trial.
The money will be paid by the university and Sanderson's homeowner insurance company to NANCY WATTS, who was the coach's longtime administrative assistant and had a 15-year affair with him.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Government made it easier for smaller investors to buy real estate and other assets once owned by bankrupt savings and loan associations.
The assets will be offered one at a time before being bundled into pools to be sold to larger investors.  [ Page D1. ]
Retail sales fell 1 percent in March, the biggest monthly decline in two years, suggesting a slackening of economic growth.  [ D1. ]


G.M. Grants Its Chairman A Pay Raise
Expanded duties at the world's biggest auto maker are earning John G. Smale, the chairman of the General Motors Corporation, a fatter paycheck than before.
Mr.
Smale, an outside director who was named chairman last November, is being paid $300,000 a year, according to the proxy statement that G.M. released today.
Other outside directors receive roughly $60,000 annually.


Alpha Microsystems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Weis Markets reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Bridge
It is generally understood that a duplicate player must strive for overtricks, even perhaps jeopardizing a contract to do so.
It is not so well understood that this effort is sometimes right and sometimes wrong.
If a player is in a normal contract that is likely to be reached at other tables, it makes sense to try hard for an overtrick, perhaps taking risks to do so, or neglect a safety play that will insure success.


Witness Gives Step-by-Step Description of Killing
Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano, a Mafia leader who turned informer, provided the anatomy of a murder for a jury yesterday as he described how he led a "hit team" that used guns, walkie-talkies and three cars to carry out the killing of a Queens man in 1988.
Testifying for the second day in a racketeering-drug trial, Mr.
Gravano said the main defendant, John Gambino, obtained John Gotti's approval to kill Francesco Oliveri, who was held responsible for killing a member of Mr.
Gambino's crew in the crime family headed by Mr.
Gotti.


Stein Hires Manager And Consultant To Bolster Campaign
Seeking to ignite his stalled and fractious mayoral campaign, Andrew J. Stein, the New York City Council President, has hired a Queens political aide to be his campaign manager and a high-powered San Francisco consultant to handle direct mail and field operations.
David Keisman, a former aide to State Senator Manfred Ohrenstein of Manhattan and most recently the publisher of The Queens Tribune, a weekly newspaper whose majority owner is Mr.
Stein's father, Jerry Finkelstein, will be the campaign manager.
Jack Davis, who helped elect San Francisco's Mayor, Frank Jordan, in a long-shot campaign, will be a special consultant.


Bank Set To Acquire Boston Five
Confident that the devastation in the New England real estate market has ended, the Citizens Financial Group, a subsidiary of the Royal Bank of Scotland, agreed yesterday to buy the Boston Five Bancorporation.
Citizens, which is based in Providence and has $4.6 billion in assets, agreed to pay $95 million in cash, or $13 a share, for the $1.7 billion Boston-based savings bank.
The acquisition represents a return to Boston for Lawrence K. Fish, Citizens' chairman, who had headed the attempted salvage of Bank of New England, which nonetheless failed in 1991 and was bought by the Fleet Financial Group.
Mr.
Fish approached Peter J. Blampied, Boston Five's chairman, several months ago and proposed an acquisition.


Who's Coach of Year? Bet on Riley
A year ago, the Knicks were about to lose a five-game lead with eight to play and blow the Atlantic Division to the Boston Celtics, and it was painfully obvious to Pat Riley why.
The Knicks, he recognized, were expert at what he called "subconsciously sabotaging yourself."


The High-Tech Way to Grocery Shop
EACH week, Marilynn Glazer of Skokie, Ill., shops for groceries by sitting down at her personal computer and typing the log-on "peapod." She then scans the screen for sales.
She sorts and chooses items by unit prices.
She checks to see when she last bought milk and other staples.
And within 90 minutes, her order arrives at her door.
The delivery person even accepts coupons and recycles her plastic bags.
"It's wonderful," said Ms.
Glazer, a retired telecommunications supervisor, who is disabled.
"It makes it very easy for me."


Super Rite Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


SHARP AND A.T.&amp; T. ANNOUNCE JOINT MARKETING EFFORT
The Sharp Electronics Corporation and A.T.&amp; T. announced a joint effort to market a wireless version of Sharp's Wizard line of electronic pocket organizers that will allow people to send and receive messages over the air.
Under the agreement, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company will supply a radio communications device about the size of a credit card that plugs into the pocket organizer and links it to A.T.&amp; T.'s electronic mail system, known as Easylink.
The organizers cost between $360 and $500.


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


White House Reviewing Trade Pact Compliance
The Clinton Administration is closely reviewing whether Japan and other countries have complied with trade agreements with the United States and is prepared to take unilateral action to insure compliance, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said today.
Mr.
Kantor discussed the review a day before Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan is scheduled to arrive in Washington for talks with President Clinton.
Trade is expected to be a big issue in the talks.


Most vodkas are indistinct, so their ads are anything but.
THE tagline of a print advertisement for Jubilaeum citrus vodka urges consumers to "Keep Evolving." The vodka industry itself appears to have taken the words to heart.
A sweeping glance at recent vodka campaigns suggests that marketing strategies are more splintered than ever in this advertising category long dominated by Absolut and its agency, TBWA Advertising of New York.


Corrections
A brief report in the Health Watch column on the Health page in some editions yesterday about overdiagnosis of Lyme disease omitted a credit line.
It was by The Associated Press.


Justice Dept. to Investigate Mississippi Jail Deaths
Attorney General Janet Reno has ordered an investigation of 46 hanging deaths in Mississippi jails since 1987 to determine whether there is evidence of criminal wrongdoing by the authorities, Justice Department officials said today.
Her directive evoked the era of the 1960's and 1970's, when the Justice Department's civil rights division tried to combat violence against blacks in the Deep South by enforcing laws that dated from Reconstruction but that had not been fully applied.


Glass That Flickers And Plays Tricks
IN "Glass Installations," which opens today at the American Craft Museum in Manhattan, six artists have designed works of glass that resemble a waterfall, tusks or fireflies darting around a cavern.
The artists wanted to "transform the environment and involve the spectator," said Janet Kardon, director of the museum and curator of the show.
"Glass artists didn't want to make objects for the pedestal or for the marketplace. They liked the notion of interacting with a larger space."


Canandaigua Wine reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Linear Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


'Angels' Opening Postponed
The opening of "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches," the Pulitzer Prize-winning play by Tony Kushner, has been postponed to May 4 from April 29.
The announcement by the show's producers, which came after the first preview at the Walter Kerr Theater on Tuesday night, stated that technical difficulties were the reason for the postponement.


All American Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Bruce Lee's Brief Life Being Brought to Screen
Bruce Lee was a master of the martial arts, a man in pursuit of mental and physical perfection, a legend among young men.
His mysterious death in 1973 at the age of 32 has made him an icon in the same pop cultural tradition as Jim Morrison, Janis Joplin, James Dean and Marilyn Monroe.
The recent death of his 28-year-old son, Brandon Lee, of an apparently accidental gunshot wound on a movie set in North Carolina, was not only tragic but has also deepened the mystery surrounding Bruce Lee even further. 'So Much Mysticism'
"I don't find it a coincidence," said Jason Scott Lee, the reserved, almost shy 26-year-old star of "Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story," an offbeat, adventurous film about the martial arts star that will be released May 7.
Mr.
Lee is Hawaiian and no relation to the San Francisco-born, Chinese-American actor he portrays.


TENSIONS RUN HIGH
A nationwide day of mourning for the slain black leader Chris Hani burst out of control today, as angry young blacks rioted through several cities in defiance of pleas for order.
In the worst single incident, panicky police officers here fired without warning into a throng milling outside the main police station, killing three and critically wounding five, and replenishing the rage that black leaders hoped would be spent by this day of protest.


International Game Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton Said to Seek Increase in Intelligence Funds
President Clinton has asked Congress for authority to spend even more money on spy agencies, satellites and other intelligence activities in the 1994 fiscal year than it allotted for 1993, Congressional and Administration officials say.
The request is hidden in classified sections of the Defense Department budget that on the whole reflects Mr.
Clinton's plans for significant cuts in military spending.


Larry Berthelson, 60, A Master of Puppetry
Larry Berthelson, the creator of the Pickwick Puppet Theater and a former president of the Puppetry Guild of Greater New York, died at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif., on April 8.
He was 60.
Mr.
Berthelson, who was born in New Haven, formed his puppet company when he was 21.
He performed on television and in hundreds of schools around the country.
In 1963, Mr.
Berthelson and his puppets took part in a WCBS-TV adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's "Just So Stories."


Is Yeltsin a)President b)Politician c)Failure?
President Boris N. Yeltsin hadn't spent more than two hours in Siberia's coal country, considered one of his most loyal strongholds, before he was accosted by his first angry pensioner of the day.
As the elderly woman, her head wrapped in a tight red kerchief, continued her tirade about the miseries of life on a monthly pension of 6,000 rubles, the President became exasperated.


Takeover Bid By Teamsters To Run Local
The head of the national teamsters union moved yesterday to take over the New York City local that had been the power base of the ousted teamsters leader, Barry Feinstein.
But in a struggle for control of the affiliate, Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the local's executive board barred a national representative from entering their building yesterday and refused to vacate their offices.
Ron Carey, the general president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, said in an interview yesterday in Washington that he had appointed a trustee on Tuesday to supervise Local 237 in the wake of charges that Mr.
Feinstein had misused $500,000 of the local's money to maintain a luxurious personal life style.


Rio Hotel &amp; Casino Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Karen Akers  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through May 8
Karen Akers, who has been one of the most popular cabaret divas in New York for more than a decade, exudes the intimidating hauteur of a performer masking a painful shyness with what can sometimes seem like arrogance.


Do Beer and Olympics Mix?
It's a longstanding tradition, but to Paul Wood, president of the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, it doesn't get any better with time.
Accordingly, a day after Anheuser Busch became an official sponsor of the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta, he issued a formal protest against the $40 million deal, which will allow the brewery to use the five-ring symbol in its domestic advertising for three years.
"What kind of example are you setting for the nation's youth?" Wood asked in a letter sent to Billy Payne, the president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympics, and to LeRoy Walker, the president of the United States Olympic Committee.
"It is difficult enough to separate alcohol consumption from athletic events without the Olympics forging an even stronger link between the two."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about The New York Times Company's first-quarter earnings misstated the latest reporting period for The Times's circulation.
It was the six months ended March 31, 1993, not the quarter.


Withstanding Shocks, Dow Rises
The stock market continued its bumpy march yesterday toward a Dow Jones industrial average of 3,500, now tantalizingly close.
Cheered by falling interest rates, the market held on to most of the gains of Tuesday, amid some nasty surprises.
The most striking development was a huge selloff late in the day of Wal-Mart Stores stock, perhaps indicating the tentativeness of the market's rise.
Advancing stocks narrowly led decliners, by 1,021 to 874.


U.S.B.L. Drafts Swoopes
Sheryl Swoopes, who led Texas Tech to the N.C.A.A. women's basketball title and was named player of the year, yesterday became the second woman drafted by the United States Basketball League.
Swoopes was selected by the Daytona Beach Hooters, but has said she planned to play professionally in Europe because there is no women's league in the United States.


12 Leaders of Failed Soviet Coup Get Their Day in Court, in Russia
Twelve leaders of the August 1991 coup attempt finally went on trial today, accused of betraying a motherland that no longer exists.
While a clutch of die-hard Communists cheered behind police barricades outside, the defense unleashed an anticipated barrage of motions seeking to disqualify the military judges, the prosecutors and the court itself.
And when the chief judge dismissed these, one of the defendants promptly fell ill.


A Crumbling Landmark in Search of a Patron


Home Video
John Wayne Dust-Up
John Wayne still kicks up a stir in the video business.
In stores, he's a priority.
"Of all the movies not yet out on video, three Waynes -- 'McLintock!,' 'Hondo' and 'The High and the Mighty' -- are the most asked for," said Ed Weiss, general manager of Movies Unlimited, a Philadelphia-based chain and one of the country's largest video mail-order companies.
Now "McLintock!," a 1963 Wayne western with a comedic twist, has been released.
It co-stars Maureen O'Hara.
The movie is such a hot property that a range war has broken out between two distributors over who has rights to the film.


CHRONICLE
DANNY MEYER, the owner of the Union Square Cafe, did not have to be cajoled into lending a hand to help feed the hungry.
Mr.
Meyer is on the dinner committee for a benefit for the Food and Hunger Hotline next Thursday, at the Landmark on the Park, Central Park West and 76th Street.
The party is being held to support the establishment of a restaurant on the Lower East Side that would offer the poor an alternative to soup kitchens.


In Move to Secure Aid, Yeltsin Plans Tokyo Visit
In a surprise move by Russia that could eventually pave the way for Japan to offer it considerably more aid, President Boris N. Yeltsin has asked to come to Tokyo next month after abruptly canceling such a trip last year, the Russian Foreign Minister told Japanese officials today.
During a meeting this afternoon with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan, the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, proposed the visit but reportedly said little about the issue that scuttled Mr.
Yeltsin's trip last September -- Japan's long insistence on some progress on the territorial dispute over the four islands in the Kurile chain seized by the Soviet Union at the end of World War II.


Stephen P. Taylor, 69, Economist And Federal Reserve Statistician
Stephen P. Taylor, an economist and a retired official of the Federal Reserve System, died last Friday at a hospital in Arlington, Va., his hometown.
He was 69.
He died of injuries suffered in a fall from a bicycle, his family said.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Control Spring Eagerness
Q.
Can you tell me when it will be O.K. to put houseplants out on my balcony for the summer? -- Abigail Marcus, Philadelphia.
A.
Rare indeed are the city slickers who are not tempted by the first balmy spring day to make their corner of town green in a hurry.
The problem is not the warm spring days, but the cool nights.


Roadway Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Wilander Comeback
Following in the footsteps of BJORN BORG, a fellow Swede, MATS WILANDER, is attempting a comeback.
Wilander, the former No. 1-ranked player, gave up tennis last year after dropping to 157th in the world at the end of 1991.
Wilander, 28 years old, was granted a wild card into the main draw of the A.T.&amp;T.
Challenge, an ATP Tour event that opens April 26 at the Atlanta Athletic Club.
Wilander, who also plans to play World Team Tennis in New Jersey this summer, hasn't played a regular tour event since an unrewarding Wimbledon tuneup at Queen's Club in June 1991. (AP)


Fed Move Nudges Treasuries Up
Treasury prices moved a little higher yesterday as the Federal Reserve helped support the market by buying Treasury securities.
The discount rates on Treasury bills moved lower for the second straight day as more investors seemed to bet that the economy was growing so slowly that the Federal Reserve might have to reduce short-term interest rates.


Digital Loss Narrowed In Quarter
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it was making progress on its return to profitability, primarily by slashing operating expenses.
The company reported a fiscal third-quarter loss that was 10 times smaller than a year earlier on a slight rise in revenue.
For the quarter that ended March 27, Digital had a net loss of $30.1 million, compared with a net loss of $311.3 million for the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenue rose 6 percent, to $3.45 billion.
Digital said that without the favorable impact of foreign exchange rate movements, revenue would have been essentially flat.


CHRONICLE
As RUTH MESSINGER, Manhattan Borough President, saw it, if COLETTE AVITAL, Israel's new consul general in New York, was "the highest ranking Israeli woman diplomat, and if she was being sent to New York, one of the ways New York should receive her is with a luncheon of distinguished, diverse New York women."
So, Ms.
Messinger asked GAYFRYD STEINBERG if the luncheon could be held in her 34-room art-laden triplex.
Mrs.
Steinberg "was delighted, even though she was in the middle of kitchen renovations," Ms.
Messinger said.


Sports of The Times; Rangers Must Search For a 'Riley'
TO the Paramount corporate honchos at Madison Square Garden, the Rangers were money in the bank, but the bank failed.
With a $20 million payroll, the Rangers had budgeted a return of $5 million from Stanley Cup tickets at the Garden through two games into the third round of the playoffs.
But now that New York's most frustrated franchise didn't qualify for the playoffs, that $5 million has melted like the Garden ice after last night's empty 2-0 loss to the Washington Capitals before 8,000 empty seats in the season's finale there.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bear Stearns Companies, New York, is offering $200 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due in 2003 at 99.833 to yield 6.773 percent through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investor Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Canadian Pacific Ltd., Montreal, is offering $250 million of 6 7/8 percent notes due in 2003 at a price of 100 through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes are rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


Sega Links With Cable Providers
Sega of America Inc., a video game leader with titles like, "Sonic the Hedgehog II" and "Streetfighter II: Champion Edition," said today that it would form a venture with the nation's two largest cable television companies to transmit Sega's games directly into homes via cable.
The service, which is to begin tests later this year and would be the first of its type, would eliminate the need for even the quickest of jaunts to the software store or video rental shop.
A Powerful Alliance
Sega's powerful cable partners will be Tele-Communications Inc. and Time Warner, each of which plans to conduct a 2,000-household test of the service later this year.
If the experiments prove promising, the cable companies would begin introducing the service nationally next year.


Hopes and Tensions Rise in Haiti As Aristide's Return Seems Closer
Amid expectations of a diplomatic breakthrough, tensions grew here today as United Nations mediators prepared to meet with the country's military high command to seal the framework for a settlement of Haiti's 18-month political crisis.
With the arrival of the special United Nations envoy, Dante Caputo, late Tuesday, speculation has abounded here about the effect of stepped-up international pressure on Haitian officers to quickly pave the way for the return of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


New Time Life Editor
John L. Papanek, a former managing editor of Sports Illustrated, has been appointed editor in chief of Time Life Inc., a division of Time Warner Inc. headquartered in Alexandria, Va.
Time Life markets books and music and has recently expanded into production of documentary and television programming.
Mr.
Papanek, who most recently was director of new media at Time Inc., succeeds Tom Flaherty, 64, who is retiring.


Settlement in Club Case
After three years, several million dollars in legal fees and some apocalyptic projections about the future of the game, an out-of-court settlement was reached today in the $100 million lawsuit by Karsten Manufacturing against the PGA Tour.
With a trial date of April 20 in Phoenix looming, Karsten, the maker of Ping golf clubs, accepted a settlement offer that included the key stipulation that golf club irons with U-shaped -- or square -- grooves will remain legal.


Market Place; Wal-Mart Falls Out of Wall St.'s Favor
Investors in Wal-Mart Stores Inc. suffered another blow yesterday, as erosion continued in what was one of Wall Street's premier stocks for several years.
In extremely heavy trading, Wal-Mart shares fell $1.75, to $27.25, on the New York Stock Exchange after the company's chief financial officer, Paul R. Carter, told analysts that if Wal-Mart posted 7 percent to 8 percent sales growth this year, it would be "a good performance."


Sex Survey of American Men Finds 1% Are Gay
A new national study on male sexual behavior, the most thorough published since the Kinsey report more than four decades ago, shows that about 2 percent of the men surveyed had engaged in homosexual sex and that 1 percent considered themselves exclusively homosexual.
The figures on homosexuality in the study, released yesterday by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, are significantly lower than the 10 percent figure that was published in the Kinsey report in 1948 and that then became part of the conventional wisdom.


You Can't Legislate Campus Relationships
To the Editor:
When your reporter sat down to discuss the proposed ban on intimate teacher student relationships at the University of Virginia with a friend and me last Friday afternoon, I did not have a clear understanding of the policy being debated at my own university.
Your April 4 news article led me to a better understanding of the code.
I would like to respond.


My 'Middle-Class' Family Lives From Paycheck to Paycheck
To the Editor:
As the Federal Government considers a national sacrifice economic plan, I wonder if Beltway politicians truly understand the daily middle-class plight.
I wish one of them would spend a month in my parents' Brooklyn "upper middle class" home.


Worth Less?
The share price of Networth, a maker of computer equipment and a hot issue last year, has dropped sharply since December, and it plummeted yesterday.
A third-quarter loss resulted from supply problems for a major product, an "intelligent hub" that lets networks of personal computers communicate.


Boys and the Street: Tempting Jerina, 18
Jerina Gervais heard that her old boyfriend was out of jail, and the news made her nervous.
He was a drug dealer, in and out of jail for as long as she'd known him, most recently for assaulting a police officer.
But to Jerina, with neither father nor mother to care for her, he had been lover, protector and friend.


Sears Apparel Quits Ogilvy
The Sears Merchandise Group of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company dismissed Ogilvy &amp; Mather yesterday from the apparel portion of its giant advertising account.
Sears has spent little recently to advertise its women's, men's and children's clothing.
But the troubled retailer has said it intends to increase spending significantly -- to perhaps as much as $40 million annually -- as part of efforts to revive flagging sales.


HILTON HOTELS CORP. (N)
The Hilton Hotels Corporation, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., reported a 19 percent increase yesterday in its first-quarter net income, to $26.5 million, or 55 cents a share.
The earnings were in line with analysts' expectations of 50 to 60 cents a share.
But before the cumulative effect of accounting changes, the earnings were equivalent to 48 cents a share, a bit less than the analysts had forecast.
The company adopted two accounting changes at the beginning of the year, one for income taxes, which lifted net income by $8 million, and one for retirees' benefits, which resulted in a charge of $4.6 million after a deferred tax benefit of $2.3 million.


Pop and Jazz in Review
M'Boom  S.O.B.'s
Max Roach's percussion group M'Boom has always been one part concept and one part music.
As a percussion group, it reflected black America's interest in African forms; the group also performs be-bop.
And in its untraditional format, the group reflects a post-1960's esthetic that allows for variation and experimentalism.


With Nothing to Lose, Whalers Beat Islanders
Hockey is a sport where cliches come true.
The Hartford Whalers proved that in duplicate tonight at the Civic Center.
Fresh from tying the playoff-bound Islanders on Long Island Tuesday, they again played like men who had nothing to lose.
And they didn't.
Instead it was the Islanders, not so desperately fighting to avoid the Patrick Division's bottom playoff berth and the frightening first-round date with Pittsburgh that it entails, who succumbed to a 5-4 loss in overtime, then skulked away from their back-to-back games against the lowly Whalers with only 1 point.


A Mansion of Dreams Awakes in Urban Peril
Michael Halberian's house towers above Bowery Bay from a rugged perch in Astoria, Queens, a 19th-century mansion of 27 rooms, with cast-iron porticoes and pillars that recall the villas nestled in the wrinkled green hills of Tuscany.
Down the block, though, a street scape of warehouses, Dumpsters and razor wire shatters the mood.
And the dogs sniffing around the grounds used to be strays until Mr.
Halberian took them in.


Review/Dance; The Question: What Is Reality? The Answer: Who Knows?
The ever-fertile mind of the Canadian choreographer Robert Desrosiers never ceases to come up with startling images to bombard the viewer.
One in particular seems crucial to the theme of his wildly hallucinatory if wildly uneven new work, "Black and White in Color."
Halfway through the piece, a stage Frenchman in a beret appears with an easel and palette while a woman's voice croons, in French, of love in Paris.
The artist's model is, however, anything but romantic.
In fact, she is the painting the painter is about to paint: a figure topped by a mask that is a composite Cubist and Fauve still life.


NEW TAX ON GOODS IS WEIGHED TO PAY FOR HEALTH CARE
The White House said today that it was considering a value-added tax -- an indirect form of sales tax -- to help pay for President Clinton's health-care package.
But it insisted that the President had not made any final decision on such a sweeping new proposal to raise revenue.
President Clinton first broached the idea of a value-added tax, which is imposed on goods and services at each stage of production but ultimately paid for by the consumer, in February.
He then backed away, calling it a "radical change" that could only be looked at in years ahead.
Back on the Table
But in the past two days, the Health and Human Services Secretary, Donna E. Shalala, and Deputy Budget Director Alice M. Rivlin said in separate statements that such a tax was now being considered to pick up some of the cost of Mr.
Clinton's plan, estimated at $50 billion to $100 billion a year.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


YELTSIN IS BACKED AT TALKS IN TOKYO
The world's seven leading industrial nations pledged support today to President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia but were still struggling to assemble an aid program to promote his economic reforms and to help him win a nationwide referendum in less than two weeks.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan opened the two-day conference saying that Russia was at a "critical juncture, with the reform efforts under the leadership of President Yeltsin facing tremendous challenges both politically and economically."


Review/Music; If Concept Shadows Composition
Conceptual programming is a seductive possibility in today's concert life.
Linking the pieces on a concert program can establish unexpected connections, spur new ways of listening and thinking, and even, some say, bring new audiences to music.
But the more conceptual that conceptual programming gets and the more artful its attempts to connect and elaborate, the more the risk that the music itself will be eclipsed.
Something like this happened on Tuesday night in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University as part of a series of events titled "Perspectives in Music and Art," directed by Sato Moughalian and George Stauffer.
The subject of the evening was "Symbolists and Symbolism"; it was an attempt to explore the sensuous play with image and syntax in literature, music and art at the turn of the century.
The entire first half of the program, in fact, was a lecture by Robert Rosenblum, a professor at New York University, on "Music Made Visible: Symbolist Art 1890-1910." It was followed by a series of "symbolist" compositions that might usually be considered Impressionistic, by Debussy, Ravel and some of their lesser colleagues.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Where Artifacts Find Shelter After Many Storms
THEY live in an uncluttered six-room apartment in Manhattan with their two children, a pair of green shutters, a few well-worn porch columns and a sprinkling of weather vanes, cast-iron urns and hand-painted signs.
All of which -- except the children -- are the pillars and posts of a decorating style that also encompasses salt-glazed crockery, wooden building blocks, primitive paintings and twig rockers.
But that was last week.
Don't expect the same things to be there from one day to the next.
Judith and James Milne are antiques dealers who specialize in folk art and quilts but also have a predilection for architectural fragments like stair banisters, roof finials and arched windows that they call "bits of history."


Ex-Chairman of Grumman Is Fined $10,000 for Bank Fraud
After enduring a five-year Federal investigation into allegations that he took kickbacks from a subcontractor, the former chairman of the Grumman Corporation was fined $10,000 today for bank fraud.
It was perhaps an anticlimactic finish to a scandal that had forced the executive, John O'Brien, and several other top officials to resign from the company, and that may still end up costing Grumman as high as $20 million in civil penalties.


First Fidelity to Buy Peoples Bank
Continuing an aggressive expansion campaign, the First Fidelity Bancorp, based in Lawrenceville, N.J., said yesterday that it would acquire Peoples Westchester Savings Bank, based in Hawthorne, N.Y., for $233 million in cash and stock.
The offer price, of either $43.90 in cash or 0.8693 share in First Fidelity, was considered disappointing by some analysts since it did not offer a premium to Peoples' stock prices.


Dannenwalde Journal; A Portrait of the Informer (as People's Champion)
In a land where questions of guilt and collaboration hang in the air like dark clouds, few figures personify moral ambiguity as fully as Manfred Stolpe.
Mr.
Stolpe was a senior lay administrator in East Germany's Lutheran Church for more than 20 years, and in that time he maintained close contact with the Stasi, the secret police agency that dominated East German life.


Standex International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Binks Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fernandez Makes His Pitch With Victory
If Sid Fernandez wants out of New York, he has a peculiar way of showing it.
Perturbed that the Mets will not sign him to a contract extension, Fernandez disgustedly told his agent today, "They ought to just trade me," and then pitched a compact one-hit shutout for five innings.
If not for a stiff left shoulder -- made worse by the Colorado chill -- Fernandez (1-0) might have been on course for a complete game in front of 57,489 spectators at Mile High Stadium.
Instead, he exited after the fifth inning, snuggled under a dugout heater, and watched a makeshift bullpen wrap up a 6-3 victory over the Colorado Rockies.


Democrats Retain House Seat in Mississippi
Democrats held on to the Second Congressional District in Tuesday's runoff election to fill the seat that Mike Espy left to become Secretary of Agriculture.
Bennie Thompson, a 44-year-old black county supervisor from Bolton, a Jackson suburb, rode a surge in black voting to defeat Hayes Dent, a white Republican who was an aide to Gov.
Kirk Fordice.
Mr.
Thompson polled 71,701 votes, or 55 percent, to 58,544 votes, or 45 percent, for Mr.
Dent.


GFC Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Pulitzer Prizes, and a picture caption in some copies, misidentified the category for which The Dallas Morning News won.
It was spot news photography, not feature photography.
Because of an editing error, the article also misstated the title of a series of reports in The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, honored for explanatory journalism.
It was "When Bugs Fight Back."


COMPANY NEWS
ALBERTA ENERGY CO., Calgary, Alta., plans to spend as much as $395 million to build an 820-mile oil pipeline between Edmonton and Cheyenne, Wyo.
ECOGEN INC., Langhorne, Pa., a biological pesticides concern, received a patent for a gene that is useful in controlling pests like the Colorado potato beetle and the corn rootworm.


State Street Boston's Stock Tumbles 18%
Shares of the State Street Boston Corporation, one of the nation's most profitable banking companies in recent years, fell nearly 18 percent yesterday as investors and analysts reacted to reports of rising expenses.
As a leading bank in the computer-intensive businesses of mutual fund record-keeping and securities custody services, State Street has invested in a second data processing center and in new computer work stations.


Foreign Affairs; When to Forgive and Forget
Let's say it's authentic -- the document found in old Soviet archives in which a North Vietnamese general says Hanoi held three times the number of U.S. prisoners of war it had acknowledged to Washington.
Suppose, further, that Hanoi killed the P.O.W.'s to destroy the evidence.
It would be a nightmare.
It would confirm all our worst fears about North Vietnamese brutality and malice.
Yet it would still leave open the wrenching question of what U.S. policy toward Vietnam should be now, 18 years this month after Marine helicopters swooped down onto U.S.
Embassy rooftops in Saigon to rescue the last American diplomats from advancing Communist troops.


Keystone Consolidated Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nynex Unit Will Offer Speed Lines
The New York Telephone Company is starting an effort to win back business lost to upstart companies that sell sophisticated telecommunications services to corporate clients.
The new offering, Nynex Enterprise Services, was announced yesterday, and is aimed at the fast-growing market for private-line services delivered by fiber-optic lines.
Corporate customers like banks and brokerage houses increasingly want to send voice, data and images to different offices at high speeds.
Losing Share to Newcomers
In recent years, rivals like the Teleport Communications Group and the Metropolitan Fiber Systems Corporation have been able to take business from regional Bell companies like the Nynex Corporation, the parent of New York Telephone.


FIRST UNION CORP. (N)
The First Union Corporation, a banking company that has been on an acquisition spree, yesterday reported first-quarter earnings of $200 million, more than doubling the restated earnings of 1992's first quarter.
The restatement reflects accounting changes related to the 1993 acquisition of the Dominion Bankshares Corporation in Roanoke, Va., and two other smaller banks.
First Union, based in Charlotte, N.C., has assets of $63 billion and is the nation's eighth- largest banking company.
It is in the process of acquiring First American Bankshares Inc., the Washington bank once controlled by the Bank of Commerce and Credit International.


A.T.&amp;T. Gets Switch Order
Time Warner Inc. picked A.T.&amp; T. yesterday to supply an advanced switching system for a showcase cable television system in Orlando, Fla., that will provide digitally stored movies on demand, two-way data communications and other information and services.
The planned Orlando fiber optic network is the cable television industry's most ambitious attempt to develop a high-speed communications highway, and switching technology is one of the most central components in such a network.


Satellite Finds Growing Threat to Ozone
Satellite measurements indicate an abundance of ozone-destroying chemicals remained in the atmosphere over the Northern Hemisphere much longer this winter than last, researchers said today.
They said the finding could portend even greater ozone loss over highly populated parts of the world than in the past.
Data from the spacecraft, the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, also showed that atmospheric ozone levels above parts of Canada, Scandinavia, Russia and Europe were down 10 percent on average from last winter.
This is more than twice the usual year-to-year variation, the researchers said.


K Swiss Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Two Free Concerts At Mannes College
The Mannes College of Music Contemporary Festival is to present free concerts of works from around the world, on Monday and next Thursday at 8 P.M. in the school's concert hall, 150 West 85th Street, Manhattan.
Monday's program, "African Influences," will feature music by African composers and by Western composers influenced by African styles and instruments.
In addition to the music there will be a demonstration of West African instruments and instrumental techniques by the Ghanaian drummer Abraham K. Adzinyah.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
IF play is the work of childhood, then toys are the tools of that trade.
But the tools are seldom the same for boys and girls.
Despite the efforts of parents, teachers and other adults who, over the last 30 years, have tried to get children to play with toys that are less stereotyped by sex, it is almost a sure bet which children in a preschool will be brushing Barbie's hair and which will be crashing toy trucks.
"We've all been surprised that despite the efforts of some parents, children still tend to act out the traditional sex roles of our culture," said Dr.
Brian Sutton-Smith, a professor of education at the University of Pennsylvania, who studies how children play.
"The child's peer group may have more of an influence over this than the parents."


Drama Surrounds Legend of a Kentucky Derby Past
Two and a half weeks before the 119th Kentucky Derby, racing people in the bluegrass country are keeping a vigil for a 16-year-old mare these spring days.
She is called "Jenny" around the barns, but she is renowned as Genuine Risk, who made history 13 years ago when she became the second filly in a century to win the Kentucky Derby.
Now she stands solemnly in her executive stall at Three Chimneys Farm waiting for the moment when she may make medical history.


Salomon Ratings Dropped
Concerned about volatile earnings of Salomon Inc., the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation has lowered the brokerage firm's long-term debt from A to A-, which is still investment grade.
The move on Tuesday affected about $8 billion in outstanding securities.


In Caring for the Elderly, Students Prepare for Jobs
They seem an odd mix to be companionably spending afternoons together: frail residents in a geriatric nursing home, average age 86, and 100 students, 15 to 17, from the school next door.
The old and young are partners in an experiment linking the Isabella Geriatric Center at the northernmost tip of Manhattan and the neighboring George Washington High School.
It is one of a growing number of school-to-work ventures that governments and educators hope will prepare teen-agers for college or, alternatively, train them to move directly into the work force, preferably in a growth industry like health care.


All About Age
To The Home Section:
I was reading with interest Michael Specter's article about Madeline Kahn  [ "Funny? Yes, but Someone's Got to Be," April 8 ]  when I came to the part where he asks Ms.
Kahn her age.
He then describes Ms.
Kahn's reaction ("catatonic stupor") and her request that she be "treated like a lady and not have it specified." She explained that mentioning her age could adversely impact her career.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Caroliner Rainbow  Gargoyle Mechanique 28 Avenue B Lower East Side
Of all the strange phenomena to emerge from San Francisco in the wake of punk rock, Caroliner Rainbow is possibly the strangest.
It looks and sounds like no other band currently in circulation.
Before their show on Friday night, the three men and two women of Caroliner spent well over half an hour cluttering a tiny stage with decor: bright orange and yellow hangings, banners, trinkets, toys.
A string of black lights made the whole assemblage glow alarmingly.
The band then disappeared for a while and re-emerged in indescribably lurid fancy-dress costumes, flapping with appendages.
One woman played the whole show with a lamp electronically rotating on top of her head.
"Pscyhedelic" doesn't begin to describe it: this is some lost American Baroque, retrieved at rummage sales.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  PRATT &amp; WHITNEY THREATENS TO CUT JOBS
Pratt &amp; Whitney threatened to close two Connecticut plants and cut deeply into its work force here unless its unions and the state offer concessions to make the plants more competitive at a time when the defense industry is struggling under military-spending cutbacks and the collapse of the commercial jet-engine market.
A1.
Employees at Pratt &amp; Whitney discuss the dimming job outlook. B6. NEW YORK CITY


Microsoft's Profit Rises 36% On a 41% Gain in Revenue
The Microsoft Corporation, the dominant company in the personal computer industry, reported yesterday that it had earned $243 million, or 80 cents a share, in the fiscal third quarter ended March 31, an increase of 36 percent over the $179 million, or 60 cents a share, earned in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The per-share earnings were near the midpoint of analysts' estimates, which ranged from 72 cents to 96 cents.


New Hope in the Hunt for Top Quarks
Physicists reported today that the top quark, a subnuclear particle that is vital to the jigsaw puzzle of matter, remains tantalizingly out of reach.
But there are signs that the hunt, which has been under way for 15 years, is at last within sight of its goal.
With redoubled efforts, scientists believe the top quark could be recreated within 18 months.
The latest report on the status of the hunt for the top quark -- a pursuit that may affect the financing for high-energy physics as well as the prospects for creating the top quark -- was delivered at a meeting of the American Physical Society.


Nassau Board Is Overturned By U.S. Judge
Nassau County's system of government was declared unconstitutional today by a Federal judge, who described the weighted-voting system on the Board of Supervisors as a mathematical quagmire.
The decision came only two weeks after the County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, proposed that Nassau scrap the 95-year-old Board of Supervisors and replace it with a county legislature.
And it means that Nassau must now embark on the same path followed by New York City four years ago, when the United States Supreme Court ruled that the city's top legislative body, the Board of Estimate, violated the one-man one-vote principle.
That board has since been replaced by an expanded and strengthened City Council.


Ryan's Family Steak House (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paine Webber's Net Income Down 4.6% for First Quarter
Paine Webber Group Inc. reported yesterday that its net income fell 4.6 percent in the first quarter, in contrast to the large gains posted by two other big brokerage firms, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and the Bear Stearns Companies.
Still, the results appeared to be no surprise to Wall Street, as Paine Webber's stock rose 25 cents to close at $27.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
It traded as high as $29 early in the day.


Schulman (A.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


New Film Studio Hires Saatchi Offices
Savoy Pictures, a movie studio formed last year, said yesterday that it had named the New York and Torrance, Calif., offices of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi to handle its account, estimated at $15 million to $20 million.


A Million-Dollar Shot
An average fan found out last night how it feels to earn $1 million dollars for making a basket.


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Upjohn Picks Stand-In for Chief, Gravely Ill
The Upjohn Company appointed Ley S. Smith acting chief executive yesterday after the chairman and chief executive, Dr.
Theodore Cooper, became critically ill on Tuesday.
Mr.
Smith, a vice chairman since 1991, was also named president, chief operating officer and acting chairman.
He will continue to direct Upjohn's worldwide drug business.


Egypt's Trampling of Rights Fosters Extremism
To the Editor:
The day after President Clinton met in Washington with his Egyptian counterpart, you wrote in "President Mubarak's Flawed Advice" (editorial, April 7) that Hosni Mubarak's regime is "inbred, bureaucratic and unresponsive." You did not mention that the Mubarak Government also has an appalling human rights record, which opponents use to discredit the legitimacy of the state.
Rights abuses in Egypt are cited by Islamist militants as justification for their own violence against government and by public figures, the police, Christians and foreign visitors.


It's Over: The Devils End Penguins' Streak
First things first: The third- and fourth-place finishers in the Patrick Division will be determined Friday night when the Devils visit the Islanders in the regular-season finale.
That situation was created tonight after the Devils played the Penguins to a 6-6 tie at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Islanders suffered a 5-4 loss in overtime at Hartford and the Washington Capitals beat the Rangers, 2-0, at Madison Square Garden to wrap up second place.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Dave Nilsson, catcher, and Bill Doran, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent William Suero, infielder, to New Orleans of the American Association.
Waived Tim McIntosh, catcher.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Optioned Greg Litton, infielder, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.


Essay; The Grand Conclave
Dwight Eisenhower called us "sensation-seeking columnists and commentators"; Arthur Schlesinger Jr. labeled us "panjandrums of the Opinion Mafia."
The other night, the publisher of The New York Times and the chairman of its parent company took the occasion of my 20th anniversary as an essayist to salute all the Op-Ed columnists of The New York Times, together again for the first time.


Yields of Money Funds Off As Inflation Worries Ease
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were down in the latest week, reflecting some easing of investor fears about inflation, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
Tax-exempt money fund yields fell sharply in the week that ended Tuesday.
The IBC/Donoghue's average seven-day compounded yield for a tax-exempt fund fell 9 basis points, to 1.89 percent, with the average seven-day simple yield also down 9 basis points, to 1.86 percent.
The 30-day average compounded yield is 1.94 percent and the simple yield 1.92 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percent.


Ranger Garden Finale: Goals No, Boos Yes
Mike Gartner doesn't blame the Ranger fans.
He'd boo too if he had to watch himself and his teammates play hockey these days.
Last night, the Rangers tied their longest home losing streak, falling for the seventh straight time in a 2-0 defeat to the Washington Capitals.
The president and general manager, Neil Smith, was not around to witness this historic moment.
He is on a trip to Hull, Quebec, where he is scouting Eric Lecompte, a player projected to go 10th in the National Hockey League draft in June.
Perhaps Smith should have gone elsewhere.
The way they are going, the Rangers are most likely to pick even higher than that, as high as eighth, if they finish last in the Patrick Division.


Modern Player Bars Touchy Subjects
Last season when a Toronto player, during a game, called Steve Howe a "druggie," the pitcher threatened to put him "in extreme danger" the next time he batted.
Last week, Yankee officials complained to the American League office about a post-game comment by an umpire that appeared to allude to Howe's drug-ridden past.
When did Steve Howe, seven-time loser, become so untouchable that no one can utter a word about his past problems?
"Are you kidding?" Howe responded yesterday, his words seemingly contradicting his reactions, when he was asked before the Yankees' game with Kansas City if he was overly sensitive about his past?
"If I was overly sensitive about my past, I wouldn't be playing this game. I'm subject to stuff every single day. There's guys out there who would love to see me fall."


Khmer Rouge Quit Phnom Penh, Troubling U.N.
The commander of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia has expressed disquiet at the sudden departure of top Khmer Rouge officials from Phnom Penh, the capital, but says he still expects that more than 80 percent of registered voters will be able to take part normally in elections planned for next month.
The commander, Lieut.
Gen.
John M. Sanderson of Australia, also says he is stepping up security for the more than 3,000 civilian election officers and other officials in Cambodia after recent Khmer Rouge attacks against United Nations personnel, Vietnamese settlers and fellow Cambodians apparently aimed at disrupting the election.


30 Passengers Injured as Jetliner's Landing Gear Collapses


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
2.98
4.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.80
2.83
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.96
3.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.50
5.53
7.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.75
6.78
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.75
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.93
5.95
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


HOME IMPROVEMENT
HOUSEHOLD electrical repairs are often simple once you master the standard techniques for working with wire.
Following are the basic accepted procedures for joining electrical wires and for fastening them to switches and wall outlets.
In seeking more information, refer to books or pamphlets published in 1991 or later; these should comply with the National Electric Code, which was revised in 1990.
Before starting any household-wiring project, find out from your local building department whether amateurs are allowed to perform electrical work in your area and whether a permit or inspection is needed.
Naturally, always turn off the power before starting an electrical project.


Custody Wars Wound
To the Editor:
Your reports of the Mia Farrow-Woody Allen custody case underscore what happens when a family breakup is brought into the adversarial atmosphere of the courts.
Lawyers making their case and psychotherapists giving expert testimony seem to talk different languages, compounding the pain and confusion for the couple and their children.


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ISRAEL MAY ACCEPT PALESTINIAN'S ROLE
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, after a meeting with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, said today that if Palestinians agreed to resume the peace talks he would lift his Government's ban on negotiating with Palestinian representatives from East Jerusalem.
Mr.
Rabin said he would be willing to allow Faisal al-Husseini, the coordinator of the peace team, who lives in East Jerusalem, to join the negotiations.
Including Mr.
Husseini would end the longstanding Israeli policy intended to insure that the status of East Jerusalem, annexed by Israel after its capture in 1967, remains unchanged.


'AIDS Knockin' at Your Door'
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q
Are there any norms about what kind of sexual activity is proper?
DOUG KILCOMMONS , 17, Staten Island (Tottenville High School): Since I'm Christian, what I've been told by my parents is that sex before marriage is wrong, and I am going to wait to have sex until after I'm married.


AT THE OFFICE WITH: James Weikart; Steady at the Tiller In an Ocean of 1040's
JAMES WEIKART was in what he called his manic phase when Kathryn Watterson and her husband, Ron Sitts, walked into his Upper West Side office two Saturdays ago.
Mr.
Weikart, 52, the founding partner of Weikart Tax Associates, is not a person given to overstatement, and what he meant by manic was anyone's guess.
He was a couple of hours into a 15-hour work day, and the deadline for filing Federal tax returns was casting a bigger shadow every second, but there was no indication that he was anything but unworried and unhurried as he ambled into the reception area, leaned over and exchanged an air kiss with Ms.
Watterson, shook hands with Mr.
Sitts and indulged generously in small talk.
His time is worth $3.75 a minute, and this leisurely preamble wasn't on the clock.


RPM Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


FOSSIL OFFERS CLUE Of A MISSING LINK
Scientists exploring the Gobi Desert of Mongolia have discovered fossils of an unusual animal that lived 70 million to 80 million years ago.
It was the size of a long-legged turkey and had the long tail and strong teeth of a dinosaur but other traits of a flightless bird.
The fossils could be critical to an understanding of the evolution of birds and flight.
The discovery was announced yesterday by paleontologists at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City and at the Mongolian Academy of Sciences in Ulan Bator.
They said the fossils represented a new group of dinosaur-bird transitional animals, which they have named Mononychus olecranus.


Making Ashes, So That Something May Arise From Them
A roaring fire consumed a section of the New York Botanical Garden yesterday, burning knot weed and bramble, badly damaging stems of nut sedge and leaving clusters of perennial rye grass in ruins.
The Fire Department said the blaze had been set, and officials pronounced themselves entirely pleased by the results.
The fire was a "prescribed burn," intended to clear away dead material from last year, turn it into potash (a fertilizer) and kill off the early sprouting weeds to make space for the North American wildflowers that are showcased in this part of the Botanical Garden.
Weeds in this corner of the Bronx include the kind of grass that most people call a lawn; plant specialists here call the grass "lawn escapees."


Jets-Baxter Talks Stall
In one month, the Jets have signed four prominent unrestricted free agents, made a trade for a proven veteran quarterback and matched an offer from another team to keep a valuable defensive end.
But in two months the negotiations between the team and fullback BRAD BAXTER have gone nowhere, according to JOEL SEGAL, Baxter's agent.


Economic Scene; The Labor Secretary's Spin On Jobs Data Lifts Eyebrows
At a time when the economic outlook is confused and the President's economic stimulus package faces opposition, it should come as no surprise that the Clinton Administration is eager to put its own spin on politically charged economic statistics.
Most administrations do.


A.T.&amp; T. Aims at Britain
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company will announce on Thursday plans to press for greater access to Britain's long-distance telephone market, sources said today.
The move could lead to a bitter trade dispute with Britain's dominant telephone carrier, British Telecommunications P.L.C., which has asked the Federal Communications Commission for permission to provide end-to-end corporate service between the United States and Britain.
That petition is still pending.


Spring Planting at Westchester Prison Farm


DMI Furniture Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Bucs' Bid to Carrington, Chargeers' Standout
Reserve safety DARREN CARRINGTON, the San Diego Chargers' special teams player of the year for the last two years, has signed a three-year, $2.35 million offer sheet with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The Chargers have one week to match the deal signed Monday by Carrington, who led the Chargers last season with six interceptions, including three in the final four regular-season games. (AP)


Former Policeman Sentenced in Slaying
A former New York City police officer was sentenced yesterday to 33 1/3 years to life in prison for shooting a liquor-store owner to death in a Brooklyn holdup and ordering another robber to shoot a store employee who was left paralyzed.
The former officer, Robert Cabeza, who was dismissed from the police force after his conviction last month, was off duty when he and two other men robbed the Bedford-Stuyvesant store on Feb. 9, 1991.
Prosecutors said Mr.
Cabeza, 28, fatally shot the store owner, Man Sing Chan, 41, because he feared the owner would identify him, and ordered another robber, Arnold Stover, to shoot the employee, Larry Collins, 38.


No Headline
"The boomers are beginning to embrace the new frugality. They are changing from being a group of spenders to being a group of savers." -- DON UNDERWOOD of Merrill Lynch.  [ D2:3. ]


I.R.A.'s Surging As More People Invest in Funds
For Linda Wollman, the perils of darting through Park Avenue's rush-hour pile-ups on her Rollerblades were nothing compared with the risk of getting caught short of cash when she retires in, oh, about the year 2029.
So with today's deadline for I.R.A. contributions looming, on Tuesday evening she rolled into the Fidelity Investments office at Park and 51st Street in Manhattan to drop off a check and an Individual Retirement Account form for her husband.
Fearful of losing their jobs, unwilling to count on pensions or Social Security, many, like Mrs.
Wollman, are turning to I.R.A.'s with greater enthusiasm than at any time since Congress sharply limited the deductibility of contributions made after the spring of 1987.
Job-Change Flux
Several mutual funds and brokerage firms say that today will conclude their strongest I.R.A. season ever.
The increases in the number of I.R.A. mutual fund accounts and the money invested in them set records last year, according to the Investment Company Institute, a mutual fund trade group.
The year-end total of 24.3 million accounts was up by more than 3.7 million from the end of 1991.


Turk Says Russia Is Tangled in Caucasus War
President Turgut Ozal of Turkey said today that there is heavy Russian involvement in the fighting in the Caucasus between Azerbaijan and Armenia.
"Russian transport planes increased their flights to Yerevan substantially before and after the Armenian aggression on Kelbajar," Mr.
Ozal said, referring to the Armenian capital and an overrun Azerbaijani town near the Armenian border.
Mr.
Ozal, who spoke at a news conference he held with the Azerbaijani President, Ebulfez Elcibey, said that based on Turkish intelligence reports he did not think the Russian planes "were carrying just humanitarian aid."


Exabyte Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


The Nanny Solution: Costly and Complex
IN-HOME child care has received a great deal of public attention recently as a result of President Clinton's troubles in finding a nominee for Attorney General.
Yet, the in-home alternative is actually the least popular child-care choice of American families, because it is so much more expensive than family day care or day-care centers.
Only 3 percent of employed couples with a young child hire a live-in nanny or provider, according to a 1990 survey by the Urban Institute, a nonprofit research group in Washington.
Still, in-home care, for some, comes closest to having a parent at home.


Thatcher Assails West's Bosnia Policy
In a sudden and furious assault on Western policy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lady Thatcher has sharply condemned allied leaders, including her successor as Prime Minister of Britain, saying they lack the resolve to take stronger action on behalf of Bosnia's embattled Muslims.
In two days of television and radio interviews, and remarks late today in the House of Lords, where she now sits as a member, Lady Thatcher urged Britain and its Western allies not only to help arm Bosnian Muslims, but also to support what she described as "aggressive" air strikes against Serbian positions.


Pratt &amp; Whitney Threatening To Shut 2 Connecticut Plants
Pratt &amp; Whitney threatened today to close two Connecticut plants and to eliminate 2,300 additional jobs unless it receives concessions from its unions and tax breaks from the state.
The threatened closings shocked Pratt employees and their communities, but Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and other state officials quickly vowed to meet the company's requests and to avoid the loss of more jobs on top of 6,700 that are already scheduled to be eliminated.


The Reservoirs Runneth Over
New York City's reservoirs have gone from less full than normal to more than full.
At 8 A.M. yesterday they were at 101.5 percent of capacity.
Last winter's snows are melting so fast that water is streaming into the reservoirs faster than it can flow over the spillways, said Richard D. Gainer, acting director of New York City's Bureau of Water Supply.
"It's going to go down to 100 percent," he said.
"You can't keep water above the rim of the glass very long."


Ewing's Spree Sparks Knicks
It was another nail-biting game that called upon their nerve and determination.
Once again, the Knicks passed the test.
Making numerous key plays during the final three minutes, New York hung on to defeat the Charlotte Hornets, 111-107, tonight before a capacity crowd at the Charlotte Coliseum.
The Knicks (55-21) have won 4 consecutive games, and 10 of their last 11, and the victory kept them one game ahead of the Chicago Bulls (54-22) in their race for best record in the Eastern Conference.


Chile: Japan's Backdoor to the West
Reaching across thousands of miles of the Pacific, Japan and Chile have been quietly forming close economic and political ties in the last two years, ties that potentially challenge the long-standing dominance of the American business presence here.
Since 1991, Japan has become Chile's largest export market as everything from fish meal to refined copper to wine is making its way to Japan, and surpassing Chile's exports to the United States, which, with one exceptional year, had dominated trade with Chile for the last 20 years or so.
Both big and small Japanese companies, ranging from the Mitsubishi Corporation to the Sakata Seed Company have made commitments in the last two years to sink $700 million into Chile, more than all Japanese investment in Chile in the last two decades.
And the number of Japanese companies operating here in the last three years has almost doubled, to 55.
Foothold for Japan
The new relationship, though relatively small in global trade terms, has some trade experts trying to figure out how Chileans have been able to penetrate the Japanese market, often closed to American exporters.
[ President Clinton has criticized Japan's barriers and will undoubtedly tell the Japanese Prime Minister that Japan must buy more American goods when they meet on April 16. ]
Indeed, some in Washington are concerned that by establishing closer ties with Chile, Japan is getting an important foothold in Latin America, expanding its economic influence and potentially getting the biggest share of mineral, paper and fishing resources well into the next century.
Others worry that Japan will improperly use business ties with Chile as a back door to the North American free trade zone envisioned for Canada, Mexico and America.
"Chile has to push itself to move even closer to the Pacific Basin," Terusuke Terada, the senior officer at the Japanese Foreign Ministry in charge of Latin American affairs, said in an interview recently in Chile's leading newspaper, El Mercurio.
"No other Latin American nation could do this kind of mission."
Whatever the motive, the number of deals by Japanese companies is growing almost monthly.
The Sumitomo Metal Mining Company, joined the Phelps Dodge Corporation of Phoenix in a $1.5 billion investment signed last year in La Candelaria mining project near the northern city of Copaipo, which will become a huge copper and gold mining operation.
In 1991, Sumitomo, Sanyo Kokusaku of Tokyo and Chilean investors created a $57 million joint venture in land and a wood chip factory in southern Chile to export wood chips to Japan.
Last year, the giant Japanese paper concern, Daio Paper, completed an investment of $70 million for more than 160,000 acres in southern Chile, on which it is planting eucalyptus and pine.
C.
Itoh &amp; Company is a 10 percent partner in the investment.
The Mitsubishi group took a 20 percent stake in the $1 billion Escondida copper mine in the North, which started producing in 1991.
The company, which also owns pulp mills, was awarded a $150 million contract last year by Chile's state-owned power company, Chilgener, to build a power generating plant.
Even small Japanese companies are entering Chile.
Sakata Seed, a unit of the Nissho Iwai group of Tokyo, moved here in 1992 and is developing better strains of vegetable seeds to ship to Japan.
And Nito Seimo, a tiny maker of commercial fishing nets, transferred a third of its assets here and is selling to the local market in the northern city of Iquique.
"We have 4,000 kilometers of coast on the Pacific Basin," said Fernan Ibanez, who stepped down last month as executive director of the Government's Foreign Investment Committee.
"The Japanese tell us that if it weren't for the ocean, we would be neighbors. If you just look at the growth numbers of the countries there, we have to move more in that direction."
What Japan finds attractive are Chile's big natural resources of minerals, lumber, fish and agricultural products, riches Japan sorely lacks.
Also, the Japanese hope to use Chile, along with Mexico, to circumvent tariff barriers in the Latin American market and ultimately into the North American market.
And the Japanese consider Chileans to be industrious, honest and concerned with quality control.
"Japan is surrounded by water and that has made us a more closed society," said Koji Mizuno, president of Mitsubishi here.
"If you look at Chile, it is surrounded by water and mountains, and Chileans also tend to be a closed society. Chileans are honest, very hard workers, very shy and timid, like Japanese. Chileans are sentimental about lifetime employment and loyalty, like Japan. We are much more comfortable doing business with Chile than other countries."
Mitsubishi found in its investment in the Escondida copper mine that using Chilean contractors, the project was finished six months ahead of time and $150 million under budget.
A Shift for Chile, Too
For its part, Chile, with the most robust economy in Latin America, has turned more attention to the Pacific Basin countries, particularly Japan, hoping Chile will be the "bridge" of choice for the Pacific Basin countries into Latin America.
Chile is not the only country trying to lure investment from Japan, Hong Kong and other Asian countries.
Late last month, President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru announced he would waive a two-year waiting list for foreigners applying for naturalization in an effort to attract skilled professionals.
And Mr.
Fujimori is actively negotiating with Japanese businesses on investments in Peru's privatization program.
After Mr.
Fujimori's seizure of near dictatorial powers last April, the Japanese Government did not withdraw hundreds of millions of dollars in vital foreign aid at a time when the rest of the international community was isolating Mr.
Fujimori.
Many Chileans welcome the Japanese as good corporate citizens, noting plans by Daio paper and other Japanese to reforest 250,000 acres in southern Chile.
But some companies have recently been cutting native forests, and Japanese fishing companies are periodically accused of over-fishing the Pacific off Chile's territorial waters.
There have also been accusations of illegal purchases by Japanese of tons of locos, a large, tasty Chilean mollusk that is secretly shipped to Japan, seriously depleting an endangered shellfish.
Favorable Trade Balance
Chile's balance of trade with Japan last year was a $733 million surplus, compared with a $336 million deficit with the United States.
Next year, Chile will become the first Latin American country to export fresh fruit to Japan, having met the rigorous import inspection standards.
A visit to Tokyo last November by President Patricio Aylwin was the first by a Chilean head of state.
The closer ties to Chile in many ways reflect a new look at all of Latin America by Japan, after many Japanese businesses suffered huge losses in 1980's when governments and corporations defaulted on loans and debt.
For years, Japan has been concentrating investment in Mexico because the country borders the huge United States market.
And it has been cautiously reinvesting in Argentina, buying interests in fishing and building the luxury Cesar Park Hotel in Buenos Aires, as it waits to see whether the deep economic changes and anti-inflation policies of President Carlos Saul Menem will last.
"They are investing little by little, but I don't know if it is an investment of large scale," said Kazuo Omi, general manager of the Bank of Tokyo.
"This is a time of being very conservative. They don't want to expand either in Japan or abroad. They don't want to run new risks." Political Insurance
As for Chile, the Japanese seem intent on insuring that the current political environment continues after presidential elections in December.
In an extraordinary push to the front-running candidate, Eduardo Frei, a member of the Aylwin coalition and son of a former Chilean president, the Japanese Government has invited him to visit, just months before the election, in what amounts to something just short of a presidential-style visit.
"Frei is seen as the continuation of what now exists, and that as a businessman he might bring even more ideas," said a Government official who asked not to be identified.
"This is Japan trying to make sure a good formula does not change."


Help Belarus Become Nuclear-Free
Belarus has yet to reap the benefits of deciding to rid itself of the nuclear arms it inherited from the former Soviet Union.
The U.S. has pledged aid to help Belarus disarm but has yet to deliver a cent.
Washington has promised additional funds for food, medical and technical assistance but has delivered only a trickle.
If Washington truly wants to spur nuclear disarmament, it needs to disburse the aid promptly.
That would send the right message to other republics of the former Soviet Union: The way to get aid is to get on with disarming.


Events: Talks and Tours
Speaking About Architecture
Cooper Union Great Hall, 7 East Seventh Street; (212) 753-1722.
The Architectural League of New York is sponsoring a talk tonight at 6:30 by the architect Zaha Hadid.
Fee is $7; members, no charge.


Apartment-Hunting in New York With Michael and Pat York
THE buzz was spreading among the Hamptons-Park Avenue crowd like privileged information: Michael York, that versatile British actor who has shared the stage with nearly every show business legend from Laurence Olivier to Elizabeth Taylor, needed a place to stay in New York for a few months.
And his wife, Pat York, a celebrity photographer who has also crisscrossed the globe, would be coming along to put the finishing touches on another book of photographs.
The Yorks found themselves in this rather familiar predicament after Mr.
York agreed to replace Alec McCowen in the Broadway play "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me." He opened April 6 in the role of the prim British professor of Middle English who is held hostage in a cell in the Middle East with two other men.


Cavalier Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Books of The Times; Evangelists of 2 Eras, In Tin Lizzies and on TV
Sister Aimee  The Life of Aimee Semple McPherson  By Daniel Mark Epstein  Illustrated. 475 pages.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $27.95.
Anatomy of a Fraud  Inside the Finances of the P.T.L.
Ministries  By Gary L. Tidwell  357 pages.
John Wiley &amp; Sons. $24.95.
Long before evangelical television ministries sold religion in living color on their own channels, itinerant horse-and-buggy and Tin Lizzie preachers used theatrical techniques to importune the faithless and entertain the faithful.
Undeniably, they filled a longing for millions of people, and still do, but others found the hellfire preachers self-serving and bizarre.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Layoff Appears to Hamper Becker  Boris Becker didn't last long in his first tournament in two months, losing in the second round of the Nice Open in France yesterday to Franco Davin of Argentina, 4-6, 6-3, 6-1.
Davin wore down Becker in the 2-hour-14-minute match, racing through the final set in less than 30 minutes.
The second-seeded Becker lost his service two times in a row to fall behind, 4-0, in the third set before winning a game.
"It was like playing against a wall," said Becker, who pulled out of a tournament in mid-February because of a viral infection.
"I kept hitting winners and they kept coming back all the time. Then I missed a couple and that was it." (AP) Patrick McEnroe Advances in Hong Kong: Patrick McEnroe, a wild-card entry, upset eighth-seeded Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-4, to advance to the quarterfinals of the Salem Open in Hong Kong.
McEnroe, 118th in the ATP ranking, will play the defending champion, Jim Courier, who is top-seeded.
Courier, who lost his world's top ranking to Pete Sampras last week, moved into the quarterfinals with a 6-1, 6-4 victory over Jeremy Bates of Britain. (AP)


Dinkins Says Albany's Budget Threatens His
Saying that New York City had come up short in the state budget agreement reached last week in Albany, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday raised the possibility that the city might have to cut services to balance its own budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1.
Mr.
Dinkins said that over the next several weeks he and other city officials would continue pressing Albany for help, including new city taxes that require approval of the State Legislature and relief from certain state requirements.
He also suggested for the first time that he might have to resort to service reductions if he failed in Albany.


White House Never Promised a Rose Garden
A warning to members of Congress who vote against President Clinton's big legislative proposals: Don't go looking for small favors from the White House.
White House officials said that House and Senate Democrats who are viewed as disloyal for voting against the President's economic progam should not expect the White House to honor special requests for extra tickets for constituents' tours through the Rose Garden or pictures with the President.


Stock Cars Headed to Indy
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway and Nascar yesterday announced as expected that a Winston Cup stock car race -- called the Brickyard 400 -- will be held at the historic oval on Aug. 6, 1994.
At a news conference at the speedway, Tony George, the track's president, said that the speedway's board of directors decided 18 months ago to pursue a second event to go with the Indianapolis 500, the only annual race at the track since 1911.
Last year's race drew more than 300,000 spectators.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Raul Juarena and the New York-Buenos Aires Connection  Dance Theater Workshop
The Argentine tango lives by its contrasts.
An aggressive, robust theme is followed by a languorous one; huffing, grunting accompaniments melt into sustained harmonies; an assertive, reedy bandoneon is answered by sultry violin.
The music mirrors a dance in which first one partner, then the other, advances and retreats.


Marriott Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Harken Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Parking Rules
Because of Orthodox Holy Thursday and Good Friday, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City.


New York's Secretive Legislature
The leaders of New York's State Legislature are praising themselves for holding spending for the Legislature's own operations slightly below the whopping $168 million they gave themselves last year.
But Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin and the Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino, deserve little credit until they tell taxpayers where the money actually goes.
Right now, that's largely a mystery.
The funding approved as part of the state's overall $32 billion budget provided only a sketchy outline.
And the leaders don't even have to follow that when they dole out the money.
Even lawmakers who vote on the budget have only the vaguest idea about important details; for example, how the money is distributed between majority and minority parties.


Checkers Drive-In Restaurant (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The White House is considering a value-added tax to help pay for President Clinton's health-care package.
But it insisted no final decision had been made on such a tax, which is an indirect form of sales tax paid by businesses.  [ Page A1. ]
The popularity of I.R.A.'s is soaring, as corporate layoffs and the evaporation of benefits have forced more workers to take retirement planning into their own hands.  [ A1. ]


William D. Miller, 74; Ran Metals Company
William Dawes Miller, a retired metals company executive and past president of the Metropolitan Club in Manhattan, died on Friday at his winter home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 74 and also had homes in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Humphrey Indicted
Miami Dolphins running back BOBBY HUMPHREY was indicted Tuesday on aggravated assault and other charges stemming from a Jan. 31 fight at a Columbus, Ga., hotel. (AP)


Outside the Gates, Losing A Definition of Security
The manufacturing operation at the Pratt &amp; Whitney headquarters here is known as the mother plant, the oldest and largest of Pratt &amp; Whitney factories.
The jet engines that rolled out of its bays led the world in aviation technology.
Over the last decade, company employees have grown accustomed to layoff notices.
Today, they had to absorb the most shocking news of all: The plant itself may have to close, with a loss of 2,200 jobs.


A New Tack in Fighting Crime Against Cabbies
When Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly offered a new plan this week to fight violent crime against cabdrivers, it amounted to an acknowledgement that strategies put into place only a year ago had proven inadequate.
The new plan calls for the creation of a special detail of investigators who will move throughout the city to work exclusively on the murders and robberies of medallion and livery cabbies.
While it will borrow on some of the techniques used in the past -- like spot checks and protection offered by officers in plain clothes -- it will focus on special investigations under a single command, department officials said.


Education Board Breakup Urged
Three borough presidents proposed yesterday that the city's Board of Education be disbanded and its authority spread among borough boards and local groups.
Addressing a morning news conference at City Hall, Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan and Claire Shulman of Queens said that their proposal would make schools more accessible as well as "reduce bureaucracy and make schools more accountable."


Nets Still Go Down As Petrovic Returns
Midway through the third quarter, the Nets trailed the Indianapolis Pacers by 25 points, and so the battle began simply to make the score respectable.
And maybe that's what New Jersey's season has come down to -- a battle not to look too bad losing.
Fading, fading, fading.
Someone take a pulse quick because soon there may not be a heartbeat.


U.S. ENVOY ISSUES WARNING TO SERBS
The Clinton Administration's special envoy to peace negotiations on the former Yugoslavia warned today that the United States would support lifting an arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina unless the Serbian forces who have carved up the country agreed soon to a United Nations peace proposal.
"We are continuing to pursue the diplomatic track," the envoy, Reginald Bartholomew, said here at a news conference.
"If the Serbs do not come to terms reasonably soon, we cannot see this as an extended process. We will do our part to pursue the lifting of the arms embargo together with our allies."


Inventories Climbed 0.4% In February
Stocks of unsold goods climbed for a fifth straight month in February, the Commerce Department said today, providing new evidence that consumer demand may be faltering.
The department said inventories at the manufacturing, retail and wholesale level grew during February by four-tenths of 1 percent, to a seasonally adjusted $854.05 billion.
It was the biggest monthly increase since an identical rise last July.


P.&amp; G., the Diaper Leader, Strikes Back
Besides coming as welcome news for parents everywhere, Procter &amp; Gamble's decision Tuesday to reduce the price of their popular disposable diapers, Pampers and Luvs, again demonstrated how major consumer-products companies are absorbed with the challenge of low-priced private-label brands.
But unlike the response 12 days ago, when the Philip Morris Companies announced a 20 percent cut in the price of Marlboro cigarettes and the stock fell $14.25, Procter &amp; Gamble's shares rose 12.5 cents to close at $48.25.


Survey Finds Flaws in States' Water Inspections
A Government study released today found that most state inspection programs to insure the safety of public water systems were in a shambles.
The study by the General Accounting Office does little to allay concerns about the purity of the nation's water supply.
Such concerns have recently been heightened by Milwaukee's problems with its drinking water, apparently as a result of contamination with cryptosporidium, a parasite that causes intestinal illness.


GANNETT CO. (N)
The Gannett Company reported yesterday that it earned $66.3 million in its first quarter this year, in contrast to a loss of $91.5 million in the 1992 quarter.
The loss last year was in large part attributed to changes in accounting policies.
Without those charges, Gannett would still have done better in this year's quarter, posting gains on an operating basis of 21.6 percent.
Sales for the quarter were up 6.5 percent, to $844.7 million.


A Jazz-Singing Legend Guides a New Generation
By the time Betty Carter started singing professionally, with Lionel Hampton's orchestra in 1948, she had made a decision to be different.
Unlike most other singers of her generation, she didn't want to sound like Dinah Washington or Ella Fitzgerald or Sarah Vaughan.
Instead, she dedicated herself to finding her own voice.
And now, 45 years later, the astringent tone she has developed and the emotionally intense tempos she favors have made her jazz's most imposing singer.
She is at ease with being different: it seems almost a necessity to her, a way of marking off some esthetic and personal territory and staking a claim for greatness.


Union Rule Faces a Rare Fight; Dear to Labor, Wicks Contracting Law Is Debated in Albany
As long as there has been a Wicks Law, which is 72 years now, there have been people trying to repeal it.
"It's a horror," said Henry Stern, president of Citizens Union, a nonprofit government monitoring group.
He and other opponents of Wicks, which requires local governments to hire at least four separate contractors rather than one general contractor for most projects, say that it inflates construction costs on public projects across the state by $400 million a year.
Despite perennial efforts to rescind the Wicks Law, it has stayed off the legislative agenda for decades, mostly because of the sophisticated lobbying and generous political contributions of its prime beneficiaries -- the state's plumbing, electrical and heating trades.


King World Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Review/Theater; Shaw on the Evils of Capitalism
Shaw's first play, "Widowers' Houses," is a dialectic on the evils of capitalism and the exploitation of the masses, the sort of thing Marx spent years working out in the Reading Room of the British Museum.
Shaw's effort, which is being revived by the Pearl Theater Company on the play's centennial, is considerably shorter and a good deal more amusing than "Das Kapital."
Shaw began the play with William Archer, but later broke off the collaboration, insisting that he wanted to write "realism," and finished the work on his own.


Population Control Doesn't Cure Poverty
To the Editor:
"Birth Control 'for All People' " (editorial, April 2) draws attention to the opinions of two Republican Presidents on international population control programs.
Dwight D. Eisenhower, you remind us, favored such programs on the ground that without them "the expectation of future generations" would be limited "to abject poverty and suffering." Ronald Reagan denied them funds on the ground that population growth was a "natural phenomenon" that could stimulate economic growth.
Neither state ment enables us to reach any conclusion on population control.
They are opinions, not arguments.


Learning Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Wickman, It's Easy Till the Last Out
The manager said nothing.
This is a good thing in Bob Wickman's new world.
It was a sunny day in the Bronx, and his sinker had been so consistently effective that Wickman called upon just one changeup all day.
Wickman had benefited from Wade Boggs's four hits and from two botched double-play balls by Kansas City that led to three Yankee runs.
Wickman had held the Royals to one run in eight innings.
He had needed only 77 pitches.
The Yankees had a five-run lead going into the ninth, and Manager Buck Showalter said nothing.


Reports Say Buttafuoco Is Indicted
The Nassau County District Attorney's office prepared to charge Joseph Buttafuoco today in the statutory rape of Amy Fisher, people familiar with the case said.
Mr.
Buttafuoco is to be charged with having sex with Miss Fisher when she was 16 years old.
The move came after a grand jury voted to indict Mr.
Buttafuoco, said people close to him.


Levi Strauss Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Trevino Is Making Yet Another Adjustment
Lee Trevino has been through more passages than any of golf's great champions.
From struggling driving-range pro to United States Open champion, from struck by fame to struck by lightning, from aging star to Senior superstar, Trevino has been carried along by his wits, an enormous capacity for work and the genius in his hands.


The Judge Sticks Up for the Homeless
Last November a New York City judge held four officials in contempt because homeless families were spending nights in welfare office waiting rooms.
Now, with the problem continuing, the judge has ordered financial reimbursement for the families and threatens to hold the Mayor personally in contempt.
That draws outrage from City Hall, yet the judge's frustration is understandable.
Families with nowhere to sleep now report to Emergency Assistance Units, where caseworkers, following court rulings, are supposed to find them apartments or hotel rooms.
But the demand is such that accommodations can't be found for scores of families -- on some nights well in excess of 100.
They bed down on armchairs and couches or on the floors of the waiting rooms.
The conditions are uncomfortable for adults and unhealthy, if not downright abusive, for children.


USF&amp;G Selects Margeotes, Fertitta
The USF&amp;G Corporation, a Baltimore-based insurer, said yesterday that it had selected Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss Inc. of New York to handle its account, previously handled by Gray Kirk/VanSant, formerly known as VanSant Dugdale &amp; Company of Baltimore, for more than 60 years.
Kerrie Burch-DeLuca, a USF&amp;G spokeswoman, declined to disclose the billings.


Shares Drop As Goodrich Reports Loss
The B. F. Goodrich Company reported a $7.6 million first-quarter loss yesterday, a surprise that led to heavy morning selling of its stock.
Its shares tumbled $3.125, to $44.875, in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange but later partly recovered to close at $46.875, off $1.125.
The loss was far deeper than the operating loss of $1.9 million reported in the first quarter of 1992, when a $286.5 million charge for adopting a new accounting standard for retiree health-care benefits resulted in a net loss of $288.4 million.
First-quarter sales fell 1.4 percent, to $596.8 million, from $605.3 million a year earlier.


All That's Needed Is a Wall, a Ball and a Nice Day


Egypt's Trampling of Rights Fosters Extremism; Some Other Cairo
To the Editor:
As a yearlong resident of Cairo, and a member of its expatriate community, I was outraged by the tone and content of your March 31 article Cairo Journal, which maintains that the fury of Islam has dimmed the sparkle for expatriates on the Nile.
The city you describe is not the city in which I live.


Children's Needs
To the Home Section:
As a working mother who has nursed three sons, I thoroughly enjoyed Patricia Leigh Brown's article on breast feeding for busy moms (March 11, 1993).
My experience as a nursing working mother has provided me with several revelations the author may have overlooked.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Federal trial involving the Bank of Commerce and Credit International misidentified the law firm of a witness, Cantwell F. Muckenfuss 3d, former deputy Comptroller of the Currency.
It is Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher.


Cuomo Proposes Tougher Smoking Limits


Maxine Wood Dead; Playwright Was 87
Maxine Flora Finsterwald, a playwright and short-story writer who used the pen name Maxine Wood, died on April 7 at Summit Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
She was 87 years old.
The cause was congestive heart failure after a long illness, said Jonathan Ezekiel, Miss Finsterwald's executor.


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Upstairs, Downstairs: A Way to Manage Both
WHEN Mark O'Connell decided to change careers, he never thought he would have to learn how to balance glasses on his head or to pack trousers without wrinkling them.
But those were among the skills he gained in an intense 10-day immersion in the world of household management taught by Ivor Spencer, who many in England believe has breathed new life into the grand old profession of being a butler.


Bridge
The state of Connecticut has not yet produced any world champions, but it has a group of very strong players who win frequently in the New York metropolitan area and are competitive at the national level.
One is Richard De Martino of Riverside, Conn., who finished third in the Open Pairs three weeks ago at the Spring Nationals of the American Contract Bridge League.
He was playing with Stephen Williams of Lawrenceville, N.J., and they were aided by the diagramed deal.
They were using four-suit transfer bids, now very popular among experts, and the two-spade response showed club length.
The four no-trump bid was natural and invitational, and De Martino as South chose to continue.


Critic's Notebook; How the Smile of Comedy Has Turned Wolfish
Back in the 1950's, standup comedy was a fairly uncomplicated craft.
On television showcases like "The Ed Sullivan Show," an Alan King could start building a career on wife jokes.
In clubs, a Lenny Bruce could venture into unconventional material.
In either case, standup was a relatively modest job in the wide, wide world of popular entertainment.
No more.
In standup today, television superstardom and staggering wealth are the ultimate stakes sought by all, even if attained by only a fortunate few.
Instead of touring constantly in one-night stands, a comic can now be marketed in a sitcom or talk show.
Bill Cosby, Roseanne Arnold and Jerry Seinfeld have had their comedy acts expanded into smash weekly series.
Jay Leno and David Letterman, rolling off Johnny Carson, make enormous amounts of money for working a few hours a week on the late-night shift.


Minor League Playoffs Major Jolt for 3 Rangers
The Rangers faced rebellion from within yesterday, when Russian rookies Sergei Zubov and Aleksei Kovalev and Swede Peter Andersson responded unhappily to the organization's decision to send them to Binghamton to play for the team's minor league affiliate in the playoffs -- a decision that denies each of them the chance to represent their respective homelands in the world championships beginning next weekend in Munich.
After the Rangers' 2-0 loss to the Capitals last night, Coach Ron Smith informed each player of the decision and met for an extended period of time with Zubov and Kovalev and their respective agents.
Afterward, all three players declined comment, but Kovalev grudgingly acknowledged in a brief interview before the meeting that he would go to Binghamton if the Rangers forced him.
None of the players can play in the world championships without the consent of the organization, according to Smith, and they face possible suspensions from the team if they do not report to Binghamton when told.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


POPE ORDERS NUNS OUT OF AUSCHWITZ
In a last-minute letter apparently intended to defuse the controversy on the 50th anniversary of the Warsaw ghetto uprising, Pope John Paul II told Roman Catholic nuns today to move from their convent at the Auschwitz death camp.
The Pope's letter, made public by the Polish news agency here today, said the 14 Carmelite nuns must move to another convent within the diocese in the Auschwitz area or return to where they came from nine years ago.


Beleaguered Andreotti Faces Senate Panel in Italy
Giulio Andreotti, Italy's elder statesman and emblem of its Machiavellian postwar politics, testified today before a committee of fellow senators supposed to decide whether to end his parliamentary immunity from prosecution on the explosive charge of conspiring with the Mafia.
The hearing coincided with news reports quoting Mafia informers as saying Mr.
Andreotti ordered at least one political assassination by the Sicilian mob and met with the Mafia "boss of all bosses" of the late 1970's, Stefano Bontade.


The Taxman Experiments
Eligible taxpayers in Ohio can meet tonight's filing deadline by punching in the required information on a touch-tone telephone.
It's an experiment by the Internal Revenue Service to streamline income tax collection, like the electronic filing system originally tested in 1986 and now handling some 14 million returns a year.
Despite these gee-whiz advances, the I.R.S. has fallen behind in collaring delinquents and is launching yet another experiment -- private debt collectors.
That's not as ominous as it sounds.
They won't be "tax farmers" like the heavy-handed agents of 18th-century French kings, who got a piece of whatever they collected.
Rather, private collection agencies will help find delinquents who have dropped out of sight, and will handle routine notifications.
They will
not
do high-pressure collecting; that's the Government's job.


Simpson Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wallace Stegner Is Dead at 84; Pulitzer Prize-Winning Author
Wallace Stegner, the novelist and short-story writer whose work celebrated the American West and won him the country's highest literary awards, died on Tuesday night at St.
Vincent Hospital in Santa Fe, N.M.
He was 84 and lived in Los Altos Hills, Calif.
The cause of death was respiratory failure, said Lynn Stegner, his daughter-in-law.
On March 28, Mr.
Stegner was seriously injured in a traffic accident in Santa Fe, where he had gone to give a lecture.


Strictest Curb on Smoking In U.S. Backed by Cuomo
Citing new information about the dangers of secondhand tobacco smoke, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed legislation today that would prohibit smoking in schools and many restaurants and prevent advertising for tobacco products on all billboards and signs.
If passed, the proposal would give New York State the toughest laws in the nation governing smoking in restaurants and advertising for tobacco products, Mr.
Cuomo's aides, restaurant organizations and several anti-smoking groups said.
The New York City Council and several state legislatures have already passed laws prohibiting smoking in schools.


Nanny Held in the Murder Of a 10-Month-Old in Rye
A 25-year-old nanny who told the police that she loved a 10-month-old boy in her care "like her own" was charged today with murder in the boy's death last month from severe head injuries.
The nanny, Ann Franklin, was accused by prosecutors of showing "a depraved indifference to human life" and of recklessly creating "a grave risk of death" to the child, Kieran Dunne.
But Maryellen Martirano, chief of the Westchester District Attorney's child abuse bureau, did not specify how Ms.
Franklin might have caused the fatal blows to the back of Kieran's head or what possible motive she might have had.


Girl, 6, on Bicycle Ride Foils Abduction Attempt
A 6-year-old girl foiled an attempted kidnapping Tuesday night when she broke free from a man who had got out of a parked car and grabbed her by the shirt, the Nassau County police said today.
The girl, who had been riding her bicycle with two friends on Pleasant Drive, managed to run to her house, where her mother called the police.


Edna Amadon Toney, Writer and Actress, 79
Edna Amadon Toney, a writer, an actress and a producer, died on Tuesday at her home in Katonah, N.Y.
She was 79.
Her husband, Anthony, said the cause was liver cancer.


Reliance Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Los Angeles Juror's Illness Adds to a Complicated Task
A juror in the police beating case fell ill today, cutting short the fifth day of deliberations over what on its face appears to be a simple matter: Whether to mark "guilty" or "not guilty" in the blank spaces on four verdict forms -- one for each officer charged in the beating of Rodney G. King.
But a measure of the complexity of the jury's task is the time it has consumed so far.
To help answer the questions, the jurors have considered the testimony of 61 witnesses, more than 130 exhibits and a long interpretation of the law from the trial judge.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  RIOTS ACROSS SOUTH AFRICA  Defying pleas for order, angry young blacks rioted through several cities in South Africa on a nationwide day of mourning for the slain black leader Chris Hani.
A1  ISRAEL SEEKS TRADE-OFF ON TALKS  After meeting with Egypt's President, Israel's Prime Minister said that if Palestinians agreed to resume peace talks, he would lift a ban on negotiating with Palestinians from East Jerusalem.
A3


Ohio Prisoners and Officials Make First Deal
Corrections officials who are engaged in a tense three-day-old standoff with rebellious inmates holding eight guards hostage at a state maximum-security prison here achieved their first success in negotiations today.
The break came this evening, when the authorities agreed to provide food and drinking water to the rebels, who number about 450, in exchange for the insurgents' assurance that they would accept from corrections officers, and give to two hostages, prescription medications that these hostages needed but did not have.


Sales Rise For Vehicles Built in U.S.
Sales of domestically built vehicles excluding those built by the Ford Motor Company rose 14.8 percent in early April from the corresponding period a year ago.
In a deviation from its pattern of reporting on the same day as other auto makers, Ford said it would release its 10-day sales figures on Thursday.
The Chrysler Corporation does not provide partial monthly figures; its sales are estimated by Ward's Automotive Reports. 'Demand Is Only So-So'
Some analysts cautioned that demand could be slightly better or slightly worse once hard data from Ford and Chrysler were available.


INSIDE
Order to Nuns at Auschwitz
Seeking to defuse a controversy, Pope John Paul II ordered 14 Carmelite nuns to move from their convent at the Auschwitz death camp.
Page A13.
Israel's Trade-Off on Talks
Israel's leader said he would lift a ban on negotiating with Palestinians from East Jerusalem if Palestinians returned to peace talks.
Page A3.
Wallace Stegner Is Dead
The Pulitzer Prize-winning author who celebrated the American West and heroic virtues was 84.
Page B8.


Drug Dealing Was Banned By Mob, U.S. Witness Says
Under cross-examination, Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano conceded yesterday that any member of the Gambino crime family who dealt in drugs in the 1970's and 1980's would have been risking his life by breaking the family's rule against drug trafficking.
For a third day, Mr.
Gravano, the former Gambino underboss who turned informer, testified against two brothers, John and Joseph Gambino, accused of running a major heroin-distribution operation.


Meridian Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Control Crime, Then Worry About Poverty
Why the producers of this vigorous hourlong documentary on crime thought they needed two journalists to front their program is perplexing, especially since Fred Barnes and Morton Kondracke are in total agreement on all points; when they are on camera together they seem to be completing each other's paragraphs.
Already colleagues, both at The New Republic and on "The McLaughlin Group," maybe they have ambitions to be the Weber and Fields of punditry.
But perhaps their joint appearance here is a way of giving weight to the program's political message: that controlling crime has to take precedence over curing poverty and racism.
That is an unusual message for public television and the latest sign of conservative attitudes finding expression in documentaries, a field criticized on the right for being awash in liberal sentiments.
If the conservatives can make it there, they can make it anywhere.


Central &amp; South West reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


How a Value-Added Tax Works"


Yields End Low After a Wild Day
The bond market felt the rumble of the roller coaster yesterday as traders and investors bought, then sold and then bought 30-year bonds again, jolting its yield down, up and then down again.
For several brief moments early in the day and near the end of trading, the yield on the long bond dipped below 6.72 percent, the lowest yield since the Treasury began regular auctions of the bond 16 years ago.


Police Officer Arrested
A police officer was arrested yesterday on five counts of possession of cocaine, officials said.
Officer Sergei Denecko, 31, who was assigned to the 52d Precinct in the Bronx, was accused of buying cocaine at least 240 times in 1990 and 1991, paying at least $44,000.
The arrest resulted from a joint Federal-city investigation into narcotics trafficking that has led to the apprehension of 47 people.
Investigators captured records detailing the officer's purchases when they arrested his supplier in October 1991, according to the U.S.
Attorney's office in Manhattan.
Officer Denecko was suspended without pay pending the outcome of the investigation.


PNC Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bank of Nashville reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MNC Financial Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Diner's Journal
Hot and Cold at Japonica
In the New York University neighborhood, the sparkling Japanese restaurant called Japonica is as popular as spring break.
And little wonder, for the food is pristine, beautifully presented and delectable.
Japonica is larger than it appears at first glance, with a wraparound dining room done in natural wood, colorful Japanese lanterns overhead and a handsome sushi bar.
A limited sampling of lunch specialties found virtually every item appealing, starting with a deluxe sushi assortment ($16.95) holding ruby-colored tuna, shrimp, salmon, cod and several kinds of tekka maki, the seaweed rolls.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Bank of New Hampshire reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parking Rules
Because of Orthodox Good Friday, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.


Delta Will Take Write-Off of $82.5 Million
Delta Air Lines Inc. said yesterday it would take an $82.5 million write-off in the most recent quarter to cover severance payments for 600 pilots and retire 21 jets.
The moves to streamline Delta's operations were announced in March, and the performance of its stock yesterday, unchanged at $57.625, reflected investors' expectations that the carrier would take such a charge.
Delta said the results of its cost-cutting would be underscored in its quarterly earnings statement to be released next week.


American International Petroleum Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Skewed Census Endures
Every national census has failed to count millions of Americans, and for at least five decades the undercounted have disproportionately been urban minorities.
So New York, Los Angeles and other victims of the undercount started urging the Census Bureau years ago to adjust the numbers using accepted statistical techniques.
The Bush Administration, viewing the census through a different political lens, found those statistical techniques unreliable and refused to apply them.
So the undercount victims sued the Government to force an adjustment.
This week a thoughtful Federal judge, Joseph McLaughlin, declined to disturb the bureau's 1990 census count.


Don Clay, 46, Teacher And Interior Designer
Don Clay, an interior designer in Manhattan, died on Monday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 46.
The cause of death was AIDS, a family spokesman said.


METRO DIGEST
A YALE DEAN TO BECOME ITS PRESIDENT
After a nine-month nationwide search for a president, Yale University reached into its own back yard and selected Richard C. Levin, a 46-year-old economist who has spent nearly half his life at the university.
A1.
Mr.
Levin has built a reputation for intelligence, openness and conciliation.
A16.
A NEW URBAN SCOURGE: MALT LIQUOR
Since the late 1980's, malt liquor -- essentially beer brewed with sugar for an extra alcoholic kick -- has been marketed in an outsize 40-ounce bottle with aggressive campaigns aimed at minority drinkers.
Known as "liquid crack" because of its potency, it is fast becoming the intoxicant of choice for black and Hispanic youths in New York and other American cities.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  ARCHDIOCESE JOINS PAT ROBERTSON GROUP
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, forging a tactical alliance with a group run by Pat Robertson, is preparing to distribute to each of its 213 parishes a guide designed by Mr.
Robertson's organization to help voters in the upcoming school board elections pick candidates who are conservative on social issues.
A1.
SPERM DONOR'S CLAIM IS DEFEATED
A Family Court judge in Manhattan has ruled that a man who donated his sperm so that a lesbian couple could have a child has no right to be declared the 11-year-old girl's father or even to have visitation rights.
B2.
Mayor Dinkins and his wife release their income-tax returns. B2.
Mark Green resigns as Consumer Affairs Commissioner. B2.
Bruce Cutler, the longtime lawyer for John Gotti, conducts his first cross-examination of Salvatore Gravano, a Mafia informer.
B3.
Detectives are seeking two men for questioning in the deaths of a Park Avenue couple.
B3.1 REGION  ON THE BALLOT, OFF THE BOOKS
With less than eight weeks before New Jersey's primary, both parties are busily working the political science of financing expensive campaigns without having the candidates pay.
B5.
A New Jersey mail carrier who organized a tax protest will run against Governor Florio.
B5.
INVESTIGATOR ADMITS EVIDENCE TAMPERING
Shedding new light on the first evidence-tampering scandal in New York State Police history, a former state police investigator in Sidney, N.Y., admitted fabricating evidence in 21 cases.
B5.
CUOMO PROPOSES HEALTH-CARE SHIFT
Governor Cuomo proposed legislation that is intended to cut employers' costs for workers' compensation claims by allowing the claims to be handled for the first time through managed health-care systems.
B4.
John A. Marino, the chairman of the State Democratic Committee, announced that he was resigning.
B4.
Our Towns by Robert Hanley B5  Chronicle B4  Parking Rules B2


LGF Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knicks' Smith Learning That Less Can Mean More
Pat Riley spelled it out during training camp: If Charles Smith wanted to fit in with the Knicks, he would have to adjust to playing small forward, get in better shape, accept less playing time, score fewer points and take fewer shots.
That would be hard for any player to swallow.
For Smith, a proven scorer in the final year of his contract, it was even harder.
But eventually, Smith adapted.
And if he enjoys a few more performances like the one Wednesday night in Charlotte (23 points, 8 rebounds), perhaps Smith will eventually be rewarded with two of the things he wants most: a championship and a new contract.


The Shot Heard Round Chicago
No National Basketball Association agents came calling for DON CALHOUN yesterday.
Everyone else did.
The $5-an-hour office supply salesman and part-time student was celebrating his first day as a millionaire after flinging a basketball 75 feet into a Chicago Stadium net before a standing-room-only crowd that had come to see the Bulls play the Miami Heat.


Justin Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sounds Around Town
Betty Carter and Friends
Betty Carter in "Jazz Ahead '94," Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, (718) 636-4181.
When the singer Betty Carter was still a teen-ager, she was given opportunities to perform with well-established jazz stars like Charlie Parker, Miles Davis, Max Roach and Duke Jordan.
Now she is giving similar opportunities to rising young stars, who include Theodross Avery, a 19-year-old tenor saxophonist; Adonis Rose, an 18-year-old drummer and Mark Subek, a 19-year-old trumpeter, all students at Berklee College of Music in Boston, and to Chris Byars, a 22-year-old tenor saxophonist who was a semifinalist in the 1991 Thelonious Monk Competition.
They will appear with her at the Majestic Theater tomorrow at 8 P.M. and on Sunday at 3 P.M.
Miss Carter will also perform with her regular trio: Cyrus Chestnut on piano, Christopher Thomas on bass and Clarence Penny on drums.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (212) 307-4100, or at the box office of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Accordion Makes Three
Jimmy Smith Trio, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
Jimmy Smith, who gave the Hammond organ validity as a jazz instrument in the late 1950's, is making one of his infrequent visits to New York from his home in California to lead a trio with musicians who are his equals on their own instruments: the guitarist Kenny Burrell and the drummer Grady Tate.
They last appeared together at Fat Tuesday's in 1991.
Now in his mid-60's, Mr.
Smith still plays jazz-funk with an energy that leaves both his audiences and his sidemen exhausted.
They go on tonight and tomorrow at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight, and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a cover charge of $20 and a $10 minimum.


Debate Rises on Hanoi P.O.W. Report
A United States envoy left today on a mission to Vietnam, but President Clinton instructed him that new questions about American prisoners of war must be resolved before there can be any thaw in relations with Hanoi.
The questions were raised by a 1972 report that suggests that Hanoi held more American prisoners than it has acknowledged.
In turn, however, questions have also been raised about the document itself.
The researcher who discovered it in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party in Moscow has also come under criticism as a partisan who ardently opposes normalizing relations with Vietnam.


Review/Theater; 2 One-Woman Plays, Each Starring the Author
Marga Gomez was a child of the city, emotionally uprooted, whose parents were flamboyantly concerned with the world of Latin American show business.
In contrast, Charlayne Woodard had a secure, middle-class background in upstate New York, and her parents stressed traditional family values.
Each woman emerged with her individuality intact and with her imagination nurtured into creativity.
Both have become actresses and writers and have turned their early lives into vivid one-woman plays: Ms.
Gomez with "Memory Tricks" (at the Joseph Papp Public Theater), Ms.
Woodard with "Pretty Fire" (at Manhattan Theater Club's Stage II).
They offer audiences intimate entree into formative experiences, looking back on very different American childhoods with compassion and without regret.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clintons' Income for '92 Is Put at $290,000
Hillary Rodham Clinton made more than $250,000 last year, helping the Clintons to earn $290,000, their highest income ever, according to tax data made public today by the White House.
Mrs.
Clinton, a partner until late last year in the Rose law firm of Little Rock, Ark., reported earnings of $203,000 from the firm.
She also earned $13,000 from the sale of her interest in the firm's building and $32,000 from honorariums and fees, including directors' fees from boards of corporations she served on until last spring, when she resigned to devote more time to her husband's Presidential campaign.


Lifeline Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Midwest Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a state assessment of the Newark school system misstated the view of D. Kim Thompson Gaddy, a member of the city's school board.
She said she believed that unless new leadership joined the board after the April 20 election, the state would seek to take control of the schools, not necessarily that it should.


Two Sought for Questioning in Park Ave. Deaths
Detectives investigating the deaths of a Park Avenue couple are seeking to question two men who left the victims' apartment three days before the bodies were found.
John J. Hill, the commander of Manhattan detectives, who is in charge of the case, said the two men "are believed to have been the last two people" to have seen the couple alive.
He said it was too early to say whether the men were suspects.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Iroquois Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BASEBALL: At Elizabeth High School; Good and Bad Innings Come With Territory
Listen to the Professor of Pitching: "The world is full of throwers. Coaching is about getting the throwers into a pitching mentality. I tell the kids that pitching is only three things, in and out, up and down, fast and slow. You mix that up to disrupt the batter, tilt the strike zone, and you do that all the time, even when you're warming up or tossing the ball around. You are always pitching, thinking, loosening your brain along with your arm."
This year, the professor, Ray Korn, baseball coach and athletic director of Elizabeth High School, has the student of his dreams, a 6-foot-2-inch, 15-year-old freshman named Al Hawkins who can throw a baseball 85 miles per hour, but who needs to learn how to pitch.
An intense, tightly controlled 47-year-old who rarely raises his voice, Korn refuses to be drawn into the excitement around Hawkins.


Survey Stirs Debate on Number of Gay Men in U.S.
A survey's finding that only 1 percent of men identify themselves as homosexual has renewed intense debate over the number of gay people in America.
Many sociologists, poll takers and political analysts said yesterday that they believed the actual number of gay men was higher than 1 percent.
But they also said it was probably lower than the 10 percent in a frequently cited study conducted in the late 1940's.


First Amarillo Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Children
Horse Show
Steeplechase Park  Surf Avenue and West 19th Street  Coney Island  Brooklyn  (800) 834-3832  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow
Steeplechase Park will resound with the clop of real horses' hooves, perhaps for the first time.
The horses will compete individually and in teams in several events, including an obstacle course.
As in all horse shows, the winners will receive ribbons.
Riding the horses will be mounted-police officers from Nassau County, L.I.; Toronto; Rochester, and Bergen County, N.J., and members of the New York City Parks Enforcement Patrol.


Morton International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Barrick Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fairness or Racial Gerrymander? Justices Study 'Serpentine' District
Except for a few bulges and detours, North Carolina's 12th Congressional District is barely wider than Interstate 85, which it hugs for 160 miles, from Durham to Gastonia, like some long-distance trucker.
Even its designers call it "serpentine" and "ugly" and "uncouth," a shape only a political cartographer could love.
Now the 12th District is the focus of a Supreme Court case challenging the very purpose for which it was drawn: to create this and one other district with majorities of black voters.


CHRONICLE
They'll be saying farewell tonight at the Salvation Army's Centennial Memorial Temple on West 14th Street to Gen.
EVA BURROWS, who is retiring as the organization's international leader.
She will also be honored at a lunch today at the United Nations when the ambassadors of the 96 countries in which the Salvation Army serves will pay her tribute.
The general, who is 63 years old and the daughter of two Salvation Army officers in Australia, is stepping down after seven years in a post she describes as "head of a family."


Boatmen's Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Fernando Valenzuela, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.
Recalled Brad Pennington, pitcher, from Rochester.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Released Ken Dayley, pitcher.
Purchased the contract of Tony Castillo, pitcher, from Syracuse of the International League.


Art in Review
Jay DeFeo
Nicole Klagsbrun  51 Greene Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Jay DeFeo (1931-1989) is one of a handful of compelling San Francisco painters who began their mature work in the 1950's but who have never attracted much attention in New York.
The fact that she chose to remain on the West Coast may be one reason.
Surely another lies in her highly synthetic style, one that eludes easy categorizing.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
North Stars Eliminated  Paul Coffey's power-play goal early in the third period started a three-goal explosion that helped the Detroit Red Wings knock the visiting Minnesota North Stars out of the playoffs with a 5-3 victory last night.
The North Stars needed a victory to have any chance of beating out the St.
Louis Blues for the final Norris Division playoff spot but instead ended their final season in Minnesota at 36-38-10.
The North Stars are moving to Dallas after this season. (AP) Flyers 7, Sabres 4: Kevin Dineen scored two short-handed goals and a power-play goal to lead Philadelphia past Buffalo, in Buffalo, for the Flyers' seventh straight victory.
As a result, the Flyers are now 2 points ahead of the Rangers in the battle to stay out of the basement in the Patrick Division.
Both teams have one game to play. (AP)


Ghosts? Well, There Is a Sheet of Ice
The Devils view their regular-season finale Friday night against the Islanders as a one-game playoff, and they are confident they can overcome the ghosts of Nassau Coliseum, win the game and capture third place in the Patrick Division.
All told, the Devils have played 37 regular-season games at Nassau Coliseum since setting up shop in New Jersey in 1982.
And in those games, the Devils have managed only 5 victories and 6 ties, along with 26 defeats.


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; James Levine
James Levine's ubiquitous "Ring" has been thoroughly dissected in recent seasons, both as the current Metropolitan Opera production and in its various appearances on television, home video (Deutsche Grammophon 072 522; 11 laser disks or seven VHS cassettes) and CD (Deutsche Grammophon 427 607-2, 423 389-2, 429 407-2, 429 385-2; 15 CD's).
Briefly, Otto Schenk's production adheres closely to Wagner's stage directions and scenic descriptions, keeping the story in a traditionally conceived world of gods and mortals of various stripes.
Gunther Schneider-Siemssen's sets and projections strive to combine naturalism and mythical grandeur.
And the company did not stint on either detail (you could probably make a sword after watching this "Siegfried") or spectacle (the ending of "Gotterdammerung" is appropriately cataclysmic).
Although Brian Large's video direction captures something of the production's dimension, this "Ring" is far more magical in the house than on the small screen.
Mr.
Large's penchant for close-ups, in particular, has drawbacks.
At one point in "Gotterdammerung," the camera zooms in on Hagen so insistently that one wonders whether it will sail down his throat.


Both Sides Talk of Pact On Jobs Bill
Suspending their public quarrel over President Clinton's $19.5 billion plan to stimulate the economy, Mr.
Clinton declared today that he was willing to scale back his proposal, and Senate Republicans signaled they were ready to discuss an agreement.
"I have been working with the Senate to come up with an adjusted package that meets some of the concerns of those who've been blocking action on the jobs plan," Mr.
Clinton said during a ceremony in the Rose Garden.
"I am willing to compromise so long as we keep the focus on jobs, keep the focus on growth and keep the focus on meeting unmet national needs."


First of America Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


German Split on Peacekeeping Role
Increasingly fierce Serbian attacks in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last month, and a court ruling allowing a limited German role in trying to stop them, have intensified the political debate about whether a reunited Germany can play a stronger military role in peacekeeping operations.
A vocal minority of legislators of the two largest political parties has called on the Government and the United Nations to send in troops to stop the fighting, and today the Christian Democratic Defense Minister, Volker Ruhe, rejected calls from politicians of his own party to send German warplanes into action against Serbian positions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Balkan Peace Depends on Talking to Serbs Also; Don't Spread the War
To the Editor:
There is a grave problem with touting ethnic homogeneity as a basis of legitimacy in the Balkans: how do we keep the idea of ethnic homogeneity out of places where we don't want it (like the United States)?
Once ethnic homogeneity is accepted as a principle, it provides the catalyst for many dormant ethnic problems to become active and violent.
Ethnic Albanians are 90 percent of the population in Kosovo, and they live under the control of the 10 percent who are ethnic Serbs.
They have not taken the road of a violent "solution." Urging them to turn to violence hardly seems in anyone's real interest -- certainly not that of the United States.


Firm to Help Find A Commissioner
The committee assigned to find a new commissioner showed its first public sign of life yesterday, announcing the hiring of an executive search firm.
Bill Bartholomay, the Atlanta Braves' chairman and chairman of the search committee, said Robert and Frank Beaudine, the senior principals of Eastman and Beaudine Inc., would work directly with the committee in finding candidates for the job.
The position has been vacant since Fay Vincent resigned under pressure Sept. 7.


Commencements and Prayer
Trying to revive the issue of school prayer, Pat Robertson is threatening to sue school boards that ban prayer at commencement.
Page A12.


Arden International Kitchens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Grainger (W.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the new president at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's automotive group referred incorrectly to the resolution of 1992 accusations that the group had recommended unnecessary repairs.
Sears reached a settlement with officials in California, conceding instances of unnecessary repairs, but not admitting widespread wrongdoing.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS -- Advertising; A.T.&amp; T. seeks to reinvent itself with the younger generation.
BE young. Have fun. Use A.T.&amp; T.
O.K., so the American Telephone and Telegraph Company isn't quite ready to emulate marketers like Pepsi-Cola that aim sales pitches at younger consumers through snappy slogans, rock tunes and flannel-clad teen-agers.
But a campaign for the telecommunications giant that begins running Monday is definitely meant to reach out and touch people in their 20's and 30's.
"The overall intent is to say that A.T.&amp; T. is the contemporary communications company, not all those other bozos," said Patrick J. Cunningham, vice chairman and chief creative officer at Ayer New York, which produced the campaign.
The commercials and print advertisements, with an estimated annual budget of $40 million to $80 million, are the first time in three years that A.T.&amp; T. has tried to reshape its image among consumers rather than sell them long-distance service or answering machines.


Topics of The Times; Water, Water Everywhere
If there is anything good to be said about a winter that was a monument to snow, sleet and rain it's that it left the city with more water than it can handle.
For once New Yorkers need not feel guilty about soaking in a tub or drinking the second glass of water.
Our reservoirs runneth over.
Enough already. Bring on the sun.
To look to the street trees, bare and grim and barely budded, is to see the middle of February, not the middle of April.
To look to the sky is to see every shade of gray, one more depressing than another.
To look to a garden is to see sodden soil, the occasional crocus and a few tentatively blooming forsythia.
Everything else is still in hiding.


Hasbro and Agency To Settle Charges
Hasbro Inc. and its agency, Griffin Bacal Inc. in New York, agreed yesterday to settle charges brought by the Federal Trade Commission that they falsely represented the performance of certain toys in Hasbro's G.I.
Joe line.
One instance the commission cited was a television commercial in which a toy helicopter is shown as if it could "hover and fly in a sustained and directed manner," when it could not.


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dow Up 0.28 but Transports Surge Again
Stock market investors seemed to lose heart early yesterday and then rally diffidently.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell as much as 16 points in the early afternoon before recovering slightly, closing up 0.28 point, to 3,455.92.
Other indexes, with a greater variety of stocks, were more negative.
But the Dow Jones transportation average set another record, its fifth in six trading sessions.
The average closed up 12.28 points, to 1,673.21, with most of the gains coming in the last hour of trading.


Agency Rent-A-Car (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Concerts at the Y
Eduardus Halim, a pianist, will be the soloist this weekend in two concerts with the New York Chamber Symphony at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue.
He will play the Chopin Piano Concerto No. 2 in F minor; other works on the program are Barber's "Capricorn" Concerto for Flute, Oboe, Trumpet and Strings; Corigliano's "Voyage," for Flute and String Orchestra, and Brahms's Serenade No. 2.
Other soloists are Judith Mendenhall, flutist; Randall Ellis, oboist, and Neil Balm, trumpeter; Gerard Schwarz will conduct.
Tickets are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Immigrant Enrollment Rises In New York City Schools
Accelerating a trend of recent years, 65,322 immigrant children entered New York City's public schools in the last year, creating new pressures to increase the number of classrooms, expand bilingual education programs and provide other services for foreign-born students.
The increase, reported yesterday by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, was 45 percent larger than in the 1991-92 school year, when 46,358 immigrant children enrolled in the schools.
Since the 1990-91 year, the report said, the public schools have gained 137,796 immigrant children.


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Health Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Neworld Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ranger Impasse Worries N.H.L.
To the Rangers' organization, the situation is simple.
Sergei Zubov, Aleksei Kovalev and Peter Andersson are under contract.
They have been told to report to Binghamton, N.Y. -- Kovalev today and the other two after the Rangers meet Washington tonight -- to play for the Rangers' minor league affiliate during the playoffs.
They must report or, according to the collective bargaining agreement, they could face suspensions and subsequent loss of pay.
For the National Hockey League, though, the issue isn't so clear.
By choosing to deny three foreign players the right to play for their countries in the world championships next week, the Rangers could damage the league's already delicate relationship with the international hockey community when the N.H.L. is putting a premium on improving its image worldwide.


For Minority Youths, 40 Ounces of Trouble
The start of another "Fri-high-day" in the Bronx: With no questions asked and no proof of age demanded, a 19-year-old walks into a grocery store and buys a 40-ounce bottle of Olde English 800 malt liquor.
Rejoining his friends on a stoop across the street, he lifts the fat bottle trumpet-like to his lips and gulps down the brew in loud, foamy swallows.
"It gets you nice," he says, passing the bottle to an eager friend.
"It gets you pumped up," adds the next boy.
"I feel more comfortable when I'm drinking a 40."
Malt liquor -- essentially beer brewed with sugar for an extra alcoholic kick -- has long been popular with black and Hispanic drinkers.
But in the outsize 40-ounce bottle, introduced in the late 1980's with aggressive marketing campaigns aimed at minority drinkers, it is fast becoming the intoxicant of choice for black and Hispanic youths in New York and other American cities.
Some teen-agers call malt liquor "liquid crack" in tribute to its potency.
And to the dismay of drug counselors, social workers and ministers who see malt liquor as a dangerous drug in sheep's clothing, the 40-ounce bottles with brand names like King Cobra, Crazy Horse, Colt 45 and St.
Ides have become an accessory to the youth-culture ensemble of baggy clothes, expensive work boots and street-hardened attitudes.
"Tap the Bottle," a new song celebrating the consumption of 40-ounce malt liquor, has become a hit on the rap charts.
The essence of the 40 is its combination of size, power and price.
At between $1.25 and $2.50, essentially the same as a quart bottle, and with an alcohol content of 5.6 to 8 percent, compared with 3.5 percent for regular beer, the 40-ounce malt liquor offers more punch for the money.
The brewing companies -- which have long been criticized for marketing campaigns that target minority communities -- argue that in selling and promoting the 40-ounce malt liquors, they are simply trying to maintain what has always been a crucial market.
But to a chorus of critics, the creation and targeted marketing of the 40 is a cynical attempt to take advantage of poor youngsters in search of a cheap high.
The results, they say, can be dangerous and occasionally disastrous, not least because of a misimpression that malt liquor is a relatively harmless pleasure.
"They are becoming alcoholics and don't even know it," said Eric Brent, a recovering cocaine addict who is the founder of Rescue, an anti-addiction program in the Hunts Point section of the Bronx.
"Denial is such a monster in their lives."
The precise dimensions of the phenomenon are unknowable.
But industry analysts say that in the last few years, malt liquor has become the fastest-growing segment of the beer market.
And drug counselors and health officials say that while they know of no studies of malt-liquor consumption by young people in the inner city, they see signs of increasing underage drinking linked to the availability of the large bottles.
Seen as Alternative to Drugs
The popularity of the 40's comes as drug-treatment experts and the police are reporting modest drops in teen-age drug use.
Some teen-agers in poor neighborhoods now see malt liquor as an alternative to drugs, according to Makani Thaemba, a public policy specialist for the Marin Institute for the Prevention of Alcohol and Other Drug Problems in San Rafael, Calif.
At the same time, some substance abuse authorities say they have been seeing growing numbers of young people seeking treatment for twin addictions.
Increasingly, one of the substances is alcohol, many say, and often that alcohol came by way of malt liquor sold in a 40-ounce bottle.
Some say, too, that they have noticed a growing association between drinking 40-ounce bottles of malt liquor and smoking marijuana.
The combination, one teen-ager said, goes together like "cookies and milk."
The Bronx teen-ager who bought the Olde English 800 returned to the grocery store minutes later to purchase a 35-cent Philly Blunt cigar and, as street fad dictates, he hollowed it out and packed it with marijuana to smoke with the malt liquor.
Hoisting a 40 for Breakfast
Drinking a 40-ounce bottle of malt liquor for breakfast en route to school is not unusual, said a Bronx teen-ager who said he used to do just that.
Guzzling 40 ounces to intoxication, others added, is a major attraction at "hooky parties."
"It is just a thing we did," said Clifton W., a 16-year-old Bronx boy who is in treatment for substance abuse.
"It just made me feel good."
Fakri A., a 17-year-old from the Bronx who is now in treatment, recalled that he was once so drunk after drinking six 40-ounce bottles of malt liquor that he staggered obliviously through a firefight between drug dealers.
"I guess God was looking out for me that day," he mused.
Darryl McDaniels, a 28-year-old member of the rap group Run-DMC, recently told a rap magazine that he had been hospitalized for alcoholic pancreatitis, the result of years of drinking as many as eight 40-ounce bottles of malt liquor a day. 'Pack a Lot of Punch'
The 40-ounce bottle was introduced beginning in the mid-80's as a "retailer and consumer convenience," according to Ron Richards, a spokesman for the Miller Brewing Company, maker of the Magnum brand of malt liquor.
Store owners like them, he said, because they take up far less shelf space than six-packs.
And in the wake of their introduction, national malt liquor consumption has increased to 82.9 million 2.5-gallon cases in 1992 from 73.6 million in 1989, according to the Jobson Publishing Corporation's Beer Handbook, which predicts sales of 97.8 million cases this year.
The reason for such sales, market researchers say, is the promise of more alcohol for less money.
"If you measure your serving size by 40 ounces," said Peter Reid, editor of Modern Brewery Age, "it's going to pack a lot of punch."
In a comparative analysis, the Marin Institute found that 40 ounces of St.
Ides, which at 8 percent alcohol is one of the most powerful malt liquors, has more alcohol than a six-pack of standard beer, and roughly the same amount as five 5-ounce glasses of wine.
Brewery officials deny that their pursuit of a small but lucrative segment of the American liquor market is an effort to entice underage or irresponsible drinking, and they insist that they are not unduly targeting young minority drinkers.
Noting that malt liquor sales have always been the highest among minority drinkers, they say they are simply following the dictates of maintaining a market they want to continue to serve.
"You obviously gear the advertising of any products to groups that tend to prefer them," said Randy Smith, a vice president of the G. Heileman Brewing Company of LaCrosse, Wis., the maker of Colt 45.
He and officials of other breweries say they regularly advertise against irresponsible and underage drinking.
And they say they also sponsor a variety of service activities in minority neighborhoods, from concerts, to literacy programs, to scholarships.
"The industry is very sensitive and spends a lot of money to be responsible," said Frank Walters, director of research for M. Shanken Communications in New York, publishers of Impact and Market Watch, leading trade publications.
Two years ago, Heileman Brewing came under fire from black consumer groups and civil rights organizations after introducing Power Master, its most powerful malt liquor at 5.9 percent alcohol, and marketing it specifically to black drinkers.
Regulators ordered it off the market, saying the word "power" on the label violated a law against using brand names to promote alcohol content.
Linking Success With Liquor
Heileman now faces criticism over an advertising campaign for Colt 45 that is aimed at a younger black consumer than before.
Gone is a middle-aged black actor, Billy Dee Williams; instead, a polished, soft-spoken younger black man talks of commitment, giving back and success.
As he does, he reaches for a can of Colt 45.
Linking black success with malt liquor is cynical and exploitative, critics of the ads say.
"All this speaks of a slick marketing campaign that has tremendous impact on African-Americans," said the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem.
Mr.
Butts has led a campaign to stem the advertising of alcohol and tobacco products in poor neighborhoods.
Popular at Hooky Parties
Judy Corman, a spokeswoman for Phoenix House, a drug-rehabilitation organization, said she was surprised by the response when she asked a roomful of Manhattan teen-agers recently if they had drunk 40-ounce malt liquor.
"You should have seen the hands go up," she said. "Nearly everyone raised their hands."
Jennifer O. was one of them.
The 15-year-old Bronx high school student said she seldom went to classes last year, preferring instead to attend hooky parties at friends' houses, in basements and on rooftops.
"As long as there was music and people," recalled Jennifer, who is Puerto Rican.
"When I went to hooky parties, we used to have boxes and boxes and boxes of 40 ounces in the refrigerator, and we would go crazy," she said.
She drank to impress her friends, she said, and her ability to drink two bottles of malt liquor back-to-back earned her the nickname, "Shorty Two Forties."
"The most I drank was three and a half bottles and I was drunk out of my mind," Jennifer said.
When asked if there was anything she regretted about her days of drunken malt liquor binges, she paused, and nodded.
"I lost my virginity," she said, "when I was drunk on 40's."


Hasbro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


ENRON CORP. (N)
The Enron Corporation, the diversified natural-gas company, said rising prices and demand for gas bolstered its first-quarter profits.
Enron's gas marketing unit, Enron Gas Services, reported a 43.8 percent gain in operating profits, to $48.6 million during the quarter.
Operating income at Enron Oil and Gas rose 54.7 percent, to $31.4 million.
Gas pipelines, the company's biggest unit, posted a 30.8 percent increase in pretax profits, to $144.7 million.


Pressed, U.S. Issues Report on Bosnia Havens
Bowing to Congressional pressure, the State Department today made public a report by Clinton Administration experts recommending the creation of militarily protected "safe havens" for the Bosnian Muslims.
But at the same time, Secretary of State Warren Christopher ruled out the use of American forces to create such havens.


American Health Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sounds Around Town
2 Leader-Driven Bands
Ultra Vivid Scene and Grant Lee Buffalo, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Despite their band status, Ultra Vivid Scene and Grant Lee Buffalo are both essentially defined by single personalities.
Ultra Vivid Scene is the brainchild of Kurt Ralske, a soft-sung guitarist who plays pretty pop with psychedelic trimmings.
At his more delicate and cerebral, he harks back to mid-60's classics like the Beatles' "Revolver" album, while his beefier, brawnier moments owe a bit to T. Rex.
Grant Lee Phillips is the vision behind Grant Lee Buffalo; his lengthy narratives combine breezy imagery and the occasional pretentious wordplay.
Gorgeous, spare arrangements of acoustic guitar and subtle percussion frame tales like "Jupiter and Teardrop," about "a girl who can't say no and her sweetheart on parole." Show time is Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $7.
Firehose and High Velocity
Firehose, Grand, 76 East 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 777-0600.
Without relying too much on melody, Firehose creates gut-wrenching rock that's actually quite beautiful.
The bass lines shudder through layers of guitar distortion; the drums shimmy and crunch and sometimes the bassist, Mike Watt (who, along with the drummer, George Hurley, is formerly of the legendary punk band the Minutemen), talks the lyrics with the detachment of a stranger on the telephone.
The ferocity is so pure it approaches trauma, achieving a weird and infinite sadness.
Show time is tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. (with Crackerbash).
Tickets are $10 today, $12 tomorrow.


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loblolly Parades a Pair of Entries
Just two weeks from show time, final auditions for the Kentucky Derby will be held tomorrow when 12 colts compete in the $500,000 Wood Memorial at Aqueduct and 11 run in the $500,000 Arkansas Derby at Oaklawn Park.
Loblolly Stable, which took the lead in the chase last week when Prairie Bayou won the Blue Grass Stakes, will continue its massed march toward the Derby by running formidable two-horse entries in each of the races.


Dershowitz Says Farrow Involved Him
In recent years, he has defended such high-profile clients as Claus Von Bulow, Leona Helmsley and Mike Tyson.
Yesterday, the Harvard law professor Alan M. Dershowitz was in court once again, involved in another celebrated case.
But this time, the person he was defending was himself.
Mr.
Dershowitz went to state Supreme Court in Manhattan on the 14th day of the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow custody trial to answer charges made by Mr.
Allen's lawyers.
They have accused Mr.
Dershowitz, acting on behalf of Ms.
Farrow, of asking Mr.
Allen last summer to pay her millions of dollars so she would drop allegations that Mr.
Allen had molested their daughter, Dylan.


Dekalb Genetics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; Herbert von Karajan
Hearing Wagner's stunning orchestral framework for "The Ring," a listener may yearn at times for the particular qualities of a favorite symphony orchestra not normally associated with opera.
"Das Rheingold," after all, can be viewed in sheerly musical terms as a huge vocal symphony, and the orchestral fabric grows only richer and more complex in the larger works that follow.
Decca/London is currently recording a "Ring" conducted by Christoph von Dohnanyi, and whatever the strengths and weaknesses of that project, it should be fascinating to hear the Cleveland Orchestra in a starring role.
A similar interest attaches to Herbert von Karajan's "Ring" with the Berlin Philharmonic (Deutsche Grammophon 435 211-2; 15 CD's), which was recorded in the studio in connection with staged performances of the operas at the Salzburg Easter Festival from 1967 through 1970.
The orchestral performance, though never overstated, is superb, and Karajan's conception is thoughtful and compelling; he plays a Wotan of sorts to Georg Solti's Loge in the Decca/ London recording.


First Commerce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES INC., Houston, a waste-disposal company, will raise its stake in its Spanish affiliate, Browning-Ferris Iberica S.A., to 77.7 percent from 50 percent by purchasing solid-waste companies in Barcelona, Spain, for stock valued at $26.75 million.
SNYDER OIL CORP., Fort Worth, said it had agreed to acquire a 42.8 percent stake in Command Petroleum Holdings for $18 million.


Review/Theater; Combine Characters, Toss Madly And Serve
It's not just a jungle out there in Tina Howe's apocalyptic new comedy, "One Shoe Off"; the jungle has come inside, too.
In Heidi Landesman's delicious set, a macabre marriage of Charles Addams and George Booth, a two-story Greek Revival farmhouse in upstate New York has been invaded by gnarled trees that push through splintered floorboards, snake in and out windows, and impale the roof.
When the occupants of this madhouse, Leonard (Jeffrey DeMunn) and Dinah (Mary Beth Hurt), tidy up, they don't vacuum; they rake.
Housekeeping is the least of this couple's problems, however.
Leonard, an actor, hasn't worked in 12 years.
Dinah, who keeps popping manically in and out of her bedroom closet in search of the mode juste, is, as her husband puts it, "one of life's ironies, the costume designer who can't dress herself." And guess who's coming to dinner?
A long-lost friend (Brian Kerwin), now a big-shot Hollywood director, who may or may not have had an affair with Dinah long ago, and some new neighbors, an arrogant book publisher (Daniel Gerroll) and his starlet wife (Jennifer Tilly), who are about as much fun as Nick and Honey in "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?"


CHRONICLE
It is 75 years since Fordham University Law School admitted women -- eight of them -- to the class of 1918, and on Monday, a yearlong celebration of that milestone will begin with a reception.
A portrait of FRANCES BERKO, class of '44, who is the New York State Advocate for the Disabled (she has cerebral palsy), will be unveiled in the Moot Court Room of the law school, on the Lincoln Center campus.
Among the 2,793 women who have received law degrees from Fordham over the years are Geraldine Ferraro ('60); Amy S. Vance ('78), daughter of the diplomat Cyrus R. Vance; Mary McDonald ('69) general counsel of the Merck drug company; Judge Loretta A. Preska ('73) of Federal District Court in Manhattan, and Elizabeth McCann ('66), a Broadway producer.


Cuomo Offers Plan to Curb Worker Compensation Cost
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed legislation today that is intended to cut employers' costs for workers' compensation claims by allowing the claims to be handled for the first time through managed health-care systems.
Under a package of proposals announced by Mr.
Cuomo, companies with at least 250 workers would be allowed to refer workers injured on the job to health maintenance organizations or other networks of health-care providers for diagnosis and treatment.
Now, injured workers choose their own doctors.


Art in Review
William Clift
Equitable Gallery  787 Seventh Avenue, at 52d Street  Manhattan  Through June 12
William Clift's dramatic black-and-white landscape photographs fit into a time-honored tradition of American art in which mountains, rivers and expanses of desert and sky take on an almost moral dimension.
This fine retrospective presents examples of Mr.
Clift's pictures since 1956, including not only his landscapes but also portraits, family photographs and architectural views.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday about the decline in the stock of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. referred imprecisely to the company's expected sales growth this year.
Wal-Mart expects 7 percent to 8 percent growth at stores that have been open at least a year, apart from the sales results at its new stores.


As Catholic Feminists Meet, Some Question Their Faith
Five months ago, Roman Catholic feminists formed a united front and succeeded in helping to persuade the church's bishops to set aside a pastoral letter upholding traditional limits on church roles for women.
But as Catholic feminists gather for a meeting today in Albuquerque, N.M., many are questioning the direction of their movement, and even asking whether it is on the verge of ceasing to be Catholic.


Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Johnson Controls reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jazz Signs Donaldson for Pivot
The Utah Jazz signed the veteran N.B.A. center JAMES DONALDSON yesterday to replace the injured MARK EATON.
Eaton missed the Jazz's last two games because of a back injury.
Donaldson will take his spot on the roster, providing he passes a physical examination.


CATHOLICS JOIN BID BY CONSERVATIVES FOR SCHOOL BOARDS
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, forging a tactical alliance with a group run by the Rev.
Pat Robertson, is preparing to distribute to each of its 213 parishes a guide to help voters in the coming school board elections pick candidates who are conservative on social issues.
Although some Catholic churches have quietly backed board candidates sympathetic to Roman Catholic views in scattered districts before, church officials said the archdiocese had never before undertaken such a sweeping, centralized effort to inform Catholic voters about candidates' views in the May 4 elections.
Squaring Off
The effort will put more than 100,000 voters guides prepared by the Robertson group, called the Christian Coalition, in parishes attended by more than one million Catholics in three boroughs, Manhattan, Staten Island and the Bronx.
The Diocese of Brooklyn, which includes Brooklyn and Queens, will not distribute the pamphlets because Catholic groups there will make their own recommendations on the candidates.


The Ghost Called Tibet
Like a family ghost that intermittently makes an awkward appearance, the matter of Tibet is coming up again.
In late April His Holiness the Dalai Lama, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate and spiritual leader of an ill-used country, is due to meet President Clinton.
This does not mean that the State Department has retreated from its legalistic view that Tibet is part of China.
But it does offer Mr.
Clinton a chance to express American sentiments on the human cost of that cold determination.
Tibetans are among the world's least belligerent peoples.
Their exiled leader uses the weapons of peace -- persuasion and nonviolence -- to protest China's repeated betrayal of promises to respect Tibet's distinct cultural and religious identity.
Since China annexed Tibet in 1949, as many as 1.2 million Tibetans, a fifth of the population, have died.
An estimated 120,000 have fled.
Tibet still suffers from the "merciless repression" promised by Beijing's security chief during a visit in 1988.
And the massive transfer of Chinese into Tibet threatens to turn Tibetans into strangers in their own land.


Franklin Electric Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Pinnacle Banc Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Schwab Shares Fall Despite Report of 19.2% Jump in Profit
Charles Schwab &amp; Company reported yesterday that its first-quarter earnings jumped 19.2 percent, but that was not enough to prevent a sharp decline in its stock price after a Wall Street analyst reduced his ratings on Schwab and other securities firms, saying their stock prices were too high.
Schwab shares, which had more than doubled in price since early October, fell yesterday by $3.125, or about 8 percent, to close at $35.125.


Abroad at Home; 'Where Reason Is Free'
We celebrate Thomas Jefferson's 250th birthday this week with the respect due a monument of our history: the author of the Declaration of Independence, a President who with his friends Madison and Monroe made a 24-year Virginia dynasty in the White House.
But in his day Jefferson was a highly controversial figure, widely feared and reviled.
He was in fact one of the first objects of the paranoia that has gripped American politics from time to time, most recently in the form of hysteria about Communism.


Philip Ryan, Executive And Lawyer, 60, Dies
Philip J. Ryan, a lawyer, executive and former aide to Senator Robert F. Kennedy, died yesterday at a hospital in his hometown of Greenwich, Conn., at the age of 60.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Nynex Reports Profit Decline
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that first-quarter profit fell 1.5 percent from earnings in the comparable period a year ago, which were inflated by interest income from a federal tax settlement.
Net income for the quarter ended March 31 fell to $331.1 million, or $1.60 per share, from $336.2 million, or $1.65 per share, in the first-quarter last year.
Operating revenue rose to $3.3 billion, from $3.24 billion.


Cooker Restaurant Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Federal Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Balkan Peace Depends on Talking to Serbs Also
To the Editor:
Unlike A. M. Rosenthal in "America's Allies in Serbia" (column, April 6), I cannot get on the phone with President Clinton to express my ideas about new options in the former Yugoslavia.
I am one of about two million Serbs who live in the United States, whose opinion is not sought and whose access to the news media and policy makers has been severely restricted in the last two years.
If I could, I would tell Mr.
Clinton what Mr.
Rosenthal did: Mr.
President, please get your Administration and the Western allies to pay a lot more attention to Serbian democrats.


Bosnia Yielding Town to Serbs, U.N. Aides Say
United Nations officials said tonight that Bosnian defenders were negotiating a surrender to Serbian forces of the besieged Muslim enclave at Srebrenica that would guarantee the evacuation of 60,000 civilians and the beleaguered garrison.
The officials said Srebrenica could be in Serbian hands as early as noon Friday, and at any rate within two or three days, because Bosnian efforts to defend the city appeared to have virtually collapsed.


Restaurants
Sprawling, theatrical and loud, Sfuzzi is to an Italian trattoria what the Hard Rock Cafe is to a hamburger joint.
This branch of a Dallas-based chain seems decidedly formulaic and calculated.
So much so that one suspects that a bevy of Texas executives has already determined how much food and wine you will order, the quantity of bread you will consume, approximate seating time, even napkin use.
Nonetheless, in my experience at the four-and-a-half-year-old Sfuzzi the food has been better than the atmosphere would lead you to believe.
There is little hint of that upon entering, though, when a pair of distracted hosts may or may not pay attention to you.
While waiting you can take in the pre-chipped wall moldings, weathered columns, artsy lighting and animated scene.
To the right, above a long bar, are four big televisions tuned to the same station.


Mercantile Bankshares Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dr. Denis Burkitt Is Dead at 82; Thesis Changed Diets of Millions
Dr.
Denis P. Burkitt, a missionary surgeon in Africa who turned to research in his late 40's and came up with important findings on cancer and nutrition, died on March 23 in England.
He was 82.
His death from a stroke was reported in the current issue of The British Medical Journal.


Fritz Steinhardt; Professor, 71
Prof.
Fritz Steinhardt, who taught mathematics at City College for 39 years, died on Wednesday at his home on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
He was 71.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TV Weekend; World Ends Not With a Bang, but a Heat Wave
Just in time for International Earth Week, CBS is broadcasting "The Fire Next Time" on Sunday and Tuesday, both nights at 9.
The four-hour movie follows the odyssey of a family trying to escape the accelerating horrors of global warming.
The time is given as "sometime soon," about 25 years from now.
Drew Morgan (Craig T. Nelson), a shrimper on the Gulf Coast of Louisiana, finds his business disappearing because of shifting weather conditions linked to decades of environmental neglect.
Long heat spells have destroyed the shrimp in local waters.
Skin cancers are commonplace.
Air-conditioning is rationed.
Drew still thinks a solution can be found.
His estranged wife, Suzanne (Bonnie Bedelia), a science teacher, disagrees.


Insurance Hurdles to Health-Care Reform
Workers' compensation and automobile insurance, two largely private insurance systems that pay more than $40 billion in health- care bills each year, are presenting the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform with a devilish dilemma.
For people injured on the job or in car accidents, it is workers' compensation or auto insurance that pays their medical bills, not their standard health policies.


Of Learning Amid Leisure: Molto Bello
L'ALBERGO di Monte Mohonk e bello e romantico -- molto bello, molto romantico.
I probably could not have said that before I recently spent a Tower of Babble weekend learning Italian at Mohonk Mountain House, a remarkable hotel magnificently situated within a 7,000-acre wilderness in the Shawangunk Mountains, just 90 miles from New York City.
But the resort, which has been a moderately well-kept secret since it was founded in 1869, does encourage flights of rhapsody, in whatever language.


Former State Trooper Explains Ways He Fabricated Evidence
Shedding new light on the first evidence-tampering scandal in New York State Police history, a former state police investigator today admitted fabricating evidence in 21 criminal cases.
The investigator, Robert M. Lishansky, also said that in one case, a District Attorney was present when a fellow investigator tampered with evidence.


Donors Also See Gain in Aid Package
While there were arguments here today over how much of the $28 billion in aid pledged by the wealthy industrial nations will reach Russia quickly, there were fewer doubts about another group likely to benefit: foreign businesses eager to finance risky operations in Russia.
No sooner had the delegates to the conference on Russian aid handed out fact sheets explaining their complex new program, than they moved on to the issue of expanding trade and developing jobs -- in their own countries.


Topics of The Times; Zapping Delinquents on TV
Tax collectors for Fairfax County, Va., across the Potomac River from Washington, D.C., don't have computer resources to match the mighty Internal Revenue Service in the pursuit of delinquents.
But they have television -- and a clever producer.
This week the county launched a 10-minute cable TV show called "Tax Evaders!" with the names and addresses of more than 100 county tax delinquents writ large on the screen.
Just to be sure no one missed the point, the names were paired with pictures of county deputies seizing automobiles and auctioning off houses.
And there was a "delinquent taxpayer" with a big black dot obscuring her face.


Buttafuoco Enters Plea Of Not Guilty
Speaking in a clear firm voice, Joseph Buttafuoco pleaded "not guilty" today to statutory rape and sodomy involving Amy Fisher, who said she had an affair with Mr.
Buttafuoco when she was a 16-year-old high school senior.
Mr.
Buttafuoco denied all charges in a 19-count indictment that accused him of 6 counts of statutory rape, 12 counts of sodomy and 1 count of endangering the welfare of a child.


For Mandela, a Perilous Road Ahead
The African National Congress, Nelson Mandela told his followers on Wednesday, is a government in waiting.
The lesson of the last few days is that if the waiting is painfully hard, the governing promises to be even harder.
The killing of the popular black leader Chris Hani and the angry eruptions that followed will probably not significantly delay the elections that Mr.
Mandela hopes will install a democratic government by next year.
Perhaps the crisis will even hasten the demise of the white monopoly.


Review/Film; Mrs. Rochester No. 1, Long Before 'Jane Eyre'
John Duigan's "Wide Sargasso Sea," adapted from the Jean Rhys novel, is something you don't often see in movies these days: a seriously exotic Gothic romance that is as lean and pared down as, say, the 1944 film adaptation of Charlotte Bronte's "Jane Eyre" is big and thunderously emotional.
The comparison is not accidental.
The Rhys novel, published in 1966, is a remarkable literary conceit, what's called a prequel today, being the story of the mad first Mrs.
Rochester, the mysterious Creole heiress whose existence almost wrecks the life of sweet, steadfast Jane Eyre.
Taking the scant information supplied by Bronte, Rhys imagined a tale of love and loss that stands triumphantly on its own, and whose style is very much outside its mid-19th-century period, without doing a disservice to its Bronte origins.


After National Search, Yale Picks Its Graduate Dean to Be President
After a nationwide search for a president to lead it into the 21st century, Yale University turned to its own campus today and selected Richard C. Levin, a 46-year-old economist who has spent nearly half his life at the university, most recently as dean of its Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.
Mr.
Levin, who will become Yale's 22d president on July 1, faces high expectations.
Faculty, students and others will be looking to him to rescue the university from the economic troubles and low morale that plagued his predecessor, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., who resigned last May.
Traits Other Than Experience
Though Mr.
Levin has less administrative experience than other candidates who were said to be under consideration, trustees and other university leaders say he brings important compensating traits to the job: leadership, an insider's knowledge of the institution and an ability to bring factions together on the 11,000-student campus.


Market Place; Southland's stock is rising on rumors of a buyout from Japan.
THE SOUTHLAND CORPORATION, the owner and franchiser of 7-Eleven convenience stores, saw its sales shrink and its losses rise last year.
But its stock price is suddenly spurting higher.
It has risen 51 percent this month, including an increase of 34 percent so far this week, and closed yesterday at $5.34 a share, up 34 cents.
The rise appears to be on speculation that the Japanese company that controls Southland will decide to acquire the rest of the shares.
Neither it nor Southland is commenting, but there is reason to doubt that Southland would be worth the price to which the shares have been bid.


'Cybertronics' Finale
Works by the electronic-music composers Tod Machover and Trimpin form the final concerts of the "Cybertronics" Series, tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea.
The program includes the premiere of Mr.
Machover's "Valis Song," a work for electronics and multi-screen video, and the New York premiere of "Begin Again Again . . ." for cello and computer.
Also on the program are Trimpin's "Contraption APP 71512" for piano, and several recently discovered piano studies by Conlon Nancarrow.
Tomorrow at 6 P.M., Mr.
Machover and Trimpin will discuss the processes and technologies behind their works.
The discussion is free with concert admission of $12.
Information: (212) 255-5793.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A.T.&amp;T. And British Rival Clash
In a battle between two titans in the global telecommunications industry, the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company moved today to block Britain's biggest telephone company from gaining broader access to the United States market until A.T.&amp; T. is allowed to compete in Britain.
Both A.T.&amp; T. and British Telecommunications P.L.C. want to provide everything from ordinary phone service to high-speed data transmission and video services to multinational corporations.
These private global corporate networks represent one of the hottest segments of the telecommunications industry, and all the world's telephone giants are vying for the business.


No Headline
"The world will be a considerably more dangerous place if Mr. Yeltsin does not prevail." -- WARREN CHRISTOPHER, Secretary of State.  [ A1:6. ]


Dinkins Reports Higher Income
While New York City's economy may still be in the doldrums, Mayor David N. Dinkins did much better financially in 1992 than in the year before, according to income-tax returns he released yesterday.
His taxable income rose 12.5 percent last year, largely because of speaking honorariums and expiration of a 5 percent cut in his salary for part of the year, the returns showed.


Dr. Harrison Echols, 59, Biologist Who Led Study of Viral Infections
Dr.
Harrison Echols, a biologist whose findings advanced the understanding of viral infections and normal cell functions, died on Sunday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 59.
The cause of death was lung cancer, the University of California said.


Corrections
An article on April 3 about appointments to the Department of Justice misstated the age of Webster L. Hubbell, who was named Associate Attorney General.
He is 45.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.03
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.81
2.80
3.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.93
3.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.49
5.50
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.72
6.75
7.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.65
7.70
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.91
5.93
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the announcement of the Pulitzer Prizes misstated the age of John F. Burns of The New York Times, who won an award for international reporting.
He is 48.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chief of Party Steps Down In New York
John A. Marino, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's hand-picked chairman of the State Democratic Committee, announced today that he was resigning after four years to take a job with a Manhattan investment firm.
Mr.
Marino, who is 44, said in a letter to party leaders that the decision was a purely personal one that was made to provide more financial security for his family.
He and his wife, Donna, have a house in Westchester County and a 1-year-old daughter, Sara Jessica.


Art in Review
Nancy Rubins  Paul Kasmin Gallery 74 Grand Street SoHo Through April 24
The California sculptor Nancy Rubins recycles on a grand scale, turning the monumental waste of American consumerism into equally monumental works of art.
In previous efforts, almost all of them shown on the West Coast, she has piled high discarded water heaters, airplane parts and trailers, forming chaotic assemblages that evoke the junkyard as easily as they do Baroque art.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Art in Review
Roy DeForest  Frumkin/Adams Gallery 50 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Roy DeForest's work is becoming a little too crazy for its own good.
The problem isn't so much the images in his paintings and drawings; in fact, they continue a welcome loosening of the intensely patterned, faux-naive figurative style that this California artist has cultivated for several decades.
"Forest Hermit," for example, is a freewheeling riot of diverse color and of brush strokes that go far beyond the little peaked dots of paint that were once Mr.
DeForest's primary mode of application.
In the work, paint is used every which way, including straight, as the artist fills in dense, overlapping flora and such diverse fauna as an Indian chieftain, a hovering butterfly, himself and one of his signatory hounds.


For the Nets, L-L-L-L-L-L-L Spells It Out
For all of his wisdom and basketball knowledge, not even Chuck Daly can predict when the Nets will win another game.
There are four remaining in the regular season and as the losses pile up, nightmare upon nightmare, heartbreak after heartbreak, it seems the harder New Jersey tries the bigger the disappointment.
One big tease.
Like Bill Murray's character in "Groundhog Day" who finds himself stuck in time, reliving each miserable day, unable to shake out of it, the Nets are stuck in their own time warp, now losers of seven straight after the Boston Celtics beat them, 106-105, on a 12-foot shot by Sherman Douglas with just three-tenths of a second left.
On Saturday the Nets lost to Cleveland after Danny Ferry sank a 19-footer with no time on the clock.


Rollins Environmental Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; Wilhelm Furtwangler
Wilhelm Furtwangler's two extant recordings of "The Ring" emanate, curiously enough, from that most un-Wagnerian of countries, Italy.
The EMI release (CDZM 67123; 13 CD's) derives from act-by-act concert recordings by Italian radio, intended for intermittent broadcast.
They were made in 1953, a year before the conductor's death.
The second recording (Arkadia CDWFE 351; 12 CD's) was taken directly from the stage of La Scala in Milan, at performances early in 1950.
Both items affirm that Furtwangler's extraordinary incandescence in the German repertory was not necessarily a home-grown affair and could be transferred to orchestras foreign in more ways than one.
Faced with the murky qualities of these recordings, however, listeners will need assistance in getting the point.
A touch of faith helps some, a lot of prior knowledge even more.
The orchestral sound in both cases is undernourished, often downright blunted.
Yet "Ring" lovers willing to put their imaginations and experience to work will fill in various blanks and be well rewarded.


Altera Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Discus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


CCB Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pratt Hotel Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; Pierre Boulez
If Pierre Boulez had got his first choice as director of the "Ring" cycle he conducted at Bayreuth, the result might have been wintry, Swedish-style Wagner with brooding portraits of marital and familial conflict.
But Ingmar Bergman was not interested, so Patrice Chereau got the job, with well-known consequences.
For all the uproar this production caused when it was first unveiled in 1976 -- the shock at seeing the Rhinemaidens dressed as 19th-century cancan dancers and frolicking under a 20th-century hydroelectric dam, or Wotan pacing around his Edwardian living room looking like a banker in a frock coat -- the video releases of live performances at Bayreuth (Philips 070 501/4; 11 laser disks or seven VHS cassettes) are bracing and involving.


Fifth Third Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"KRAPP'S LAST TAPE," Classic Stage Company, 136 East 13th Street, East Village.
Beckett's play with John Seitz in his Obie-winning role.
Performances: tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 677-4210.
"WINGS," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Jeffrey Lunden and Arthur Perlman's musical adaptation of Arthur Kopit's drama about an aviator who fights to reclaim her life after a stroke.
Directed by Michael Maggio.
Performances: tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
"AVEN'U BOYS," John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A drama by Frank Pugliese about three young men from Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
Directed by Frederick Zollo.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"THOMAS JEFFERSON: TRANQUIL PURSUITS AND STORMY POLITICS," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
A selection of his manuscripts, documents and letters.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0610.
Closing Next Weekend
"THE KING OF CARPETS," Jewish Repertory at Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
A comedy by Joel Hammer about a young man who would rather paint than go into the family carpet business.
Directed by Edward Cohen.
Through April 25.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 P.M. and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M. and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25; $28 on Saturday and Sunday.
Information: (212) 831-2000.


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; 2 Cycles
Two full cycles of Richard Wagner's "Ring des Nibelungen" remain this season at the Metropolitan Opera.
A previous cycle will be completed at noon tomorrow with a performance of "Gotterdammerung." Tickets and information: (212) 362-6000.
Full-view tickets are still available for several performances.
Standing room and partial-view tickets are available at the box office on Saturdays for performances from that day until the following Friday.
Here is the schedule:


A Peek Inside the Health-Care Debate
In opening the door to an indirect form of national sales tax, the White House has provided an unusual public peek into the private conflict about how to finance a costly new Government-supported health-care program.
A health-care task force headed by Hillary Rodham Clinton has reached no conclusions about the cost of the various elements of the program or how to pay for them, although officials say there are at least 20 financing alternatives under consideration.


Tax-Protest Leader to Oppose Florio
John Budzash, the mail carrier who organized the huge statewide tax protest that seemed to put the political future of Gov.
Jim Florio in serious jeopardy, filed today as a candidate to oppose the Governor in the June 8 primary.
Mr.
Budzash, who resigned from the Postal Service earlier this week to run, turned his nominating petitions over to the Secretary of State's Office five minutes after the official filing deadline.
But in a hurried telephone call, Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo directed the office to accept the petitions.


Store Trying to Balance Country and Countrified
SPRING has brought a truce between the new owners of the tiny, Civil War-era general store and the old potbellied coal stove that has heated it for decades.
Sally and Angelo Vilardi no longer fret each day about starting and stoking the coal fire and mastering the knack of banking it so it glows and warms the store all night and into the next morning.
Now, the Vilardis have turned their full attention to fashioning a new role for the mountaintop relic that they bought in January, a business that once again must change to survive.


Hearing-Aid Phone Rules Are Delayed
Bowing to a wave of protest from businesses and trade associations, the Federal Communications Commission yesterday suspended enforcement of regulations that would have required establishments with 20 or more employees to make all telephones hearing-aid compatible by May 1.
The F.C.C. granted a petition by an organization of telecommunications managers to delay "until further notice" rules that would have enforced a section of the Hearing Aid Compatibility Act of 1988 covering telephones in workplaces, hotels, motels, nursing homes, hospitals and other health-care sites. 'Unduly Costly'
A May 1, 1994, compliance date for establishments with 20 or fewer employees was also suspended.
The measure was originally enacted to ban the manufacture and importation of telephones not equipped to work with hearing aids.
That section, in effect since 1989, is not affected by the decision.


Multimedia Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Old Kent Financial Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Argentina Races to Sell Oil Stake
In what could be the largest privatization yet of a state-owned company in Latin America, the Argentine Government is proposing to sell in July a 50 percent stake in its national oil company, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales, or Y.P.F.
The Government is rushing to finish the deal by the end of July.
But while the plan itself reflects Argentina's embrace of capitalism, the timing of the sale is part of a political agenda.


Kukoc Five Falls In Europe Final
France won its first European basketball championship with underdog Limoges's 59-55 victory over Benetton Treviso Thursday night.
The tournament's most valuable player, Toni Kukoc, in what might have been his last such European game because he is close to signing a contract with the National Basketball Association's Chicago Bulls, simply waited too long to take over for Treviso.


Electronics Plan Aims to Balance Government Access With Privacy
The Clinton Administration plans a new system of encoding electronic communications that is intended to preserve the Government's ability to eavesdrop for law enforcement and national security reasons while increasing privacy for businesses and individuals.
New technology will be installed in some Government communications networks within weeks or months and could be available for business and even household use before the end of the year.
It will use a new system of encoding voice and computer transmissions, including phone calls and electronic mail, to prevent unauthorized listening.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The leading industrialized nations committed to $28 billion in aid for Russia, much of it contingent on austerity steps by Moscow.
The package includes $2 billion in United States credits or loan guarantees to pay for imports of American goods.  [ Page A1. ]
Foreign businesses eager to finance risky operations in Russia will be big beneficiaries of newly pledged Western aid.  [ A10. ]


Flexsteel Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Green Reconsiders Leave And Resigns Consumer Post
Two days after he said he would take a leave of absence from his post as Consumer Affairs Commissioner to run for New York City Council President, Mark Green yesterday changed his mind and resigned from his post.
Mr. Green refused repeated requests to comment on his decision.


Nynex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


J. P. Morgan Says Profit Up 64% in First Quarter
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company said yesterday that good results in most of its major businesses produced a first-quarter profit of $432 million before accounting changes, up about 64 percent from $264 million a year earlier.
Another New York institution, the Bank of New York, announced a record first-quarter profit Wednesday.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Grand Valley Gas (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Explaining An Ad Switch
Herman's World of Sporting Goods and Bozell Inc. have shed some light on the surprising decision earlier this week by the sporting goods chain to award its estimated $25 million to $30 million account to Bozell.
Bozell's selection was unexpected because the agency was a last-minute entrant in the lengthy review, which had been previously narrowed to Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York and Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Michael Freitag, a spokesman for Herman's in Carteret, N.J., said that when an investor group acquired Herman's during the review, one of the investors -- Alfred F. Fasola, who became the new Herman's chief executive -- suggested that Bozell be included.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Art in Review
Tina Barney
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through May 1
In her latest color photographs, Tina Barney continues to explore the intersection of portraiture and domestic scenes.
Using family members and friends, many of whom have appeared in earlier pictures, Ms.
Barney extends her record of the ceremonies of upper-class life, from a christening in a well-furnished home to the tangle of traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange.


On Stage, and Off
'Angels,' Blessed and Not
Quite a week for "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches." At Sunday's dress rehearsal, Ellen McLaughlin, the actress playing the angel whose crashing descent through a ceiling ends the show, was so uncomfortable in her harness that she couldn't fly, and what fell to earth instead was an inanimate specter that resembled a giant tablecloth.
As a result, the opening preview, scheduled for Monday night, was postponed a day.
On Tuesday afternoon, the play, written by Tony Kushner, won the Pulitzer Prize for drama, and the preview that night was ebullient amid somewhat chaotic circumstances.
At the end of the opening act, a 32-year-old AIDS patient attending the show collapsed in the balcony, apparently of a heart attack, though it turned out not to be one.
He was sequestered in the ladies' room, where he revived, and paramedics took him to the New York University Medical Center. (His condition could not be determined yesterday because no one connected with the show could identify him.)


Pressmen at Post Refuse To Print Today's Issue
In what union leaders at The New York Post described as a showdown over work rules, the paper's pressmen abandoned the presses late last night, thwarting attempts to print a Friday issue.
Labor and management almost immediately traded charges over who was responsible for the disruption of a press run of over 400,000 copies.


NEW MOVES IN U.N. TO RESTRAIN SERBS
The Security Council is expected to hold an emergency session on Friday to consider imposing tough new sanctions on Yugoslavia immediately if the besieged Bosnian town of Srebrenica falls to Serbian forces.
"I would definitely convene the Council, and I personally think we should move ahead immediately with the new sanctions," Jamsheed K. A. Marker of Pakistan, this month's Council president, said after reports that the Bosnian defenders of Srebrenica are negotiating the town's surrender.


Theater Preserved
To the Editor:
In "The Stage Art of Helen Hayes Could Have Been Preserved" (letter, April 2), Lynne Lehrman Weiner laments that performances of Helen Hayes and other outstanding actors were not on film.
Since 1970, with the cooperation of producers and the theater guilds and unions, the theater on film and tape archive, part of the Billy Rose Theater Collection of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, has been videotaping and preserving live theater.


Mets Left Muttering 4-Letter Word: Nied
David Nied, sort of the Shaquille O'Neal of major league baseball, silenced the New York Mets here.
The Colorado Rockies called "heads" in last year's expansion draft coin flip, guessed right and decided -- in a matter of milliseconds -- to select the lanky Nied with their inaugural pick.
And today, that choice made the utmost sense.
If Nied threw a pitch out of the strike zone this afternoon, it was news.
Of his 111 pitches, 81 were strikes, and he was aided by a Rockies suicide squeeze, a Rockies half-swing single and an intruding fan in right field.


Boy Hurt in School Stabbing
A New Bedford teen-ager was stabbed by a student outside a school today, four days after a high school student was stabbed to death in class six miles away, in Dartmouth.
New Bedford police said Eric Wordell, 15, was stabbed in the back and shoulder outside Normandin Junior High School by a 14-year-old Normandin student.
Mr.
Wordell, who attends a school across town, was treated at a hospital and released.
The Normandin student, whose name is being withheld because of his age, was arrested shortly after the incident.


Review/Film; He's His Sister's Keeper, and What a Job That Is
"Benny and Joon" is a dangerously fanciful story of cute eccentrics, characters whose quirks are the very essence of their appeal.
Some of us experience a form of red alert at the very notion of adorable oddballs on screen, but "Benny and Joon" turns out to be remarkably benign in that regard.
Cheerfully conceived and presented with admirable restraint, it tells of a kindly, long-suffering mechanic named Benny (Aidan Quinn) who struggles to take care of his erratic sister, Joon (Mary Stuart Masterson).
Their home life is further complicated midway through the film by the arrival of Sam (Johnny Depp), whose fine-tuned Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin routines keep him as far from contemporary reality as Joon happens to be.


Elmwood Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; Clemens Krauss
The idea of a "best" as applied to so sprawling and diverse an assortment of music as Wagner's "Ring" may seem illusory, so I will proceed to proclaim the 1953 Bayreuth Festival "Ring" conducted by Clemens Krauss (Foyer 2011; 15 CD's) the best on records.
Although it is now 40 years old, and it appeared publicly long after Georg Solti's pioneering studio-recorded "Ring" on Decca/London, this set is actually a better documentation of the extraordinary post-World War II Bayreuth ensemble.
True, Mr.
Solti had Birgit Nilsson as Brunnhilde.
But Krauss had Hans Hotter in his prime as Wotan, Wolfgang Windgassen in his first Bayreuth Siegfried in the freshest voice of his career and Astrid Varnay as a womanly, impassioned Brunnhilde.


Why New York's Credit Ratings May Soon Show Improvement; Praise Rockefeller
To the Editor:
"Stop New York's Shady Borrowing" (editorial, April 2) attacks the state's use of agencies to circumvent the limitations placed on it by the ballot box.
All true, and fair game, but you fail to mention that those restrictions and the law that enacted them were harmful to the economic development of the state and its citizens.
Yes, government is bloated, and some agencies may duplicate goals, but the agency system provides funds and management where the private sector leaves off.
The private sector would not finance the hospitals and nursing homes, bridges and roads needed for the people of the state.


Enron Oil &amp; Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jennifer Convertibles Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Woody Allen Hears Mia Farrow's Lawyer Deny Payoff Demand


Russian Lightweight Out of Hospital
Sergei Artemiev, the 24-year-old Russian-born lightweight boxer who underwent brain surgery after a technical knockout in a bout in Atlantic City on March 21, was released yesterday from the Atlantic City Medical Center.
A limousine took him to the home of his trainer, Tommy Gallagher, in Howard Beach, Queens, where he will have his own room.
Gallagher; Gallagher's wife, Maureen, and Artemiev's 23-year-old wife, Belina, are all involved in the home therapy prescribed by Artemiev's doctors.


Central Fidelity Banks (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection; Georg Solti
The Decca/London "Ring" (414 100-2; 15 CD's), conducted by Georg Solti and produced by John Culshaw, was the first complete version of the cycle recorded in a studio; for many, it has remained pre-eminent.
What distinguishes this "Ring," made between 1958 and 1965, from some recent competitors is the Vienna Philharmonic's sonic splendor, combined with masterly singing in nearly all the major roles.
Some fanatical Wagnerians have treated this landmark set with condescension.
They argue that Culshaw's explosive sound effects, stereophonic spatialization and occasional electronic alteration of voices reduce "The Ring" to a sound-surround spectacular.
Mr.
Solti's conducting is also criticized for its impatience, its reliance on surface events.


Dallas Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


KLA Instruments Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Critic's Choice/Film; Revival of a Revival House
Regulars at the old Regency, once a pre-eminent revival house on the Upper West Side, will be happy to hear that the Gramercy Theater at 127 East 23d Street, Manhattan, begins its new life as a revival house tomorrow.
It will be programmed by Frank Rowley, who was once the Regency's dedicated programmer and then moved to the Biograph, which closed in 1991.
The Gramercy will now be run by Mr.
Rowley as a nonprofit theater, with help from the Samuel Goldwyn Company and EVAC Inc., a New York nonprofit community improvement organization.
The theater will charge $6.50 for each double feature.
The Gramercy's first series, beginning tomorrow, will be "Hollywood Musicals Starring New York," with an opening bill of "On the Town" and "42d Street." Later, the theater will show other New York-minded musicals, from "Easter Parade" to "West Side Story." Next month brings a tribute to Audrey Hepburn.
And starting June 13 there will be a New Prints for a New Theater series offering scratch-free versions of old favorites, from "Kiss Me Deadly" to "Annie Hall." Information: (212) 475-1660.


Scripps (E.W.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hawkeye Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Art; Hated the Nazis, Loved the Soviets, Created Images to Mock and Admire
The John Heartfield exhibition opening today at the Museum of Modern Art, the first substantial show in an American museum to be devoted to Heartfield, is overdue in paying tribute to one of the more inventive, and underappreciated, artists of the century.
Heartfield's invention -- or at least what he helped to create in 1915 in collaboration with his fellow German George Grosz and then so cleverly developed on his own -- was the medium of photomontage.
His montages were conceived for the covers of books, posters and the leftist journals and newspapers he sometimes helped to publish.
Heartfield was a political satirist (he disdained what he considered to be the bourgeois designation "artist" and liked to be known as "monteur," or mechanic) in the tradition of Goya, Hogarth and Daumier, and at his best their equal.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Heritage Federal Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


When State Officials Seize Schools; Education Idea Has Taken Root in New Jersey Since 1986
Dr.
Saul Cooperman says he was standing in his backyard when the idea came to him.
"I remember the exact moment," said the former New Jersey Education Commissioner.
"I had been thinking for almost two years: 'How do you improve schools that just don't seem to be able to get it right?' "
"Then it hit me," he said.
"My God, they declare bankruptcy and go into receivership in the private sector. If what I'm supposed to do as commissioner is stand up for the children, then I've got to create a series of steps to do the same for schools."


Bank South Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Labor Dispute Prevents The New York Post From Publishing


Animals and Fungi: Evolutionary Tie?
They may seem awfully vegetative in their habits, and the university researchers who study them may often be counted as members of the botany department, but fungi are turning out to be far more closely related to animals than to plants, scientists say.
In a new analysis of genetic relationships among organisms with complex cells, including sponges, protozoa, algae, plants and animals, researchers have concluded that animals and fungi share a common evolutionary history and that their limb of the genealogical tree branched away from plants perhaps 1.1 billion years ago.
Fungi and animals then went their own way some undetermined time after that.


Review/Music; Night of the Solo Bassoon
If oboists and clarinetists can play solo recitals, why not bassoonists?
Jean-Francois Duquesnoy, a French bassoonist in his early 20's, demonstrated that his instrument is capable of warmth and virtuosity in a short but telling program on Tuesday evening at Weill Recital Hall.
Mr.
Duquesnoy, who has won competitions in Germany and Japan, and is the co-principal bassoonist at the Paris Opera Orchestra, began with a careful but generally elegant reading of a Telemann Sonata in G minor.
He did little in the way of ornamentation, beyond the occasional trill, but he played the fast movements with a bright, flexible timbre and at a lively clip.
A Glinka Allegro and an Andante and Rondo Hongrois by Weber let Mr.
Duquesnoy demonstrate a supple, nicely supported tone and an ear for shaping a lyrical line.


Yes, Mr. McEnroe. No, Mr. McEnroe.
JOHN McENROE says he is thinking about coaching ANDRE AGASSI now that he has all but announced his retirement from professional tennis.
"I think that would be an interesting possibility," McEnroe said before playing Agassi in an exhibition match in San Diego yesterday.


Kimball International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chip Maker Has Big Rise In Earnings
Showing that it had recouped some lost glory in computer chips, Texas Instruments Inc. reported today that net income more than doubled in the first quarter, to the highest level in nearly four years.
Profits were $81 million, or 85 cents a share, compared with $40 million, or 35 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
Revenues rose 11.8 percent, to $1.9 billion, from $1.7 billion.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A 4-0 Yankee Lead Is Going . . . Going . . . Gone
When Brian McRae forced the Yankees to leave the bases loaded with a twisting, falling, groping, lunging catch in deep center field to end the eighth inning, the loud standing ovation he received at Yankee Stadium seemed little more than a spectacular footnote to another successful game for Jimmy Key.
"I don't know how I got it," McRae said, "because I didn't see it."


Balkan Peace Depends on Talking to Serbs Also; Hate Feeding on Hate
Yo the Editor:
"Bosnia Reconsidered," your April 8 front-page news analysis, criticizes the words of Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher: "The hatred between all three groups -- the Bosnians and the Serbs and the Croatians -- is almost unbelievable. It's almost terrifying, and it's centuries old."
But Mr.
Christopher is right.
Ivo Andric, who won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1961 and is widely considered Bosnia's and Yugoslavia's greatest 20th-century writer, devoted most of his writings to the conflicts of Muslims, Serbs and Croats.
In "A Letter from 1920," reprinted in "The Damned Yard and Other Stories" (London and Boston, 1992), Ivo Andric wrote about hatred in Bosnia:


Finding the Specialists Upstairs in SoHo
SOHO has many different art scenes.
The area is primarily known for its focus on contemporary art and for flashy galleries like Leo Castelli, Mary Boone and Larry Gagosian.
But tucked away on the upper floors of renovated factory buildings and above the glitzy storefronts are dozens of galleries not widely known to the public, ones that even contemporary-art lovers may not be familiar with.
At these galleries, specialization has many guises.
Some have only prints; others scour the country for the work of little-known artists from decades ago.
Some have eyes only for photography.
Others are determined to exhibit works that blend art with some form of design.


Yeltsin Attacking Old Foes And Some New Ones, Too
Campaigning at full tilt for the national referendum now 10 days away, President Boris N. Yeltsin lashed out today at his Vice President, the legislature and the chairmen of the Central Bank and the Constitutional Court.
Mr.
Yeltsin's stage today was a meeting at the Bolshoi Theater with supporters from the creative intelligentsia.
On two preceding days, the President visited with miners in Siberia and spoke to reporters in the Kremlin, aggressively attacking his detractors and asking for support in the April 25 referendum.


At the Bar; A lawyer says his letter to a rival was meant to be funny, but the rival says she isn't laughing.
David Cwik tried to get a laugh out of his opposing counsel.
Instead, he said something stupid and, as he puts it, he "saw a mushroom cloud erupt."
In 1989 Mr.
Cwik (pronounced swik) and Marilee Clausing, both Chicago lawyers, were facing each other in a garden-variety personal injury case.
At one point Ms.
Clausing, representing the defendant hospital, had moved to dismiss the case, contending that Mr.
Cwik, the plaintiff's counsel, had taken too long to produce his expert witness.


Man in the News; Sharp Mind Minus Rough Edges: Richard Charles Levin
Back in the late 1970's, when Richard Levin was a young assistant economics professor at Yale University, A. Bartlett Giamatti, then Yale's president, detected something singular about him.
One day he confided to the headmaster of the school Mr.
Levin's children attended, "Some day, he's going to be president of Yale."
When word got back to Mr.
Levin, he was perplexed.
"He saw something in me that I did not yet see in myself," Mr.
Levin said in an interview yesterday, just before Yale University announced that he had been named president.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seagram Beverage Group Hires Top Executive From RJR
With a new leadership just getting started and a complicated stock offering in the works, RJR Nabisco lost one of its prized executives yesterday.
Ellen R. Marram left as president of the Nabisco Biscuit Company, the cookie and cracker division of the Nabisco Foods Group, to become president of the Seagram Beverage Group.
Ms.
Marram's departure was not expected to disrupt any strategies of RJR Nabisco's co-chairmen and chief executives, Karl M. von der Hayden and Lawrence R. Ricciardi, or the $1.5 billion public stock offering for Nabisco's food divisions.
But she was regarded as a creative force in the largest of the food divisions, which last year generated about $2.7 billion of Nabisco's $6.7 billion in worldwide food revenues.
Ms.
Marram had served in the position since 1988.


Swift, Needed Aid for Russia
Instant dollars.
That's what Russia desperately needs to overcome the inflationary pressures that threaten to drive it to financial ruin.
And cash is what the seven major industrialized powers promised Russia yesterday in Tokyo at the conclusion of talks among finance and foreign ministers.
The U.S. and six allies pledged more than $20 billion in new aid from international financial organizations and renewed promises for billions more in debt and other relief.
The package totaled a larger-than-expected $43 billion.
In addition, individual countries chipped in sizable bilateral pledges.


Two Rights Groups Protest Offer of an Amnesty in Haiti
On the eve of an expected settlement of the 18-month political stalemate in Haiti, a dispute has broken out over a proposed amnesty for military leaders that international human rights groups have condemned as illegal.
In a three-page letter to Dante Caputo, the special United Nations mediator for Haiti, two prominent organizations said Wednesday that an amnesty would violate international law and risk fouling the prospects for re-establishing democracy.


Pentagon Speeds Plan to Lift Gay Ban
After two months of delay and indecision, the Pentagon is hurrying to prepare an executive order to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military and to agree on the practical steps to carry it out.
The Defense Department has established a 50-member military working group in an office six blocks from the White House, and ordered the panel to deliver a list of policy options to Defense Secretary Les Aspin by May 5.
Two dozen experts from the Rand Corporation, a research organization, are conducting a separate review for Mr.
Aspin that is due in early June.


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring'
WAGNER'S "Ring des Nibelungen," a cycle of four large-scale operas intended to be performed on consecutive evenings, has achieved wide circulation on the stage as well as on disk and tape in recent decades, but the sheer scope of the undertaking insures that each new outing will remain an event.
The Metropolitan Opera's current production has been slipping back into the repertory an opera at a time in recent weeks.
On Monday evening, the Met will begin two weeklong presentations of the entire cycle to end its season.


We Need to Recognize Sex-Linked Diseases
To the Editor:
The Alan Guttmacher Institute report (front page, April 1) highlights a neglected reality: the rising epidemics of sexually transmitted diseases in the United States and the inadequacy of our program to combat them.
Why have we heard so little about this national problem?
Feelings of discomfort and fear have discouraged individuals from seeking the information they need and from acting on it.
While the epidemics have skyrocketed, Government funding has not increased.


The Spoken Word
FILM LECTURE, Long Island University, Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
The director Martin Scorsese will discuss his work, as part of the Spike Lee 40 Acres Film Institute lecture series.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Admission: $25; $15 for students.
Information: (718) 858-9620.
GOURMET FOOD DISCUSSION, La Belle Epoque, 827 Broadway at 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Michael Batterberry, a food writer and publisher, will be the moderator of a discussion among food critics, restaurateurs and chefs on the history of eating and drinking in Greenwich Village, a benefit for the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation.
Sunday at 5:30 P.M.
Tickets: $50; $250, includes dinner for two at Oggi Domani; $1,000, includes dinner for four at the James Beard House.
Information: (212) 924-3895.


Judge Rejects Sperm Donor's Claim for Custody
A Family Court judge in Manhattan has ruled that a man who donated his sperm so that a lesbian couple could have a child has no right to be declared the 11-year-old girl's father or even to have visitation rights.
The man had signed an agreement relinquishing parental rights and never provided support for the child.
But in 1991, after numerous visits with the girl, he sued to be declared her father.





Around the Majors: Surgery for Ryan
Strikeout king NOLAN RYAN's farewell tour was put on hold yesterday when he underwent surgery for torn knee cartilage that will sideline him for three to six weeks.
The arthroscopic procedure on the right knee lasted about 40 minutes, said Dr.
JOHN CONWAY, orthopedic consultant for the Texas Rangers.
When asked if Ryan gave any thought to ending his career right now, Conway replied: "Oh, no, no. His whole focus is to be able to play the rest of the season."


Dime Moves To Build Up Capital Level
The Dime Savings Bank of New York announced two deals yesterday that could help it emerge from its troubles with bad real estate loans and low levels of capital.
The Dime said it was beginning a rights offering to the holders of Dime stock to raise between $148.5 million and $193.2 million.
The institution also announced its agreement to sell eight branches in New Jersey to the First Fidelity Bancorporation.


Raising Cash
In a market anxious about the economy, and especially retailing stocks, investors have shunned even Cash America Investments Inc.
Yesterday, however, the lender of last resort rose slightly when most major retailers declined.
The company, whose stock symbol is PWN, operates pawn shops.


Sonoco Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Nellcor Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


7 NATIONS PLEDGE $28 BILLION FUND TO ASSIST RUSSIA
Seeking to help President Boris N. Yeltsin's political fortunes, the leading industrialized nations committed themselves today to $28 billion in aid for Russia, most intended to be delivered this year, although much of it was contingent on austerity steps that Moscow may find difficult to adopt.
Most of the package announced today is to be provided by various international lending agencies, not the United States Treasury.
But it did include about $2 billion in United States credits or loan guarantees to pay for Russian imports of American goods, and separately the Administration announced a new commitment of $1.8 billion in direct aid that seems likely to require Congressional approval.


Is This Just a Brief Moment in Time for Nets?
Are the Nets in the process of building a championship contender or collapsing into another state of suburban decay?
Stephen Hawking would have trouble figuring out the evolution of their universe.
Weeks ago, the Nets appeared destined for big playoff nights in May, if not June.
Now, there suddenly is the remote mathematical possibility of them not making the playoffs at all.
Such flip-flopping there hasn't been since gangster Jack Nicholson had to decide whether to marry or ice Kathleen Turner in "Prizzi's Honor."


Worthy Versions Of 'The Ring': A Critical Selection
IT has been said that as much has been written about Richard Wagner as about Jesus; if so, the four operas that make up the "Ring" cycle show why.
They are Wagner's attempt at writing musical scripture, telling a tale that begins out of the primal watery opening of "Das Rheingold" and ends, some 17 hours later, with the fiery immolation of the gods in "Gotterdammerung." In between come "Die Walkure" and "Siegfried" and an anthology of mythic ingredients.
There is a sword buried to the hilt in an ancient tree, a dragon that must be slain, a magic helmet that allows the wearer to change form, a circle of fire through which only a fearless hero may pass.
And, of course, the Ring itself; forged from magic gold by a Nibelung dwarf, it grants absolute power to its wearer but also bears a deadly curse.
The tale is beyond simple summary and often strains the faith even of the devout, but it is loaded with the weight of symbols and allusions.
In Wagner's version of Original Sin, the ruler of the gods violates his own laws; in the composer's version of the Resurrection, a new world will rise out of the ashes of the old.
There are also humbler entertainments, including portraits of marital squabbling and melodramatic villainy.


Review/Film; A Therapist And a Satirist Fall in Love
"Claire of the Moon" follows its heroine, an author so famous she has appeared on "Oprah," to a seaside writers' retreat.
A renowned satirist (though she has no apparent sense of humor), Claire (Trisha Todd) is assigned to room with Dr.
Noel Benedict (Karen Trumbo), a solemn therapist who has written a book called "The Naked Truth." When Claire first arrives at their cabin, she hears the sounds of a noisy sexual encounter in the bedroom.
"Research," Noel says with a shrug.
Claire and Noel are to be participants in a long, cozy retreat for female writers, who are presented in what are meant to be broadly humorous terms.
Tara O'Hara, for instance, is the name of a romance writer from the South.
Another participant is a housewife, the mother of twins, who is writing a book imagining a planet where men must go through childbirth.
The session is led by the jovial, beer-swigging Maggie (Faith McDevitt), who looks and sounds a bit like Martin Sheen.
Maggie describes the program as "just a bunch of loony chicks writing our guts out, trying to find the meaning of life."


Andover Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jerusalem Journal; Dishing Up Lunch for a Land That Isn't All Kosher
Omri Padan has a quandary: What exactly does kosher mean?
It would be a difficult enough question for a rabbi or Talmud scholar, and Mr.
Padan readily admits to being neither.
He is a pragmatic businessman, who developed a successful Israeli chain of clothing stores and gave it all up to learn the intricacies of all-beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions and sesame-seed buns.


Mexico Sees Progress On Trade Pact Problems
Mexican officials said today that their differences had narrowed with the United States over how to deal with environmental and labor problems under a North American Free Trade Agreement.
As United States negotiators began to present detailed proposals in the third formal round of talks over side agreements to the trade pact, their conflicts with Mexico and Canada over how to control surges of imports also appeared less significant than they had before.
Still, the chief negotiators for Mexico, the United States and Canada made it clear at a news conference this afternoon that important differences remained.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  Seeking to lift the political fortunes of Boris Yeltsin, the leading industrialized nations committed themselves to $28 billion in aid for Russia this year, but much of it was contingent on austerity steps that Moscow may find difficult to adopt.
A1  Countries pledging aid to Russia also stand to benefit.
A10


Essex County Gas (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Guard Is Dead At Ohio Prison, Putting Toll at 8
In a day of rapid swings in mood and tone at the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility here, the body of a dead guard was turned over to prison officials today and another hostage was released unharmed after an inmate was allowed to speak on live radio.
The death of the guard brought to eight the number of people known to have been killed in the four-day standoff that followed a riot at the maximum security prison in southeast Ohio on Sunday.
All the other known victims were inmates, most believed to have been beaten to death by other inmates early in the disturbance.


NBD Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kyril Scherbatow, 90, A Russian Prince, Dies
Prince Kyril Scherbatow, a member of the Russian nobility, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 90.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.
He was a native of St.
Petersburg.
Both his parental families belonged to the House of Rurik, which founded Russia.


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Attorney General Visits Washington Neighborhood Terrorized by Shootings


International Multifoods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Capitol Stirs To Mr. Green, Ne Gorbachev
Just in from a whirlwind speechmaking tour through Virginia and minutes away from jetting to the Coast for his San Francisco opening -- en route to his Japan appearance -- Mikhail S. Gorbachev dropped in on the Capitol today, promoting that favorite cause of celebrities everywhere, the environment.
Mr.
Gorbachev, until 16 months ago the President of the Soviet Union and General Secretary of its Communist Party, is now president of the International Green Cross and Green Crescent, a new environmental organization that will formally spring to life in Kyoto, Japan, on Saturday.


G.M. to Make Toyota Cars for Sale in Japan
In a deal that would increase American car exports to Japan, the General Motors Corporation has tentatively agreed to make up to 20,000 cars a year in the United States for sale by the Toyota Motor Corporation in Japan under the Toyota brand name.
The arrangement, confirmed by G.M. today, would be a reversal of the usual pattern in which Japanese companies have made cars in Japan that are sold to American consumers as G.M., Ford and Chrysler cars.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Florida Power and Light Co., Miami, a subsidiary of the FPL Group, is offering $225 million of 7.30 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2016 at 98 to yield 7.483 percent through Lehman Brothers.
Callable in five years, the bonds are rated A-2 by Moody's Investor Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


UPJOHN CO. (N)
The Upjohn Company reported flat first-quarter sales yesterday in its core human health-care business.
Overall sales, including animal health and agricultural products and chemicals, increased 7 percent.
Pre-tax operating income rose 4 percent.
Ley S. Smith, the president and acting chairman, said the company was emphasizing cost controls, cutbacks and drug research.
Marketing and administration costs declined by one percentage point, to 36 percent of sales.
Mr.
Smith took charge on Wednesday after the chairman, Dr.
Theodore Cooper, became critically ill.
Sales of Halcion sleeping medication, which has been criticized by regulators in some states and Europe, plummeted 31 percent, compared with the 1992 quarter.
Other products that declined included Ansaid, an arthritis treatment, Provera, a hormone replacement, and Rogaine for baldness.
Upjohn said buyers had stocked up on Rogaine during a sales promotion late last year.
Prescription drug sales were led by antiobiotics, including Vantin, which was introduced in the United States last year; Micronase and Glynase for diabetes, Xanax for anxiety, and Depo-Provera, a newly introduced injectible contraceptive.
Over-the-counter drug sales were led by Motrin IB, a pain killer, and Dramamine for motion sickness.


Review/Film; Wife Seeks To Right Wrong Done To Husband
"The Story of Qiu Ju" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2, 1992.
The film, in Mandarin with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street, with a rating of PG (Parental guidance suggested).
Zhang Yimou is the superb Chinese film maker whose life sounds like the stuff of legend (he is said to have "sold his blood to buy his first camera") and whose rural historical dramas (among them "Raise the Red Lantern" and "Ju Dou") would be accessible in any part of the globe.
Now, in "The Story of Qiu Ju," Mr.
Zhang has attempted something more modern and no less fascinating.
With the simplicity of a folk tale or a fable, he tells of a farmer's wife and her search for justice, and in the process he provides a remarkably detailed view of contemporary Chinese life.


FMC Gold Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Senators Shuffle the Front Office
The Ottawa Senators fired General Manager MEL BRIDGMAN yesterday and replaced him with RANDY SEXTON, the National Hockey League expansion team's chief operating officer.
The move came less than 24 hours after the Senators ended their first season, finishing last in the 24-team league with a 10-70-4 record.


On My Mind; 'Muslims Broke the Truce'
Early on Tuesday, United Nations headquarters in New York received a startling report from its top general in the former Yugoslavia.
He said that the violation of the cease-fire that infuriated people around the world was deliberately provoked by Muslim forces -- not Serbian.
Lieut.
Gen.
Lars Eric Wahlgren of Sweden, the U.N. commander, reported that the truce was being largely respected in Bosnia when the Muslims broke it.
The motive, he said, was to keep the world's attention on Sarajevo, the besieged enclave of Srebrenica and the Bosnian Muslim cause, and to force Western intervention.


CLINTON TO MEET WITH GAY GROUPS
President Clinton is scheduled to meet with leaders of gay and lesbian groups on Friday in what they describe as a historic first.
But White House officials say Mr.
Clinton will not accept their invitation to appear at a gay rights march here on April 25.
Instead, they said, he may make a phone call to the marchers or send a letter to its leaders.


Hispanic Enclave Braces for Verdict
At the Fancy Hair beauty salon here, Vivian Granillo and her mother, Milagro, stay close to a television that hums from the counter, the volume low but the set on all the time as the women await a verdict in the Rodney G. King beating trial in nearby Los Angeles.
Last year, after the first trial, they were taken by surprise by a band of looters armed with a sledge hammer who invaded their shop and left with $46,000 worth of shears, swivel chairs and beauty potions.
This year, the Granillos say, they will pack the equipment they can carry the moment a verdict is reached and hustle it home.


Chiefs and Montana Closer
The Kansas City Chiefs moved closer to a financial accord with Joe Montana yesterday, remaining the front-runner over Phoenix to acquire the 36-year-old quarterback through a trade with San Francisco.
Montana's preference has been influenced by his friendship with Kansas City's offensive coordinator, Paul Hackett, who has installed the 49ers' offense.
Montana, under contract with the 49ers for the season, requested a trade so he could be a starter.
The 49ers are trying to accommodate him, and a decision is expected by the weekend.


Cullen/Frost Bankers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Depression Aggravates Other Illnesses
To the Editor:
Your April 7 front-page report on the decreasing rate of disability among the elderly is correct.
You should know that were the elderly carefully checked for the disease of clinical depression and then properly treated for it, those disability rates would drop considerably faster.
As you reported as long ago as Aug. 18, 1989, depression -- most often missed in the elderly -- is among the most disabling conditions.
It is furthermore not something one can expect just because one is getting on in years and may have other physical problems.


Art in Review
'1920'
Exit Art/The First World  548 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
The title of this 52-woman group show, "1920," marks the year women were given the vote, and the exhibition's subtitle, "The Subtlety of Subversion, the Continuity of Intervention," suggests the feminist bent of nearly all the art included.


Gotti's Lawyer Confronts Mafia Turncoat in Court
Bristling with his trademark anger, Bruce Cutler confronted Salvatore Gravano in court yesterday, portraying him as an unreliable witness who betrayed and killed people who had trusted him.
Mr.
Cutler, the longtime lawyer for John Gotti, was conducting his first cross-examination of Mr.
Gravano, who turned informer and testified against Mr.
Gotti last year.
His voice rising to a roar, Mr.
Cutler cited a list of 19 murders that Mr.
Gravano admitted participating in over the years, saying his testimony could not be trusted.


Federal Paper Board Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


INSIDE
South Africa's Perilous Road
The latest deaths and disorders in South Africa have reminded the country of dangers that will not disappear quickly, even when white rule is gone.
News analysis, page A11.
A.T.&amp; T. Fights With British
A.T.&amp; T. moved to block Britain's top phone company from expanding in the United States until A.T.&amp; T. can compete in Britain.
Page D1.
More Doubt on Hanoi Report
Some historians and researchers doubt the validity of a report that says Hanoi held more Americans than it has acknowledged.
Page A3.
Fungusi, Man's Relatives
Very, very distant relative, that is.
A new genetic analysis has found that fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants.
Page A18.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dionex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; Can Bonilla Get Along In New York?
IT always makes me nervous when I hear people say "we are working on our relationship," because that sounds like trouble, big trouble.
This is exactly where Bobby Bonilla stands with his hometown of New York.
They are working on their relationship, and I'm not sure it can be saved.
Bonilla just may not be cool enough to have a long career in New York.
Nothing against him.
This is a hard town these days, and only the strong survive.


Huntington Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Decides It Won't Prosecute Case of Altered Iraq Export Papers
After a nearly two-year investigation, the Justice Department has decided not to prosecute anyone in connection with a Bush Administration document that was doctored to conceal the military uses of some exports to Iraq, a Congressman whose committee received the falsified list said today.
Representative John M. Spratt Jr., Democrat of South Carolina, whose Government Operations subcommittee asked the Justice Department to investigate the matter in 1991, said he wanted Attorney General Janet Reno to reopen the case.
Mr.
Spratt said that he believed the decision not to bring criminal charges was made by officials held over from the Bush Administration and that Ms.
Reno might not have been fully aware of its implications.


American Drug Screens reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Digital Hires Sales and Marketing Expert
In what industry analysts called a coup, the Digital Equipment Corporation said today that it had hired Edward E. Lucente as vice president of worldwide sales and marketing.
Mr.
Lucente, who stepped down in March as executive vice president of Northern Telecom, the Canadian telecommunications equipment company, had spent 31 years at International Business Machines, where he earned a reputation as a savvy and aggressive marketing executive.
He was known in some I.B.M. quarters as "Neutron Eddie" for his willingness to cut staff years before I.B.M.'s current cutbacks.


Retired Man Is Injured by Bomb in Package
A retired sanitation worker was seriously injured yesterday when a package that came through the mail and was left on his doorstep in Brooklyn exploded after he took it into his house, the police said.
The package, the size of a shoe box, contained two large firecrackers, BB pellets and a "very sophisticated timing device designed to go off when opened," said Capt.
Joseph A. Mottle, commander of the 10th Detective Division in Brooklyn.


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On the Ballot and Off the Books
Like barriers in a swiftly moving river, campaign spending laws do not block the flow of big money, say New Jersey political analysts; they merely divert it into side currents or momentarily drive it beneath the surface.
But the river, they say, rushes on.
With less than eight weeks before the June 8 primary, both parties are busy with the new political science of financing expensive campaigns without having the bills picked up by the candidates.


McCarver's Message for a Thin-Skinned Athlete
From: Dr. Tim McCarver
To: Bobby Bonilla and all other volatile, unhappy, insecure and fabulously wealthy players.
What's wrong with you guys?


Florida Progress Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Last Shall Be First: Ziegler Leads Seniors
Following a formula that worked so well for John Daly two years ago, Larry Ziegler qualified as an alternate and took the first round lead by two strokes today at the P.G.A.
Seniors Championship.
With high winds making one of the toughest challenges in senior golf even harder, the 53-year-old Ziegler shot a six-under-par 66 over the PGA National Resort &amp; Spa course.


ACCORD IS REACHED TO AID FOREST BIRD
Trying to defuse the battle over the Endangered Species Act, the Clinton Administration said today it had approved a plan by the Georgia Pacific Corporation to protect the red cockaded woodpecker, a forest bird that is declining in much of its range in the South.
The agreement, which was announced by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, calls for Georgia Pacific, the nation's largest timber company, to keep at least 10 acres of trees and brush standing around each colony of red cockaded woodpeckers that live on its forest lands in Arkansas, the Carolinas, Louisiana and Mississippi.


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Excel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


City Opera Chairman Is Stepping Down
Robert W. Wilson stepped down as chairman of the New York City Opera yesterday at a meeting of the company's board.
Mr.
Wilson, who is 66 and has been chairman since 1981, is to remain on the board as chairman emeritus.
Irwin Schneiderman, the current president, and Lloyd E. Rigler, the current vice chairman, will succeed him as co-chairmen.
"Mr. Wilson has presided over a turbulent time that included two strikes, a change of artistic leadership and a recession," Christopher Keene, the company's general director, said yesterday, "and he has consistently supported the company's growth."


Golden West Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pope &amp; Talbot reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dauphin Deposit (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mosinee Paper Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Fine Jewelers Guild, Dallas, to Goldsmith/Jeffrey Inc., New York, to handle its account, previously at Harrison Simmons Inc., Dallas.
Goldsmith/Jeffrey was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $6 million, without a review. *
Kyocera Electronics Inc., Somerset, N.J., to Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, as the first agency to handle the account in the United States for its Ecosys aSi desktop page printers.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


FACTION IS BLAMED
In what officials described as the latest attack in the continuing battle between two rival Palestinian guerrilla factions, gunmen killed a member of the radical Abu Nidal group and his nine-month-old son today in the port city of Sidon.
The latest victim in the long series of tit-for-tat assassinations between the mainstream Fatah faction of Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, and the Abu Nidal group was Faisal Saleh.
Mr.
Saleh was attacked by an undetermined number of men as he walked on a street near his home in Sidon carrying his son.


Apple Computer (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Review/Film; A Melancholy History of North America's Indians
"The War Against the Indians," produced, directed, written and narrated by Harry Rasky, is the cinema equivalent of one of those coffee-table books that is actually worth its price.
It's an impressive, beautifully photographed, oversized (nearly three-hour) consideration of the melancholy history of North American Indians from the arrival of Christopher Columbus to the present day.
The Canadian film, originally made for television, opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Mr.
Rasky uses paintings, photographs, songs and dances, artifacts (including masks) and dozens of interviews as he meditates on the high cost of the European invasion to the indigenous peoples: near-genocide.
The film's method is more impressionistic than anthropological, more subjective than scientific, although there's no disputing the injustices that American Indians have been collecting for the last 500 years.


Books of The Times; From Houses to Towers: A 125-Year Revolution
New York, New York How the Apartment House Transformed the Life of the City (1869-1930) By Elizabeth Hawes Illustrated. 285 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
Looking at Manhattan today, with its jagged, jutting skyline, its crowded, populous streets, it is hard to imagine that only 125 years ago, the city still had the personality of a small town, that its entire population -- with the exception of the very poor -- lived in private houses.
It is this momentous, magical transformation of Manhattan that the journalist Elizabeth Hawes traces in her fascinating new book, "New York, New York."


Robertson Trying Again To Put Prayer in Schools
At Blue Ridge High School in Farmer City, Ill., 63 of the 66 members of the Class of 1993 recently voted to say prayers during their graduation ceremony next month.
School officials in the tiny farming community turned them down.


The Hamas Way of Death
Following is a transcript of a recruitment and training videotape made last summer by the Qassam Battalions, the military arm of Hamas, an Islamic Palestinian group.
Hamas figures significantly in the Middle East equation.
In December, Israel deported more than 400 Palestinians to Lebanon in response to Hamas's kidnapping and execution of an Israeli soldier.
A longer version appears in the May issue of Harper's Magazine, which obtained and translated the tape.
My name is Yasir Hammad al-Hassan Ali.
I live in Nuseirat  [ a refugee camp in the Gaza Strip ] .
I was born in 1964.
I finished high school, then attended Gaza Polytechnic.
Later, I went to work for Islamic University in Gaza as a clerk.
I'm married and I have two daughters.


Why New York's Credit Ratings May Soon Show Improvement
To the Editor:
"Stop New York's Shady Borrowing" (editorial, April 2) would lead one to conclude that New York State's dismal credit ratings are based mostly on questionable debt practices.
It follows that the state could raise its ratings by reforming those practices.
Debt reform is clearly needed, but your view is far too simplistic.
While these practices contribute to the low ratings, the state's poor credit position is more deeply rooted in a weak economy and weak tax revenue growth; in the inordinately long time it took state officials to adjust to this environment; in an inability to end profligate spending; in over-reliance on budget gimmicks; in failure to maintain a balanced budget in four consecutive years, and in too much debt, as opposed to the form it takes.


Blue Jays Jettison Dayley
Left-handed relief pitcher KEN DAYLEY was released by the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday.
Dayley, 34, signed with the Blue Jays as a free agent in 1990 after seven years with the St.
Louis Cardinals.
He was limited by several injuries and a case of vertigo while with Toronto.


USAIR TO ISSUE 10 MILLION SHARES OF STOCK
USAir Group plans to sell 10 million shares of common stock in an offering that would raise roughly $220 million at the current stock price.
Industry observers said the airline company was trying to take advantage of the strong performance of its stock to pay down high-interest debt.


Phar-Mor Plans More Closings
Phar-Mor Inc., the discount pharmacy chain that sought bankruptcy protection last year after uncovering a fraud and embezzlement scheme, said yesterday that it planned a third round of store closings, involving 4,100 employees.
Phar-Mor said it expected to receive approval on May 4 from the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Youngstown, Ohio, where the company is based, to begin liquidation sales at 58 stores, mostly in Florida and Illinois.


You've Missed Deadline: What Step to Take Now
WHAT if you blew it?
April 15 has come and gone, and you (or shall we say someone you know), failed to file either an income tax return or a request for an automatic four-month extension.
"File as soon as possible and pay as much as possible if there's a shortfall," said Vincent D. Vaccaro, partner in Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York.
After April 15 it is too late to request an automatic extension.


Sports of The Times; Giant Steps In a New Direction
THE Rangers have scheduled a news conference for this afternoon, presumably to announce the cure for decades of maladies, malaise, bad luck and insubordination.
The Rangers will announce the hiring of Mike Keenan as their head coach.


Women on Sports Beat Have Come a Long Way; Fordham No Exploiter
To the Editor:
We strongly take issue with "Basketball Slavery" (editorial, April 4), which links Fordham University to the exploitation of black athletes.
As faculty members of the department of African-American studies, we have had close contact with many of the black men and women who have played basketball at Fordham.
Almost without exception, they have been excellent students, as well as good athletes.
The graduation rate of Fordham's athletes is among the highest for Division I schools.


Magnetek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stephen J. Albert Tribute
A memorial tribute to the composer Stephen J. Albert is to be held on Wednesday in the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street, at 5 P.M.
Mr.
Albert, a member of the Juilliard School's composition faculty since 1988, died in a car accident on Dec. 27 at 51.
Carmen Pelton, a soprano, will sing Mr.
Albert's song cycle "To Wake the Dead" and Gerard Schwarz will conduct the Juilliard Orchestra in the final movement of "Symphony RiverRun," Mr.
Albert's 1985 Pulitzer Prize-winning work.
The cellist Yo-Yo Ma will also play.
Joseph W. Polisi, the president of Juilliard; the composers Bruce MacCombie and George Rochberg, and Mr.
Schwarz are scheduled to speak.
Seating is limited.
Information is available from (212) 769-7406.


Lillian Wald
To the Editor:
It is twice stated in the April 3 About New York column that there is only one Jew in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans in the Bronx, Associate Justice Louis D. Brandeis.
Lillian Wald is listed as one of the 11 women in the hall.
She was Jewish.
As Howard Sachar recounts in "A History of the Jews of America," she "developed a visiting nurse program that by 1916 permitted some 100 nurses to make 227,000 house calls a year."
He adds: "Wald moved beyond public health to vigorous activity in the Women's Trade Union League, as well as women's suffrage and peace movements, thereby becoming a pioneer of American feminism."


CHRONICLE
German gastronomy has won a reprieve of sorts.
Munich's top-rated restaurant, Aubergine, will not be closed, although its celebrated chef, ECKART WITZIGMANN has lost his restaurateur's license, after being convicted of possession of 150 grams of cocaine.


U.S. Delays Issuing Report On Sex Attacks by Aviators
The Defense Department is delaying the release of its report on a Navy sexual-harassment scandal, perhaps until next weekend, when a large gay rights march in Washington and elections in Russia might well diminish its news value, some Pentagon officials said today.
Defense Department officials said the that report, on the Tailhook Association's convention of naval aviators in Las Vegas, Nev., two years ago, was tentatively set for release today, but that last-minute questions postponed that plan.
These officials said they were told to prepare the report for release next Friday, even though they insisted that it could be ready sooner.
The gay march and the Russian elections are both scheduled for April 25.


InaCom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Former Dallas Pastor Is Acquitted of Charges of Trying to Choke His Wife to Death
Walker L. Railey, once a prominent Dallas pastor who suffered a startling fall from grace that seemed complete when he was charged with trying to choke his wife to death, was acquitted of all charges in the six-year-old case today.
The acquittal in a state District Court in San Antonio came despite a mountain of circumstantial evidence offered by prosecutors, including a note the minister wrote, complaining of a "demon inside my soul." Many people in Dallas, who were fascinated by the case, saw the note, written at the time of Mr.
Railey's suicide attempt days after the attack, as tantamount to a confession.


Reviews/Dance; Exploring Myriad Notions In a Friendly, Reborn Space
A bright and charming new theater called the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse opened at Hunter College on Thursday night.
Formerly known as the Hunter College Playhouse, the theater has a long dance history.
Sensitively renovated by Gerald I. Schiff of Abramowitz Kingsland Schiff, Kaye Playhouse has an airy intimacy that makes it the best new dance auditorium since the Joyce Theater.
The opening program of dance by two professional and seven student choreographers, performed by members of the Hunter Dance Company, started on a promisingly unfashionable note with two works of admirable simplicity, invention and wholeheartedness.
But it gradually began to toe the prescribed line with dances crammed with ideas for dances.


Mayors Are Absent During Tree-Planting Ceremony


Observer; Sexwise It's the Pits
Maybe it's time to rethink the American boys concept.
What, for instance, do people really mean when they say, "Boys will be boys"?
A couple of exceedingly squalid stories in the recent sex news have evoked this old philosophical expression.
"Boys will be boys," some said when a group of New Jersey lads were tried recently for sexually abusing a young mentally retarded woman with broom handle and baseball bat.


Review/Dance; A Flamenco Interpretation Of the Roman Catholic Mass
The flamenco guitarist Paco Pena brought his exuberant "Misa Flamenca" to New York for the first time and came up with more than the usual treatment of indigenous forms in a folk mass.
The set elements of the Roman Catholic liturgy and the spontaneity that flamenco songs and dance allow within their own structures are not necessarily opposed.
An entire branch of flamenco music is of liturgical origin, most notably tonas, a genre influenced by Gregorian chants.
These, in turn, gave birth to forms like the martinete.


Clinton Campaign Skirted Taxes, Report Says
Bill Clinton's 1992 Presidential campaign listed scores of campaign workers as self-employed consultants, allowing the campaign to avoid paying the Social Security taxes that employers must pay for their employees, CBS News reported tonight.
On reports to the Federal Election Commission for September and October, the official committee of the Clinton-Gore '92 campaign listed about 100 campaign workers as "advance consultants" who were paid as independent contractors, CBS News reported.


Seeking to Lead Group Beyond Abortion Battle
In the simple equation of public image, Planned Parenthood equals abortion rights.
And Faye Wattleton, the past president of the organization, equals Planned Parenthood.
But the new president, Pamela J. Maraldo, is working hard to change the old equations.
When she took over Ms.
Wattleton's midtown Manhattan office in February, she hoped to begin reshaping the Planned Parenthood Federation: moving it beyond the abortion-rights crucible that has consumed its budget and energies in recent years, and transforming it into the leading provider of health care for women.
Hostage to Abortion Rights
She and the organization's board reasoned that a White House and Congress less hostile to abortion rights would clear the way for a broader agenda.


Dershowitz Testimony Turns Into 3-Hour Shouting Match
With frequent cries of "Don't put words in my mouth!" and "Don't tell me!" a Harvard law professor retained by Mia Farrow and a lawyer for Woody Allen reduced the couple's custody trial to an angry shouting match yesterday, trading barbs over everything from each other's ethics to Mr.
Allen's morals.
The professor, Alan M. Dershowitz, and the lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, sparred for nearly three hours in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, as the lawyer tried to portray Mr.
Dershowitz as having participated in a scheme to extort money from Mr.
Allen on behalf of Ms.
Farrow, and Mr.
Dershowitz angrily countered with his own accusations.


A Night to Celebrate Jack Lemmon
The United States Army has not always been known for artistic sensitivity, but in 1950 it showed remarkable foresight in casting the lead role for a cautionary training film called "Once Too Often." The character was a happy-go-lucky idiot with a military buzz cut and highly developed talent for getting into trouble.
The part went to a struggling New York actor named Jack Lemmon.
"Somehow I got a reading, and to my amazement I got the part," Mr.
Lemmon said in a telephone interview from his office in Beverly Hills, Calif.
"It was the first thing of substance I got, outside of small parts in summer stock. It was even before I started getting breaks in live TV."


Four Days Before Mideast Talks, Palestinian Team Suggests Delay
Four days before the Middle East peace talks are scheduled to resume, the Palestinian delegation said today that it would recommend that the negotiations be postponed.
Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman for the delegation, said United States officials had failed to remove what her delegation considered barriers to its participation in the talks, which stalled after Israel deported 415 Palestinians in December.


I.R.A.'s Yes, but They're Not Only Kid on Block
IN the pamphlets and advertisements pouring forth from banks, brokerage firms and mutual funds, I.R.A.'s are the financial equivalent of vitamin E -- a way to prevent all ills.
To scoop up I.R.A. accounts and other retirement savings, Merrill Lynch, for example, has churned out a large-format, 521-page hardcover guide, with a cardboard calculator bound in.
Those wanting to guarantee a healthy retirement should buy the book and bench-press it 10 times every morning.
Lately, individual retirement accounts have become an easy sell.
I.R.A. investments, off sharply in the late 1980's after Congress restricted their tax deductibility, have come roaring back.


Coaching Job for Wiel
RANDY WIEL, an assistant coach for National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament champion North Carolina, was named Thursday as head coach at North Carolina-Asheville.
He succeeds DON DOUCETTE, who was the Bulldogs' head coach for five years before resigning last March after the team finished 4-23. (AP)


Loss Puts Knicks in A Tie And a Bind
A lot of things were missing for the Knicks tonight: energy, consistent offense and, most important, a victory.
The Knicks (55-22) were beaten by the Indiana Pacers, 100-94, at Market Square Arena.
The loss ended the Knicks' four-game winning streak, and it dropped them into a first-place tie with the Chicago Bulls, who beat the Milwaukee Bucks, for best record in the Eastern Conference.


Corrections
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Thursday, about a new barbecue grill sold at Gracious Home in Manhattan, included an incorrect price supplied by the store.
The store sells the Thermal Electric Grill from Thermos for $329, not $229.


Car Bomb in West Bank Kills 2 Arabs; 8 Israelis Wounded
Two Arabs were killed and eight Israeli soldiers and an Arab were slightly wounded today when a car bomb exploded at an Israeli roadside restaurant frequented by servicemen in the occupied West Bank.


Islanders Play Travel Agent, Send Devils To Pittsburgh
The Islanders won the battle to avoid Pittsburgh tonight at the Nassau Coliseum.
A strong start by New York, poor goaltending by New Jersey and a hat trick by Pierre Turgeon combined for an 8-4 victory that clinched third place and sent the Islanders to Washington and the Devils to Pittsburgh for the first round of the National Hockey League playoffs.


Italian Premier Says His Beleaguered Coalition Is 'Almost Finished'
Nine months after it was born in crisis and nurtured in a scandal that seemed only to worsen, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato said today that his four-party coalition, Italy's 51st government since World War II, was "almost finished" and that he would begin seeking a replacement next week.
The Prime Minister's statement came just two days before Italians vote in a series of referendums devised to begin changing the electoral system and thus lead to national elections late this year or early next year.
New Electoral System Seen
The impending fall of the Government deepened the sense of political turmoil after months of disclosures in a bribery and kickback scandal that has left Italy's postwar order in tatters without any clear vision of the future.


Alfred Brendel Cancels A Beethoven Recital
The pianist Alfred Brendel has canceled his May 3 recital at Carnegie Hall, the first of a series of three all-Beethoven programs, because of tendinitis.
The May 5 and 12 performances are to take place as scheduled, as is "The Beethoven and Brendel Seminar," a Carnegie Hall Professional Training Workshop scheduled for May 10 through 12.


No Headline
"What has people frightened witless now is the fact that you can be coming home from the grocery store, walking the dog, or coming home from the park, and you can be shot." -- DOROTHY BRIZILL, describing fear in a section of northwest Washington.  [ 9:1. ]


HBO &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HAITI ARMY SPURNS OFFER OF AMNESTY
Haiti's military commanders today rejected an offer of amnesty by the country's ousted President that was to have been the cornerstone of a diplomatic settlement of this country's 18-month-old political stalemate.
The rejection was a setback to the efforts by the special United Nations envoy, Dante Caputo, who had set today as a deadline for the military's acceptance of the amnesty offer.
In recent weeks, diplomats involved in the mediation efforts said they had been led to believe by the Haitian military leaders that they would accept the proposed settlement if they received a guaranteed amnesty.
U.S.
Backs Mediation
Although the details of the rejection were not disclosed, diplomats said the Haitian Army commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, had rejected outright acceptance of a proposed settlement, which calls for the early return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Istanbul Journal; 'Natasha Syndrome' Brings On a Fever in Turkey
She was 16 years old, a prostitute, when they met.
He was 55.
But that was not the only reason the relationship ended, as it seemed destined to, in tears.
He bedecked her in clothes of fine Turkish leather.
She sold them.
He set her up in an apartment across the Bosporus.
She left him.


Cuomo Reported '92 Income Of $425,000, Returns Show
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo received an average of nearly $20,000 for each of 14 speaking engagements in 1992, a sum that lifted his income to $425,644, according to tax returns made available today.
The $273,700 that Mr.
Cuomo received in honorariums in 1992 was by far the largest amount he has received since becoming Governor in 1983.
His previous record was $151,150 in 1989.
In 1991, he received $124,200 for eight speeches, an average of $15,525 per speech.


United Television Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Serbs Advance in Bosnian Town, And Its Capture Seems Imminent
Serbian nationalist forces, advancing behind artillery barrages, moved to within 1,000 yards of the center of the besieged Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica today, and Serbian capture of the city appeared imminent.
Thousands of Bosnian Muslims in the enclave huddled in basements and sandbagged bunkers while Bosnian officials in the town negotiated its surrender.


Pork and Cattle Prices Fall; Lumber Continues to Surge
Pork prices fell sharply today after the weekly pace of hog slaughters picked up, resulting in selling that also put pressure on cattle prices.
In other commodity markets, lumber prices jumped the $10 limit for the second consecutive day, most grain prices tumbled and energy prices eased.


Before Succeeding, Some Have to Learn to Aspire to Succeed
ON one side of the auditorium 200 New York City High School students held candles and pledged to pursue educational excellence and to dedicate whatever success came their way to their Hispanic communities.
On the other, with their own lighted tapers, were the old boys and girls: business people, professionals and city officials, fulfilling similar promises made long ago.
What was going on at the Aaron Davis Hall of City College was the Areyto ceremony of Aspira, a federation of high school clubs that instills ethnic pride while helping young people to do well in school and life, urging them to aim high and to remember where they came from when they get to where they are going.
Probably a lot like Skull and Bones at Yale but without all the secret stuff.


Review/Film; A Cop, a Crook, Shootouts, You Know
"Boiling Point" is a barely tepid police story co-starring Wesley Snipes and Dennis Hopper, cast respectively as a hard-boiled detective and a wily con man.
Since the material (written and directed by James B. Harris, from a novel by Gerald Petievich) offers not one shred of surprise, it's understandable that neither actor seems to believe anything he has to say.
The perfunctory story sends Jimmy Mercer (Mr. Snipes) out to avenge the death of a fellow officer and provides familiar accouterments like a beloved son, an estranged wife, a trusty partner (Dan Hedaya) and a hooker (Lolita Davidovich) with a heart of gold.
One of the guilty parties turns out to be Red Diamond (Mr. Hopper, swaggering grandly and sporting a headful of strawberry-blond hair).


CHRONICLE
THOMAS D. MOTTOLA, the president of Sony Music, and MARIAH CAREY, Sony's superstar singer, announced yesterday plans to marry on June 5 at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.
After the ceremony, a reception for more than 300 guests is to be held at the Metropolitan Club.


James Lynn Hoard, 87, Is Dead; Chemist Worked on Atom Bomb
Dr.
James Lynn Hoard, an expert in crystallography whose work helped to explain crystalline and molecular structures, died last Saturday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y., his hometown.
He was 87.
The cause was complications from injuries suffered in a fall, according to Cornell University, where he was professor emeritus of chemistry.


Toyota to Sell G.M.-Made Cars in Japan
In a deal that would increase American car exports to Japan, the General Motors Corporation has tentatively agreed to make up to 20,000 Toyotas a year in the United States for sale by the Toyota Motor Corporation in Japan.
The "conceptual" accord, which G.M. confirmed today, came as Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan met with President Clinton for the first time in Washington.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Teco Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


The Police and Election-Year Politics
There's more heat than light in the sharp exchanges between Mayor David Dinkins of New York and the head of the city's police union, Phil Caruso.
Their latest confrontation began when the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association started a $30,000 ad campaign attacking Mr.
Dinkins and asserting that sanitation workers earn more than cops.
In return, Mr.
Dinkins accused Mr.
Caruso of playing politics and said the union leader would not be able to "intimidate" his administration.
In an election year, hyperbole is inevitable.
But animosity between a mayor and the president of the police union is unhealthy.
Mr.
Caruso is posturing for his members and Mr.
Dinkins is either rising to the bait or hoping to benefit politically from his feud with the police.
Both men could do the city a favor by lowering their voices.


Unifi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


U.N. Agrees to Declare Bosnian Town a Safe Haven
The Security Council voted 15-0 tonight to declare the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica in Eastern Bosnia a United Nations "safe area." It also agreed to send peacekeeping troops to protect the town and demanded that the encircling Serbian forces pull back.
But it was unclear whether the plan would prove more effective than other efforts by the United Nations to help Muslim civilians during the yearlong Bosnian civil war.


Music Notes; Restored Works From a 'Paradise Ghetto'
Mark Ludwig, a violist in the Boston Symphony Orchestra, has spent the last five years reconstructing a lost chapter in recent music history.
His specialty, both wrenching and uplifting, is the music of Jewish Czech composers who died in Nazi concentration camps, and particularly those who spent time at Theresienstadt, near Prague, the collection point for about 140,000 Jews, most of whom were later deported to other camps.
The Nazis called Theresienstadt a "Paradise Ghetto," and used it in a 1944 propaganda film, "The Fuhrer Presents the Jews With a City," which was meant to show that the inmates enjoyed a lively cultural life.
As director of the Terezin Chamber Music Foundation, Mr.
Ludwig has been interviewing aging musicians and searching for scores that were either hidden away or entrusted to friends.
He has found orchestral works, which the Boston Symphony has performed in Boston and New York, and a great deal of chamber music -- some written at Theresienstadt, some before the war -- which he performs with three Boston Symphony colleagues as a member of the Hawthorne String Quartet.


Control Resource Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


John Ryan, 85, Officer In the Newspaper Guild
John F. Ryan, an early union organizer and officer in the New York Newspaper Guild, died on Thursday at a hospital in Glen Cove, L.I., where he lived.
He was 85.
Mr.
Ryan, a former reporter and editor on Long Island, joined the union staff in the 1930's.
He became its general organizer, then was elected executive vice president.
He was involved in recruitment, grievances, negotiations and strikes of news and business employees at newspapers and magazines.


Jefferies Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


CHRONICLE
The fog lifted and the mood was celebratory as more than 100 artists, leaders of cultural organizations, government officials and others turned out Thursday evening to greet the new chairwoman of the Congressional Arts Caucus, Representative LOUISE M. SLAUGHTER, Democrat of Rochester.
"It was a terrific opportunity to meet Congresswoman Slaughter and talk about our hopes for the arts from the new administration," said ELLEN LIMAN, a painter who is the chairwoman of the New York City Advisory Commission for Cultural Affairs.
She was the co-host for the gathering in her Manhattan apartment with LUIS R. CANCEL, Commissioner of the Department of Cultural Affairs.


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Couples Splitting Up Should Also Sunder Their Credit Cards
Should a couple split up, jointly held credit cards can create havoc -- and bad credit for each person -- unless both of them understand and accept their obligations.
Disputes regularly arise, because even if the lawyers drawing up a separation agreement or a divorce decree assign all credit card debts to one party, the other person is not absolved from responsibility for that debt until the matter has been settled directly with the credit card issuers, said Martin Johnson, a matrimonial lawyer and partner with Dranoff &amp; Johnson in Pearl River, N.Y.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to March 31


About Birth Control, Men Must Do Something Besides Preach
To the Editor:
"Birth Control 'for All People' " (editorial, April 2) illustrates how we are conditioned to thought patterns and use of language.
You refer to only half the world's people -- females.
Of course, every female must have access to birth control, but how can she be in charge of her body if she is not in control of her life?
When 98 percent of the world's growth is taking place in third world countries (and unknown percentages in our inner cities), ignorant, exhausted, often abused females cannot possibly be expected to carry this burden alone.
We're told that in China a mother must have an abortion if she has more than one child.
Who knows how many abortions that could represent over a lifetime.
Why isn't the male ordered to have a vasectomy after he fathers a child?
Vasectomies are certainly easier and cheaper.
Third world countries are bursting, and 85 percent of those fleeing for a better life are young men.
What happens to the females and all the fatherless children they leave behind?


Laclede Steel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Citing Police Scandal, Judge Declares Mistrial
In what prosecutors and defense lawyers say could be the prelude to the undermining of scores of narcotics indictments in New York City, a Federal judge yesterday declared a mistrial in a major narcotics case that she said had been tainted by a police corruption scandal.
Abruptly ending the trial of nine men accused of running a $20-million-a-month heroin ring, Judge Shirley Wohl Kram of Federal District Court in Manhattan said $50,000 to $80,000 in money seized by undercover agents was missing.


64 Vaults Weiskopf Into Share of the Lead
With an explosive, course-record-tying round of 64, Tom Weiskopf burst into a tie for the lead today in the PGA Seniors Championship.
The 50-year-old Weiskopf, playing in his fifth tournament since joining the Senior Tour late last year, had seven birdies and an eagle against one bogey on the PGA National Resort &amp; Spa course to tie a record shared by Bob Charles and Lee Trevino.


Women on Sports Beat Have Come a Long Way; Make Colleges Honest
To the Editor:
"Basketball Slavery" (editorial, April 4) is right: major college sports are exploitive.
The problem is, how does a 16-year-old boy with a gift for playing basketball, but without the education, aptitude or inclination to go to college, develop that talent and perhaps use it professionally?
He can't.
Yes, a few players (Moses Malone, for instance) have gone from high school to the pros.
But most 18-year-old boys aren't sufficiently developed, lack crucial skills or don't understand certain subtleties of the game.
Those four years are necessary to growth and development.
But they don't have to be spent in college.


Clinton Meets With Gay Groups But Won't Attend Their March
President Clinton met with leaders of gay and lesbian groups today, the first time that such groups have been openly welcomed to the Oval Office.
He told them he would not attend their march on Washington next weekend but would participate in it, possibly by way of a television satellite.
In declining the request to attend the march, Mr.
Clinton said he had several commitments, including a Senate Democratic retreat in Jamestown, Va., on April 24, and a speech the next day to the American Association of Newspaper Publishers in Boston.


Lona Foote, 42, Dies; Known for Jazz Photos
Lona Foote, a photographer known for her portraits of jazz musicians, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 42.
The cause was breast cancer, said a friend, Howard Mandel.


Lower Earnings Fail to Halt Apple's Stock Price
Shares of Apple Computer Inc. rose today even though the company reported lower quarterly profits because of price cuts and costly product introductions.
Apple shares rose 87.5 cents, to $48.125, in Nasdaq trading.
The company reported results for its second quarter late on Thursday.


Owens-Illinois Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seems Like Old Times For Johnson And the Mets
It was an explosion of nostalgia as much as power.
At long last, Howard Johnson was able to stare at what he had done rather than close his eyes to what might have been.
Johnson, his home run stroke more a memory than a menace for the last 12 months, mauled a Jose Rijo mistake on a line that refused to bend.
The baseball wound up in the Riverfront Stadium loge section in right field.
The Mets, leading by 1-0, were up by 3-0 in the fourth inning and en route to a 3-1 triumph.
The night was over for the Reds, and maybe the extended career chapter of hurt and humility was closed for Johnson, as well.
How Long Hojo?
"Six months, eight months, a year," Johnson said when asked how long it had been since he had homered.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.S. REEVALUATING BOSNIA POLICY
While U.S. officials debated whether to seek air strikes against Serbian forces, President Clinton said the United States and its allies needed to consider actions that "previously have been unacceptable" to stop the Serbian attacks in Bosnia.  1  SERB FORCES ENTER SREBRENICA
As residents huddled behind bunkers, Serbian nationalist forces moved to within 1,000 yards of the center of the besieged Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica, and capture of the city appeared imminent.  1  U.N.
DEBATES SAFE-HAVEN PLAN
The Security Council agreed to make Srebrenica a United Nations-protected haven and to send peacekeeping troops to the embattled town, but with opposition and a fast moving situation, it was unclear whether the move would be an empty gesture.  4  A SETBACK IN HAITI TALKS
Haiti's military commanders rejected an offer of amnesty by the country's ousted President that was to have been the cornerstone of a diplomatic settlement of the nation's 18-month-old political crisis.  1  A FACEOFF FOR U.S.
AND JAPAN
President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan used their first White House meeting to scold each other about trade, with Mr.
Clinton insisting on an approach to resolving disputes that the Prime Minister called unacceptable.  1  RUSSIAN AID A POLITICAL FOOTBALL
The opposing sides in Moscow's political wars tried to use a $28 billion package of Western aid to their advantage, with supporters saying it was a sign of confidence and opponents saying it would mean further dependence on the West.  5  A SHOW OF MUSCLE IN BRITAIN
Britain's state-owned railroads and coal mines were shut down by workers demanding safeguards against layoffs.
The strike stranded one million passengers and paralyzed Britain's rail system.  3  A car bomb on the West Bank killed two and wounded nine.  3  Italy's leader says his coalition is near collapse.  3  Istanbul Journal: As a city, a glittering, but tragic, magnet.  2  National 6-9  NEIGHBORHOOD'S NEW TERROR
Random shotgun killings in the Columbia Heights neighborhood of Northwest Washington have brought a typically troubled urban neighborhood an unwelcome fame.  1  JURY ACTION IN LOS ANGELES
A member of the Police Commission said the jury in the trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney King would make an announcement today.  6  MOVEMENT IN PRISON SIEGE
Inmates in Lucasville, Ohio, were allowed to broadcast their demands on television.
In exchange they freed a second of the eight guards whom they took hostage five days ago.  6  CHANGE AT PLANNED PARENTHOOD
Pamela Maraldo, the new president of Planned Parenthood, is trying to change the organization's emphasis from abortion rights to health care for women.  7  TAILHOOK REPORT DELAYED
The Pentagon is delaying the release of its report on a Navy sexual-harassment scandal until other events might well diminish its news value, some officials said.  7  PRESIDENT CONCEDES ON JOBS PLAN
Making a first concession on his plan to stimulate the economy, President Clinton offered to cut $4 billion from the $19.5 billion package.
But Republicans said the move was not enough.  8  HILLARY CLINTON RETURNS
Hillary Rodham Clinton resumed her campaign to defuse opposition to the proposals her health-care task force is drafting.  8  DALLAS MINISTER ACQUITTED
Walker Railey, a former pastor who was charged with trying to choke his wife to death in 1987, was acquitted of all charges.  8  PRESIDENT MEETS GAY GROUPS
Clinton met with leaders of gay and lesbian organizations, the first time that homosexual groups have been welcomed to the White House.  9  CLINTON CAMPAIGN UNDER FIRE
The Clinton Presidential campaign listed scores of campaign workers as consultants, allowing the campaign to avoid paying Social Security taxes, CBS News reported.  9  Washington Journal: It's cleaning time atop the Capitol.  6  Metro Digest 23  CUOMO SIGNS CASINO PACT
Gov.
Cuomo signed an agreement today allowing the tiny Oneida Indian Nation near Syracuse to open New York State's first high-stakes gambling casino in more than a century.  1  JUDGES' DRUG CASE PROTEST
Two of New York City's most prominent Federal judges said yesterday that they will no longer preside over drug cases, going public with a protest that calls attention to what dozens of Federal judges are doing quietly across the country.
The decisions were made in protest of national drug policies and Federal sentencing guidelines.
The judges said the emphasis on arrests and imprisonment, rather than prevention and treatment, had failed, and they are withdrawing from the effort.  1
Sports 28-32
Baseball: Mets beat Reds.  29
Basketball: Knicks lose to Pacers.  31
Column: Rhoden on Keenan.  29
Hockey: Keenan to become coach of Rangers.  29
Islanders defeat Devils.  29
Horse Racing: Wood may be a mudder.  31
Sports People31
Arts/Entertainment 11-16
Celebrating Jack Lemmon.  11
Film: "Boiling Point." 16
Music: Notes 11
Laurie Anderson.  11
Classical reviews 14
Dance: New theater at Hunter.  15
"Misa Flamenca."15
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21
Editorials
Lowering the passions over trade.
Griefs of South Africa.
Sex survey surprise.
Police and election-year politics.
Letters
Russell Baker: Sexwise it's the pits.
Joseph Goffman: Less acid rain for the buck.
Dannie M. Martin: Just say no to informer testimony.
Mark Sacerdote: The Board of Education fails a math test.
Obituaries 10
William J. Fox, a war hero, an engineer, a movie stunt man and cowboy.
Dr. James Lynn Hoard, a chemist who worked on the atom bomb.
Irving K. Kessler, a retired RCA executive.
cation fails a math test.
Business Digest 35


Bicycle Built for $10,000
While farmers in this quiet community in the foothills of the Berkshires prepare their fields for spring planting, one man in a rambling red building is readying his own crop: more than 200 bicycles, some from as long ago as 1820.
On Saturday afternoon this town of 3,500 will be the unlikely host to a sale that its organizer, Mike Fallon, calls "an event that spans the history of bicycle manufacturing."


2 Judges Decline Drug Cases, Protesting Sentencing Rules
Two of New York City's most prominent Federal judges said yesterday that they would no longer preside over drug cases, going public with a protest that calls attention to what dozens of Federal judges are doing quietly across the country.
The decisions, by Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn and Whitman Knapp of Manhattan, were made in protest against national drug policies and Federal sentencing guidelines.
They said that the emphasis on arrests and imprisonment, rather than prevention and treatment, had been a failure, and that they were withdrawing from the effort.


Ethyl Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arrest After Soda Poisoned
A Long Island student was arrested yesterday and charged with second-degree assault after she poured nail polish into the soda can of a teacher who had yelled at her, the police said.
The student, Dana Giles, 17, was taken into police custody at James E. Allen School in Deer Park, L.I., after her teacher, Dorothy Bonanno, fell ill and was taken to Good Samaritan Hospital.
"A preliminary investigation revealed that shortly before she drank the tainted soda, Mrs. Bonanno had verbally disciplined the student," said Officer Salvatore Yovino, a police spokesman.
"According to witness accounts, after Mrs. Bonanno left the room, Giles poured nail polish into an open can of soda," Officer Yovino said.
"When Mrs. Bonanno returned, she drank from the tainted soda and immediately became ill." Mrs.
Bonanno was treated and released at the hospital.


A Warm Send-Off for Bush in Kuwait


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Court Battle Continues Over Free Agency Plan
Lawyers for some of the National Football League's top players told a Federal judge yesterday in Minneapolis that the league's new free agency system has cut their earning power by millions of dollars.
The arguments came in the latest round of the N.F.L.'s long battle over free agency, as United States District Judge DAVID DOTY began hearing dozens of objections from players and owners who are unhappy with an out-of-court settlement on the issue.
A Federal jury ruled last summer that the N.F.L.'s Plan B free agency system was illegal, a decision that prompted the league and its players to negotiate a new system that includes nearly unrestricted free agency for players with more than five years of league experience.
Doty gave that plan preliminary approval on Feb. 26, but 86 objections to the plan have since been filed with the court, 66 coming from players.


Sundstrand Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New York Post and Pressmen Put Labor Dispute on Hold
After failing to publish Friday's paper in a dispute over work rules, The New York Post and its union pressmen agreed yesterday to set their differences aside for the weekend, publish normally today and Monday and meet on Monday to talk about a number of sensitive issues.
In the miasmic recent history of The Post, with death at the doorstep and creditors, would-be owners and staff members fighting over the diagnosis and the medicine, the episode seemed little more than a one-day cold, but the symptoms were enough to signal rough days ahead for labor and management.


Storage Technology Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Montana's Second Look
JOE MONTANA, trying to decide where he wants to be a starting quarterback, was in Kansas City yesterday for his second visit with the Chiefs.
He had worked out a day earlier with the Phoenix Cardinals and said he had no preference between the two teams.
"We'll decide Saturday morning, hopefully," said Montana, who was accompanied by his wife, JENNIFER, and by one of his agents, PETER JOHNSON.
"It's not a big money thing because I've had great offers from both sides. It's not a big deal."


Russian Politicians Take Sides on Aid
Like most events in Russia these days, the announcement by the Group of Seven on Thursday of a new Western aid package was quickly turned into a weapon by each of the opposing sides in Moscow's political wars.
Pravda, the old Communist Party daily that now reflects the opinion of the conservative-nationalist opposition, reacted to the package approved in Tokyo by the leading industrial nations with a rhetorical question: "What then does Russia get out of this?" The answer: "A further increase in its dependence on the West in different spheres."


What's a Super Bowl Worth? $40 Million Brings It to NBC
NBC Sports agreed yesterday to pay the National Football League $40 million for the rights to Super Bowl XXVIII next Jan. 30 in Atlanta.
"We're happy to have television's No. 1 event for the second year in a row exclusively," said Dick Ebersol, the president of NBC Sports.
"No network has ever had a Super Bowl in back-to-back years."


The Best of the Corporate Bond Bunch
Sixty-six A-rated corporate bond funds buy debt of companies that are the best credit risks, all investment- grade issues.
But part of the group's low credit risk comes from the fact that in their portfolios only 47.8 percent of assets, on average, was invested in corporate issues as of Dec. 31.
Because roughly 40 percent of the average portfolio was stashed in government and mortgage-backed securities, investors who want a complete package of corporate bonds might want to review each fund's holdings, said Stephen A. Schoepke of Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.


Prior Joins Packers
Defensive back MIKE PRIOR, who joined the Indianapolis Colts as a replacement player during the 1987 strike, has agreed to a three-year contract with the Green Bay Packers.
Terms were not disclosed. (AP)


Cuomo Signs Pact With Indians For Casino in Upstate New York
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed an agreement today allowing the tiny Oneida Indian Nation near Syracuse to open New York State's first high-stakes gambling casino in more than a century.
Mr.
Cuomo was considered the last major obstacle to the Oneidas' plan.
The compact is subject to approval by the Interior Department, but the Federal agency has a strong record of endorsing such agreements.


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tuition Rise Wins Praise On Trenton State Campus
Students at Trenton State College won an unusual victory today: the State Board of Higher Education agreed to let them pay higher tuition than the law allows.
While the presidents of other New Jersey public colleges have had to contend with student protests after tuition increases of 4.5 percent last fall, the most the board would allow, Trenton State won general assent, and in many cases active support, from students and parents for an increase amounting to 26 percent.
In its vote today, the board said the college could keep collecting $350 of the $500 surcharge imposed last fall to make up for money that the state could not provide.


CLINTON CONSIDERS A TOUGHER POLICY TO HALT THE SERBS
As Serbian forces moved on the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica, President Clinton said today that the United States and its allies needed to consider actions that "previously have been unacceptable" to stop the Serbian attacks in Bosnia.
While American officials debated in private whether to seek air strikes against Serbian artillery positions, Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference that in the present situation he had not ruled out any military options except the dispatch of American ground troops to the Balkans.


Valmont Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Bridge
Winston Churchill was once spotted by his host emerging naked from a bathroom in the White House.
He raised a commanding hand when F.D.R. started to turn his wheelchair and depart.
"The Prime Minister of Great Britain," he announced, "has nothing to hide from the President of the United States."
Showing all you have got may be sensible for allied heads of state, but it is not always the right policy for bridge players: the enemy may be listening.
An example is the diagramed deal played a week ago in a high-stakes game at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, 4 East 80th Street in Manhattan.
Sitting North-South were Steve Beck and Tannah Hirsch, opposing two experts.


Clinton and the Japanese Premier Scold Each Other on Trade Issues
President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan used their first White House meeting today to scold each other bluntly about international trade, as Mr.
Clinton insisted on an approach to resolving disputes that the Prime Minister called unacceptable.
Appearing together at an East Room news conference, the two leaders made clear that little progress had been made on their economic disagreement during a private meeting and luncheon, saying only that they would now attempt to work out new definitions of what could constitute a middle ground.


Clinton Retreats on Jobs Plan, Offering $4 Billion Cut
In his first concession on his plan to stimulate the economy, President Clinton today offered to cut $4 billion from the $19.5 billion package.
But the overture was immediately spurned by the Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole, who said trimming some fat off what he called a pork-barrel bill was no gift to American taxpayers.
Mr.
Clinton's new proposal, made in the hope of luring some Senate Republicans who are blocking his package into negotiations, would keep intact the entire list of job and social programs in the bill.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Picking a Policy to Supplement Medicare
When Dorothy Epstein of New York City retired four years ago, she bought a Medicare supplementary policy, called Medigap insurance, from Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield.
But she was unable to comparison shop accurately, because the cost and features of her policy were similar but not equivalent to those of other policies.
At the beginning of this year, though, Ms.
Epstein found what she felt was a better deal and switched her Medigap coverage to a policy offered by the American Association of Retired Persons and underwritten by the Prudential Insurance Company of America.


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rangers End With Whimper
It's official.
And terminal.
The season of the Rangers, the team that entered the season primping for its first Stanley Cup in 53 years only to miss the playoffs, ended tonight at the Capital Centre with a 4-2 loss.
It was the Rangers' seventh consecutive defeat.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lowering the Passions Over Trade
Standing between President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan during their talks yesterday in Washington was a looming $50 billion trade imbalance.
Mr.
Clinton labeled the deficit unacceptable and warned that it jeopardized cooperation between the two economic superpowers.
Also turning up the heat on the trade dispute are powerful industrialists threatened by Japanese exports; U.S. automobile manufacturers took out a full-page newspaper ad yesterday calling the trade deficit with Japan "priority number one."
Though the two leaders were polite during a press conference following their talks, belligerence was close to the surface.
That's too bad, because the trade deficit is a poor reason to drive a wedge between important allies.


Hillary Clinton Resumes Campaign To Sell Overhaul of U.S. Health Care
After several weeks away from the health-care task force she is leading, Hillary Rodham Clinton resumed her campaign today to build public support for the effort, warning that all Americans will suffer if the system is not overhauled.
As President Clinton considers a form of national sales tax and other ways to help pay for the plan, Mrs.
Clinton seemed to be preparing people to be ready to make sacrifices or find themselves facing "skyrocketing costs" or no care at all.


Q &amp; A
Your Own 401(k)?
Q.
Is it possible for an employee to arrange a 401(k) plan on her own?
GAIL HARRINGTON, Larchmont, N.Y.
A.
No.
"The Internal Revenue Code restricts such arrangements to qualified pension, profit-sharing and stock bonus plans maintained by employers," said William J. Arnone, director of financial and retirement planning for Buck Consultants of New York.
Individuals may, of course, set up their own individual retirement plans, which allow tax-deferred investment earnings to accumulate as with a 401(k) savings plan.
And self-employed people can establish a simplified employee pension, known as a S.E.P., which operates under the same basic rules as an I.R.A., or a Keogh plan, which operates like a 401(k) plan.
Broker-Held Securities
Q.
What are the pros and cons of leaving your securities in the custody of a broker?
MILDRED D. MAILICK, Forest Hills, Queens
A.
A big advantage of keeping securities in the custody of a brokerage firm is that you don't have to worry about safeguarding them or delivering them at the time of sale.
There is also generally an automatic deposit of your interest and dividends into some type of interest-bearing money market account at the firm.
"The major disadvantage is that you become tied to the broker who sold the securities to you and whose commissions probably cannot be negotiated," said Kenneth Janke, president of the National Association of Investors Corporation.
In addition, you cannot enter a company's dividend reinvestment plan when your stock is registered in the broker's name.
And if the broker has financial difficulties -- even with the insurance protection for customer assets that most firms have -- there may be delays before you can reclaim your securities.
Callable Treasury Bonds
Q.
Why doesn't the Treasury issue bonds with a callable feature?
WILLIAM H. O'BEIRNE, Brooklyn,
A.
Callable debt is redeemable by the issuer before the scheduled maturity date, with calls usually made when the issuer can save money by floating new debt at a lower interest rate.
The Federal Government did sell callable bonds in the past and about two dozen issues are still outstanding.
But it stopped selling them when it instituted the Strips program in the mid-1980's, a system that led to the separate trading of the principal and interest on its bonds.
"In a system like that, it's pretty inconvenient to have callable bonds," said Deborah Danker, Deputy Assistant Treasury Secretary for Federal Finance.
"If the bonds could be called, an investor could never be sure that the interest payments would actually be made in later years."
From a broader perspective, the question relates to the fact that the Government considers itself a large enough entity to self-insure.
A call on a bond usually requires a higher interest rate -- in effect, an insurance premium -- that Washington chooses not to pay.


Indians Change Plans
The Cleveland Indians have abandoned plans to hold spring training in Homestead, Fla., because of their concerns the area may never fully recover from damage caused by Hurricane Andrew.
The Indians, who trained in Tucson, Ariz., from 1946 to 1992, had made a two-year commitment to a new training complex in Homestead until the hurricane hit in August, destroying part of the facility.
Unable to train in Homestead this spring, the team instead went to Winter Haven, Fla., former spring camp of the Boston Red Sox.
Yesterday, the Indians said they intend to make Winter Haven their permanent spring home.


Reynolds Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Attorney General Janet Reno's visit to a Washington neighborhood where a gunman has shot at least nine people in recent weeks misstated the number who have died.
It is two, not four.


Top Regulator Assails Board Of Blue Cross
In a stinging rebuke of the state's largest health insurer, the New York State Insurance Superintendent yesterday urged some members of the board of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield to resign for abdicating their responsibility to oversee the financially troubled company.
In a letter to Empire board members, Salvatore R. Curiale, the Insurance Superintendent, harshly criticized the board as well as the management of the company, which has lost $250 million in the last two years despite large rate increases.


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Griefs of South Africa
A month before he was slain on a Johannesburg street, Chris Hani, general secretary of the South African Communist Party, told a Newsweek correspondent: "I am an optimist, and it may take some time, but political democracy will triumph." His own transformation from guerrilla to negotiator was one cause for optimism.
Yet the bloodletting that followed his murder suggests how much can still go wrong if hopes for an honorable multiracial compromise are buried with Mr.
Hani.


Classical Music in Review
Popov and Vona  Duo Pianists  Alice Tully Hall
The most interesting piece on the New York debut program by Popov and Vona, a Canadian piano duo, was actually a trio for two pianists and a percussionist.
The work was Gary Kulesha's "Book of Mirrors," an impressionistic piece inspired by a passage in Peter Greenaway's film "Prospero's Books." The piece describes a collection of mirrors that present mystically altered reflections, and to do so it touches many bases.
There are passages of delicate mystery, impressionistic vagueness, mild atonality and abstract wanderings as well as stretches that would be comfortable in a suspense film.
The pianists, Lark Popov and George Vona, were joined in the work by Beverley Johnston, who played with a subtlety that is not typical among percussionists.


Business Digest
International
Little progress was made by Japan and the U.S. on resolving economic disagreements.
In the first meeting of President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan, the two scolded each other about international trade.  [ Page 1. ]


Second Hostage Is Freed Unhurt By Ohio Inmates
Rebellious prisoners were allowed to broadcast a list of their demands over television today, and in exchange they released unharmed a second of the eight guards whom they took hostage when they seized a wing of the state maximum-security prison here five days ago.
The developments reduced to five the number of guards still held captive inside the L wing of the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility.
One of the eight who had been seized was freed Thursday night after the authorities had allowed a representative of the 450 or so insurgents to state their demands in a radio talk.
One hostage has died, apparently at the hands of the rebels, who earlier Thursday placed his body in the recreation yard adjoining the L wing.


Advo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Classical Music in Review
Baltimore Symphony Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
Since most of the great international orchestras have wowed New York audiences with their Mahler in recent decades, it is hard not to hold an ensemble of the second rank to an impossibly high standard in the composer's music.
In fact, the Baltimore Symphony gave a fine performance of Mahler's Fourth Symphony on Tuesday evening under its music director, David Zinman.
Mr.
Zinman showed decided ideas about the music, and some good ones, and the players seemed eager and mostly able to carry them out.
But, for example, when Mr.
Zinman coaxed those arching portamentos out of his strings, the texture tended to fray, with instruments swooping individually.
And the climaxes in the opening movement never quite shone.
Still, this was an impressive achievement, much enhanced by Dawn Kotoski's vocal solo in the finale.


Berio to Conduct for Muti
Luciano Berio will replace Riccardo Muti as conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra's Tuesday-night concert at Carnegie Hall because Mr.
Muti is under doctor's orders to rest, the orchestra has announced.
The program will remain the same: Beethoven's "Emperor" Concerto, with the pianist Garrick Ohlsson, and Mr.
Berio's "Epiphanies," with Charlotte Hellekant, a mezzo-soprano, as soloist.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Judge Frees Intel Clone For Sales
In a big victory for Advanced Micro Devices Inc., a Federal judge today overturned a jury verdict that had prevented the company from selling its clone of the Intel Corporation's 486 chip.
The 486 is the heart of most new personal computers and has helped make Intel the most profitable semiconductor manufacturer in the world.


Communications Satellite reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
'Lucia di Lammermoor'  Metropolitan Opera
Everyone but Roseanne Arnold has sung in the Met's current production of "Lucia," which will have its last performance of the season next Saturday.
The final additions to the cast have been Sumi Jo in the title role and Alfredo Kraus as Edgardo.
Ms.
Jo regularly receives acclaim for the agile beauty of her singing; she is just as often criticized for a lack of passion.
But her performance on Monday night succeeded in every dimension by which a Lucia might be measured.
The part was delivered with remarkable precision, every note gleaming in place; at the same time, it gained luster with touches entirely the singer's own.
The mad scene dissolved into shivering pulsations of timbre, otherworldly and beguiling.


Washington Journal; Dingy Goddess Atop the Dome May Shine Again
She isn't a pregnant Indian, though people always think she is.
For children, she is a magical sight towering above the city, especially all lit up at night, floating atop the Capitol dome like an angel on a Christmas tree or a bride on a wedding cake, only much grander.


Irving Kessler, 74, Former RCA Officer And a Civic Leader
Irving K. Kessler, a retired RCA executive and civic leader, died on Thursday at a hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 74 and lived in Cherry Hill, N.J.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Terrorized, a Washington Neighborhood Is Noticed
Before a drive-by killer began stalking Northwest Washington two months ago, Columbia Heights was a typically troubled urban neighborhood, another place of hard-working families trying to cope with drugs and gangs.
Now several shotgun shootings, in which two people have been killed and seven others wounded, have put the neighborhood and its problems in a spotlight that usually misses them.


North American Mortgage Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
BALLY MANUFACTURING CORP., Chicago, said it had acquired property in Biloxi, Miss., and planned to build a 30,000-square-foot dockside casino there by spring 1994.
MERIDIAN BANCORP INC., Reading, Pa., completed its acquisition of Cherry Hill National Bank.
Cherry Hill has four branches that will join the newly chartered Meridian Bank, New Jersey.


MicroAge Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Britons Would Gladly Wash Their Hands of the Irish Problem; London Must Change
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Andrew O'Hehir for "Ireland's Troubled Sleep" (Op-Ed, April 5).
It is indeed time for a new direction in dealing with the Irish conflict.
However, those looking for easy political solutions have ignored the social and economic forces that perpetuate the painful division of the two communities.
The question remains: Is a settlement between the two communities still possible?
The British Government must admit its failures and understand that direct rule from London of Northern Ireland is not the preferred option of Roman Catholics or Protestants.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Sent John Valentin, shortstop, to Pawtucket of the International League, on a 20-day rehabilitation assignment.


Making The Broker Pay for Bad Advice
Nancy Halle, a 55-year-old widow in Tucson Ariz., lost $46,695 of a $48,512 investment after she bought preferred shares of First Executive Corporation, an insurance holding company that later filed for bankruptcy after heavy losses in junk bonds.
Because she was an unsophistcated investor, she had relied completely on her Prudential Bache broker's advice.
When the broker denied all responsibility for the loss, Mrs.
Halle hired a Lawyer and presented her case to an arbitration panel of the New York Stock Exchange.


Not So Lonely
To the Editor:
In "The Lone Dissenter" (letter, April 9), Phyllis J. Read and Bernard L. Witlieb say that Jeanette Rankin was the only member of the House of Representatives to vote against United States entry into World War I. Actually, 49 Congressmen voted with her.
RONALD SCHAFFER Northridge, Calif., April 9, 1993


Here, You Try to Fix It, Rangers Tell Keenan
Mike Keenan, considered to be among hockey's best coaches and strongest personalities, will be introduced today as the new coach of the Rangers.
The Rangers would not confirm the hiring of Keenan yesterday, but the team called a news conference for 1 P.M. today at which Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, will make the move official.


Yankees Weather Rangers And Rains
After a night of swirling winds and rampant rain that began in the second inning and caused two lengthy delays, the Yankees finally escaped to a dry clubhouse with a 5-3 victory over the Texas Rangers at Yankee Stadium.
Danny Tartabull was removed from the game in the top of the fifth inning after suffering muscle soreness in his left buttocks.
He is listed as day to day.


Corrections
A cast listing with a television review in The Living Arts yesterday about "The Fire Next Time" misstated the broadcast schedule.
The four-hour movie will be shown on CBS at 9 P.M. tomorrow and Tuesday; it was not seen last night.


Strikes Shut Down Railroads and Mines in Britain
In a display of old-fashioned labor militancy, Britain's state-owned railroads and coal mines were shut down for the second time in two weeks today by workers demanding safeguards against the kinds of layoffs that have already left more than three million people out of work in Britain.
The daylong strike by two rail unions stranded one million passengers and paralyzed Britain's 11,000-mile rail system, including commuter trains in and out of London, while the 24-hour walkout by the National Union of Coal Miners forced more than half of the nation's coal mines to close for the day.


A Wreath And Fears At Scene
Hours after gunfire and death exploded on a crowded commercial street in Brooklyn yesterday, residents and merchants of Flatbush tried to return to their normal routines.
Though the police officers and detectives were gone and the bloodstains had been scrubbed away, reminders that this had not been a normal day on the vibrant strip of Church Avenue were quickly apparent: in the buzzing clusters of people assessing the area's safety and in the floral wreath hanging on a tree.


Badger Meter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pulitzer Publishing (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Utah Coach Suspended
JERRY SLOAN, coach of the Utah Jazz, has been suspended by the National Basketball Association for one game and fined $2,000 for pushing an official during Utah's game Thursday night against Portland in Salt Lake City.
He will miss tonight's home game against the Phoenix Suns.
Sloan was ejected with 9 minutes 1 second left in the fourth quarter after he pushed a referee, BOB DELANEY as they argued over the lack of a call involving TYRONE CORBIN.
The Jazz was ahead by 85-78 and wound up winning by 122-117 in overtime.


Dyersburg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Dow at High, But Broader Market Weak
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at a record high yesterday, but only by 0.27 point and probably because of computerized trading programs timed to go off when the Dow approaches a high.
The Dow rose 22.69 points, to 3,478.61, exceeding its March 10 high of 3,478.34.
But the slight rise in the broader-based Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index provided a better measure of what much of this week's trading seemed to be: meandering.


Houston Hires Carr
The former Florida athletic director, Bill Carr, became the athletic director at the University of Houston yesterday just as the school started an investigation into alleged N.C.A.A. violations in its football program.
Carr replaced RUDY DAVALOS, who resigned Nov. 16 to become athletic director at New Mexico. (AP)


Communications Plan Draws Mixed Reaction
The computer industry reacted with concern and several enthusiastic endorsements to a plan announced today by the Clinton Administration to preserve the Government's ability to eavesdrop on electronic communications while still preserving privacy.
A.T.&amp; T. quickly announced that it would introduce a line of devices that could be connected to telephones and computers to offer voice and data security based on the new communication coding technology standard developed by the Government.
The devices, which couple to telephone lines and work with the push of a button, will sell for $1,195 later this year.


David Lee Roth Is Arrested
David Lee Roth, the lead singer of Van Halen in the early 1980's, was arrested with 24 other people on drug charges yesterday in Washington Square Park, the police said last night.
Mr.
Roth was arrested while trying to buy a $5 bag of marijuana, the police said.
The arrests came during a routine narcotics sweep of the park that began Thursday.
Mr.
Roth was given a summons, similar to a traffic ticket, ordering him to appear in criminal court on May 21, the police said.
Mr.
Roth and the others who were arrested were then released from the Sixth Precinct stationhouse at 233 West 10th Street.


Jury in Los Angeles To Make Statement
Jurors in the Rodney G. King beating case will make an announcement, which could be a verdict, early this morning, a member of the Police Commission said.
The announcement will come after seven days of deliberations in the trial of four police officers on Federal civil rights charges.


Fundamentalists and Catholics: More in Common
In the tactical alliance between the Rev.
Pat Robertson and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, there is something for both sides.
Trying to influence New York City's school board elections, Mr.
Robertson's organization saw the Catholic church as the perfect vehicle for quickly gaining access to every neighborhood in the city.


Prize for a String Quartet
The Ying String Quartet has won the 1993 Naumburg Chamber Music Award in finals held at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater of Columbia University on April 1.
The prize consists of a recital at Alice Tully Hall and the commissioning of a chamber work for the group from an American composer.
The members of the Ying quartet, three brothers and a sister from Chicago, are Timothy and Janet, violinists; Phillip, violist, and David, cellist.


Pentair Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Supplies Set, Home Shopping Says
Home Shopping Network Inc., the troubled television marketer, said today that vendors were still shipping merchandise despite questions about the company's ability to pay.
Gerard Hogan, president and chief executive of Home Shopping Network, which is based here, said the company had recently reached 77 of 10,000 vendors that ship goods to Home Shopping Network and had been assured that the shipments would continue.


John P. Sullivan, 62, Scholar and Teacher
Prof.
John Patrick Sullivan, a Latin scholar, literary historian and critic, died on April 9 at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 62.
The cause was cancer, said Anthony James Boyle, a friend and colleague at the University of California, Santa Barbara.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.15
3.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.82
2.81
3.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.93
3.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.50
5.49
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.75
6.72
7.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.65
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.93
5.91
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


INSIDE
Clinton Offer on Spending
President Clinton offered to cut $4 billion from his $19.5 billion plan to stimulate the economy, but Republicans were unreceptive.
Page 8.
Empire Blue Cross Assailed
The New York State Insurance Superintendent sought resignations from some on the Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield board.
Page 23.
Minister Acquitted in Texas
A former Dallas minister who suffered a startling fall from grace was found not guilty of trying to choke his wife to death in 1987.
Page 8.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Hornets Extend Lead Alonzo Mourning scored 19 of his 36 points in the third quarter and matched a season high with 22 rebounds as Charlotte strengthened its hold on a playoff spot with a 127-93 home-court victory over Detroit last night.
The victory gave Charlotte a one-and-a-half-game lead over the Pistons, who started the night tied with Indiana for the eighth and final post-season berth in the Eastern Conference. (AP) Cavaliers 113, Magic 110: Lenny Wilkens became the second-winningest coach in National Basketball Association history as Cleveland beat Orlando after nearly blowing a 21-point second-half lead.
For Wilkens, 55, it was career coaching victory No. 865, moving him past Jack Ramsay into second place on the all-time list.
Red Auerbach ranks first with his 938 victories as coach of the Boston Celtics.
The Magic, scrapping for the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, lost its second straight, and still trails both Indiana and Detroit. (AP) GOLF It's Langer, Again Masters champion Bernhard Langer once again displayed his precise shot-making, shooting a 31 on the front nine yesterday and capturing a share of the lead with David Frost and David Edwards after two rounds at the Heritage Classic in Hilton Head Island, S.C.
After what he called a hectic week of interviews and appearances since his Augusta victory, Langer put together a dazzling round of seven birdies and a bogey to end with a 65 and a 36-hole total of 134, eight under par. (AP) TENNIS Lendl Molds Victory Ivan Lendl, playing on his favorite surface, clay, showed glimpses of his past play as he defeated Petr Korda, 1-6, 6-2, 6-0, in the quarterfinals of the Nice Open in France yesterday.
Stefan Edberg, the top-seeded player, defeated Javier Sanchez of Spain, 6-4, 6-2; a qualifier, Marc Goellner, overpowered Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina, 6-0, 6-2, and seventh-seeded Fabrice Santoro of France outlasted Franco Davin of Argentina, 7-5, 5-7, 6-3. (AP) Courier Beats McEnroe: Jim Courier, seeded first and the defending champion, defeated Patrick McEnroe, a wild-card entry, 6-2, 6-3, to advance to the semifinals of the Hong Kong Open.
Courier will play third-seeded Michael Chang today.
Advancing to the other semifinal matchup were second-seeded Pete Sampras and fourth-seeded Amos Mansdorf of Israel. (AP)


Oce-van der Grinten NV (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Hip Hip . . . Hippos?


Cable Regulation Costs
To the Editor:
"F.C.C. Orders Cuts in Cable Rates; Eases Rerun Rule" (front page, April 2) reports the potential saving in the Federal Communications Commission announcement on regulating cable, but omits the potential cost to obtain such savings.
Each community that has cable -- there are 11,000 -- must satisfy the F.C.C. that it has personnel trained to judge the pricing of its cable operator.
On average, this means that each community will need to hire one, possibly two, cable monitors.
If it costs $40,000 a year to pay, furnish office space and provide equipment and benefits for personnel, $440 million to $880 million of the so-called saving will be transferred but to all taxpayers, in the form of additional tax.


Willamette Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


March Industrial Output Unchanged
Held down by the East Coast blizzard in mid-March, industrial output remained unchanged for the month after posting five straight advances, the Federal Reserve Board reported today.
But since most analysts had expected a modest decline, based mainly on employment and workweek data published two weeks ago, the results were considered in line with continued moderate economic expansion.
At month's end, the Government is expected to report first-quarter growth in gross domestic product of 2.5 percent to 3 percent.


Britons Would Gladly Wash Their Hands of the Irish Problem
To the Editor:
As a British journalist of 40 years' experience, I am glad I never had the misfortune to work for someone as misinformed as Andrew O'Hehir, senior editor of San Francisco Weekly and writer of "Ireland's Troubled Sleep" (Op-Ed, April 5).
He writes: "Perhaps abandoning the final lump of empire is too bitter a pill for the British establishment to swallow."
I know of not one Briton, in or out of government, who would not gladly vote in a referendum to wash his or her hands of the Irish problem.
Years of losing sons and daughters, fathers and brothers to the bombing atrocities of Irish Republican Army thugs have sickened them to the point of no longer caring about the rights and wrongs of the "troubles."


The Wood Memorial: Add Rain, and Stir
On the eve of the Wood Memorial, the most important Kentucky Derby prep race in New York for the last 69 years, Rich Schosberg scanned the clouds over Aqueduct yesterday and expressed the anxiety of all trainers caught in the Triple Crown sweepstakes: "At this point," he said, "any edge will help."
Schosberg didn't seem to need extravagant help because his colt, As Indicated, won the Gotham Stakes two weeks ago and was rated the third choice in the Wood.
The race will be run this afternoon at a mile and one-eighth with a purse of $500,000 and with a dozen 3-year-olds competing.
Most of them will be taking their final tests before their owners make the decision on whether they continue on to Churchill Downs, where the 119th Derby will be run two weeks from today.


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Changing Times: Push-Button Fires
David F. Knowles, secret weapon in hand, stood before a stove with cheery yellow flames dancing over a stack of gnarly logs.
The winter just ended was another mediocre one for his industry, wood stoves, but in his palm was his wait-until-next-year weapon, a black plastic box that looked suspiciously like a remote control unit borrowed from a television set.
It was.
One click and the flames disappeared.
Another and they suddenly came back.
And the stove does not burn wood at all; the logs are ceramic, and -- no fuss and no bother -- the merry flames come from natural gas.


H.I.V. Positive, He Hands In His Crown
For the first time in boxing, an active champion has been identified as testing positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Ruben Palacio of Colombia, who held the World Boxing Organization's featherweight crown, learned of the test result on Thursday in London.
He flew home yesterday, stripped of the title he was to have defended tonight and barred from further competition by the W.B.O.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Davox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jury in Beating Trial Sets Announcement for Today
The jury in the Rodney G. King beating case will make an announcement, which could be a verdict, early Saturday morning, a member of the Police Commission said today.
The police were placed on citywide tactical alert shortly after 4 P.M. today, a move they had announced they would take when the jury reached a verdict in this tense city.


METRO DIGEST
2 JUDGES DECLINE FURTHER DRUG CASES
Two of New York City's most prominent Federal judges said that they would no longer preside over drug cases, calling attention to similar decisions made by dozens of Federal judges across the country.
The decisions, by Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn and Whitman Knapp of Manhattan, were made to protest national drug policies and Federal sentencing guidelines.
The judges said the emphasis on arrests and imprisonment, rather than prevention and treatment, failed to deal with the drug problem.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY MISTRIAL LINKED TO POLICE SCANDAL
In what prosecutors and defense lawyers say could be the prelude to the undermining of scores of narcotics indictments in New York City, a Federal judge declared a mistrial in a major narcotics case that she said had been tainted by a police corruption scandal.
Page 25.
POST RESUMES PUBLISHING
After failing to publish Friday's paper in a dispute over work rules, The New York Post and its union pressmen agreed to set their differences aside for the weekend, publish normally over the weekend and meet on Monday to talk about a number of sensitive issues.
Page 25.
SHOUTING MATCH AT ALLEN-FARROW TRIAL
With frequent cries of "Don't put words in my mouth!" and "Don't tell me!" a Harvard law professor retained by Mia Farrow and a lawyer for Woody Allen reduced the couple's custody trial to an angry shouting match, trading barbs over everything from each other's ethics to Mr.
Allen's morals.
Page 25.
30-YEAR SENTENCE IN '73 BOMBING ATTEMPT
A man described by his lawyer as an official of the Palestine Liberation Organization was sentenced to the maximum of 30 years in prison for trying to bomb three Israeli sites in New York City 20 years ago.
Page 25.
REGION CUOMO APPROVES ONEIDA CASINO
Governor Cuomo signed an agreement that will allow the tiny Oneida Indian Nation to open New York State's first high-stakes gambling casino in Verona, N.Y., near Syracuse, possibly by the summer.
Getting Mr.
Cuomo's approval was considered the last major obstacle to the Oneida's plan.
Page 1.
TRENTON STUDENTS PRAISE HIGHER TUITION
Students at Trenton State College won an unusual victory: the State Board of Higher Education agreed to let them pay higher tuition than the law allows.
Page 26.
2-WHEELERS, HIGH, WIDE AND HANDSOME
Copake, N.Y., in the Berkshire foothills, is the unlikely host to a sale that its organizer calls "an event that spans the history of bicycle manufacturing": the auction of an astounding array of more than 200 bicycles, from an Indochinese taxi-cycle to an antique hand-pedaled adult tricycle designed for riders whose legs were disabled.
Page 26.
PRESIDENT, NO. JUSTICE, NO. SPEAKER, YES!
Governor Cuomo received an average of nearly $20,000 for each of 14 speaking engagements in 1992, a sum that lifted his income to $425,644, according to tax returns.
Page 26.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 24


Women on Sports Beat Have Come a Long Way
To the Editor:
Marie Brenner's excellent "Girls of Summer" (Op-Ed, April 5) mentions that 14 years ago she was "one of the first woman baseball columnists in the major leagues." She is at least 19 years after the fact.
I was the only female reporter in the country covering the Indianapolis 500 in 1960.
I have the scars to prove it.
My interviews had to be conducted through chain-link fences because women were not allowed inside Gasoline Alley, the race car drivers' domain.
The fence was no impediment in one area; anyone on either side heard the lewd jokes lobbed my way.


Gorbachev Inaugurates Foundation in California


Classical Music in Review
Bach Choir and Orchestra  Holy Trinity Lutheran Church  Central Park West
For 25 years, the Holy Trinity Lutheran Church has been presenting Bach's cantatas within the framework of the Lutheran service for which they were originally intended.
On Easter Sunday, Richard Erickson directed the church's Bach Choir and Orchestra in a program that included the cantata "Christ lag in Todesbanden" and Giovanni Gabrieli's "Jubilate Deo" alongside Bach's secular Harpsichord Concerto in D (BWV 1054).
Bach composed relatively few works for Easter; "Christ lag," one of his earliest surviving cantatas, circumscribes the Resurrection's jubilation with stark tones of awe and gloom.
The Rev.
Richard L. Jeske, the pastor of Holy Trinity, described the ecclesiastical subtleties of the cantata at some length, taking note of numerological tricks and symbols in both Luther's text and Bach's score.
Mr.
Erickson drew out an idiomatic performance; the soloists were Margaret Brooks (soprano), Jacqueline Pierce (mezzo-soprano), Patrick Romano (tenor) and Peter Stewart (baritone), with Mr.
Stewart's powerful voice particularly apt for the occasion.


Review/Performance Art; Vaudeville, Complete With a Tornado
A little music, some comedy, an illusion, a dance novelty, a film, a song, a few homilies, a ventriloquist's dummy playing the violin.
It's the stuff of vaudeville, a format that has never been far away from Laurie Anderson's style of performance art.
Her large, recurring themes are invariably overshadowed by the oblique brilliance of individual bits.
Ms.
Anderson is performing the world premiere of her latest multimedia work, "Stories From the Nerve Bible," at the Annenberg Center through Saturday.
It is presented by the American Music Theater Festival.
The stage has a row of bright television monitors and large video screens, sliding (like Japanese shoji screens) and suspended.
Ms.
Anderson sometimes sits at a keyboard, sometimes strolls with an electric violin, sometimes gestures with airport-signal flashlights or plays a synthesizer, trademarked Bodysynth, that is triggered by arm and hand movements.
Guy Klucevsek on accordion and keyboard, Greg Cohen on bass and Cyro Baptista on percussion supplement Ms.
Anderson's music and voice, creating understated funk vamps and soothing or foreboding sustained chords.


Sex Survey Surprise
In the latest sex survey of American males, only 2 percent reported a homosexual experience over the past decade and only 1 percent described themselves as exclusively homosexual.
That's a surprise: the 10 percent rate reported in 1948 by Alfred Kinsey has long been accepted as conventional wisdom.
Of course, nobody knows for sure how honest people are in responding to the question in a face-to-face interview, even when guaranteed anonymity.
And this latest survey questioned only relatively young men, from the ages of 20 through 39, before some may be aware of their sexual orientation.


Thiokol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooklyn Bystander Dies in Robbery Crossfire
A 38-year-old Transit Authority worker who had just bought coffee for his colleagues was slain on a Brooklyn sidewalk yesterday morning when he was caught in a wild gun battle between armored truck guards and would-be robbers.
More than 25 shots were fired in the exchange, and it was unclear yesterday whether the bullet that struck the worker, Robert Singleton, in the head was fired by the guards or by the robbers, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a Police Department spokeswoman.
The guards shot one of the suspects once in the back, but his partners managed to drag him from the sidewalk and into a white Nissan Maxima before they fled without taking any money.


30-Year Term Imposed in Attempted Bombing of Israeli Sites
A man described by his lawyer as an official of the Palestine Liberation Organization was sentenced yesterday to the maximum of 30 years in prison for trying to bomb three Israeli sites in New York City 20 years ago.
Khaled Mohammed el-Jassem received the sentence in Federal Court in Brooklyn after making a two-hour statement Thursday in which he insisted that he had been framed by the Israeli and United States Governments and forsaken by the P.L.O.'s top leadership after his arrest in Italy in 1991.


Who Put It On? Who'll Take It Off?
To the Editor:
I was both astounded and amused to read that Richard Glanton  [ "A Controversial Man in an Eccentric Place," April 4 ]  "will soon be credited as the man who put the Barnes Foundation on the map." As the author of a recent biography of Albert C. Barnes, "The Devil and Dr. Barnes," I feel qualified to assure you that the foundation was put on the map by Barnes himself, years before Mr.
Glanton was born.
It was Barnes alone who assembled the extraordinary collection and initiated the education program in Merion, Pa., and he deserves full credit for making them known throughout the world.


Anglicans Triumph In Colonial Setting
OLDE MISTICK VILLAGE is a commercial enterprise, a cluster of stores designed to look like an 18th-century New England town, only neater and probably more pleasant.
It is a place of winding walks, Colonial-style structures in planned disarray, a pond with ducks and other waterfowl, flowering trees that explode with beauty in the spring, even a little church that is a composite miniature of the Congregational churches that grace town greens across the state.


Turgut Ozal, 66, Dies in Ankara; Pugnacious President of Turkey
President Turgut Ozal of Turkey, who was combative, pugnacious and provocative to the last, died in his Ankara home yesterday.
He was 66 years old.
Officials said the cause of death was heart failure and suggested that it might have been hastened by a grueling 12-day tour of Central Asia that ended two days earlier.


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring special spring activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
On permanent display are items relating to film, television and video, like costumes, sets and filming equipment.
Special exhibitions include "Changing Faces," more than 450 photographs and artifacts that examine the work of hair stylists and makeup artists (through August); continuing through April 25 will be a retrospective of films by the cinematographer Haskell Wexler.
"'What Made Pistachio Nuts? Early Sound Comedy and the Vaudeville Tradition," featuring the films of Eddie Cantor, the Marx Brothers, Wheeler and Woolsey, W. C. Fields, Burns and Allen and others will run May 1 through July 4.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
All activities are free with museum admission: $5 ($4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children under 12 and other students).
Information: (718) 784-0077.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A.T.M.'s for All
SOMETHING to think about.
At the Fleet Bank in East Islip the drive-up automatic teller machines now have directions in Braille.
"I think it's very strange," a drive-up customer, Dawn Pellegrino of Islip Terrace, said.
"If you can't see, how can you drive?"


Rocio Torres-Quevedo, Eric A. Karl
Rocio Torres-Quevedo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francisco Torres-Quevedo of Seville, Spain, was married on Friday to Eric A. Karl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ludwig L. Karl of Scotia, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ramon Mena performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Church of Santa Maria in Seville.
Mrs.
Karl, 33, is a statistician for Consumers Union, the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine, in Yonkers.
She graduated from the University of Seville and received a master's degree in psychology from New York University.
She received a Ph.D. in applied statistics from the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York.


Wildflowers Bring Color to the Season
THE garden is waking up from its long winter rest.
All kinds of little evidences of new life are appearing.
It is a time for everyone to be careful when working outside, lest a delicate plant be trampled.
This is also a time of great anticipation.
Visits to the garden are important now just to see what is coming along.
Day by day things change.
Many of spring's loveliest flowers last but a few days and unless the gardener is alert to what is coming up and leafing out, some of these beautiful flowers could be missed.


How Balanchine Speaks To the Future Via the Past
I don't know about you, but it is impossible for me to listen to Bizet's "Symphony in C" on the radio without visualizing George Balanchine's dancers in his ballet of the same name.
The score -- as apt to be heard in a dentist's office as in a taxi -- would not even be played today if Balanchine's choreography had not rescued this neglected symphony from oblivion in 1947.
How typical of Balanchine to give the public at large a lesson in both music and dance appreciation.
His own reference point was international culture, and on the 10th anniversary of his death, on April 30, 1983, he has become one of its major symbols.


Cairo Pro and Con
To the Editor: The article "Taking a Chance on Cairo" both angered and dismayed me.
It is an insult to the intelligence of experienced travelers and, perhaps worse, a dangerous piece of advice to the novice.
Do the writers really believe that the vast majority of American tourists have the budget or the desire to be whisked from airport to hotel by a sterile Mercedes complete with staff of two?
The writers "take a chance" by staying in luxurious splendor at five-star hotels, eating in posh restaurants, sailing on luxury liners and driving -- not walking -- through Luxor's open-air market.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LADIES OF THE COURT Grace and Disgrace on  the Women's Tennis Tour.
By Michael Mewshaw.
Crown, $22.


Wildflowers Bring Color to the Season
THE garden is waking up from its long winter rest.
All kinds of little evidences of new life are appearing.
It is a time for everyone to be careful when working outside, lest a delicate plant be trampled.
This is also a time of great anticipation.
Visits to the garden are important now just to see what is coming along.
Day by day things change.
Many of spring's loveliest flowers last but a few days and unless the gardener is alert to what is coming up and leafing out, some of these beautiful flowers could be missed.


Charmaine Beepot and David Evans
Mr. and Mrs.
Lothian Beepot of Hyde Park, Mass., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Charmaine Marie Beepot and David Carmichael Evans, a son of James C. Evans Jr. of Guilford, Conn., and Tarah S. Cherry of Woodbridge, Conn.
Ms.
Beepot, 26, graduated from Harvard University, where she is a graduate student in education.
Her father is a machinist at the Sudbury Brass Company in Chelsea, Mass.
Her mother, Rose Marie Beepot, is the coordinator of the memory-loss program at Kit Clark Senior Services in Dorchester, Mass.


Grand on a Small Scale
CHRISTEN KOBKE
By Sanford Schwartz. Illustrated. 153 pp. New York: Timken Publishers. $35.


Q and A
Apartments in Berlin
Q.
Do you know of sources for renting a one-bedroom apartment in Berlin? -- Edward Harper, Tulsa, Okla.


To Dudley, Insult Added To His Injury
In the Nets' locker room, center Chris Dudley is one of the team's more popular players.
He is polite, personable, a guy who has a tremendous work ethic and a valuable talent: rebounding.
But lately, as nice as Dudley is, there has been a shift in his attitude toward management.
And lately, Chris Dudley has been angry.
And because of this anger there is a solid chance that Dudley -- one of the most important parts of the team, a fierce rebounder, good shot blocker and defender -- won't be a Net next season.
And for the first time since negotiations began Dudley publicly stated that his chances of rejoining the team aren't very good.


Revival of Tax Credit Is Sought to Spur Low-Income Housing
Perhaps Thurgood Marshall or Cab Calloway slept in what is now Anita Winston's apartment back when the Whitelaw Hotel was the place to stay for black notables visiting segregated Washington.
But after the 1950's, the hotel decayed into an abandoned, drug-infested hulk.
A lot of forces had to come together to revive the historic hotel into a home for 35 low-income families.
Among them was an unusual alliance of big corporations looking at their tax bills and a network of housing groups hoping to rebuild inner cities.


Wall Street; Short Memories for the Bad Times
WALL STREET'S executives are at heart a cheerful bunch, and nothing proves that better than their speedy ability to forget the bad times and revel in the good.
Merrill Lynch said last week that it had enjoyed record earnings in the first quarter, and the giddy Wednesday morning headlines set just the right tone for an annual gathering of securities executives in New York.


Yale's Coach On the Minors
In "Colleges View N.H.L. as Predator of Talent" (The Times, April 4), William N. Wallace misquoted me in regard to the quality of coaching in the professional minor leagues compared with that in the colleges.
I was quoted as saying that college hockey coaching is "a lot better" than in the minor leagues, which is simply not the case.
It was a comment that I did not make in a discussion regarding college hockey's future.
TIM TAYLOR North Branford, Conn.
The writer is the Yale hockey coach, now on leave.
He will be the head coach of the 1994 United States Olympic team.


Unutterable Vulgarity
To the Editor:
I found Sarah Boxer's review of "Mapplethorpe" (In Short, March 7) almost incredible.
Lewd and degrading photographs are no less lewd and degrading because some poor, sick sex exhibitionists posed willingly.
Unutterable vulgarity is not "tamed by the permission implicit" in the photographs, to use Ms.
Boxer's phrase.


A Little Funky Human Warmth
DARK HARBOR
A Poem. By Mark Strand. 51 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
THE BOOK OF LIGHT
By Lucille Clifton. 76 pp.
Port Townsend, Wash: Copper Canyon Press.
Cloth, $21.
Paper, $11.
AUTOBIOGRAPHIES
By Alfred Corn. 112 pp. New York: Viking. Cloth, $19. Penguin. Paper, $10.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Tomorrow to May 1 WAGNER'S "RING DES NIBELUNGEN." Given the musical reach and the expansiveness of the mythical world Wagner created in these four operas, it is easy to understand why the four-night cycle inspires an almost religious devotion.
The Met's staging, by Otto Schenk and Gunther Schneider-Siemssen, is traditional, naturalistic and at times spectacular.
James Levine conducts casts that include James Morris (a first-rate Wotan), Dawn Upshaw, Jessye Norman, Tatiana Troyanos, Gary Lakes and Matti Salminen.
Two cycles remain this season: "Das Rhengold," tomorrow and April 26 at 8 P.M.; "Die Walkure," Tuesday and April 27 at 6 P.M.; "Siegfried," Thursday 22 and April 27 at 6 P.M.; "Siegfried," Thursday 22 and April 29 at 6 P.M., and "Gotterdammerung," Saturday at 6:30 P.M. and May 1 at 6 P.M.
Tickets: $22 to $175; also standing room at $10.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
April 21 SHURA CHERKASSKY.
The 81-year-old pianist is offering a program at Carnegie Hall that manyh of his younger colleagues would find daunting, but that is typical for him.
Included are the Tausig arrangement of Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor, the Schubert Sonata in A (D. 959), Luciano Berio's "Encores," and works by Chopin and Balakirev. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
April 22 to 24 NEW YORK NOH PERFORMANCE '93.
Kanze Za, a Japanese ensemble that presents both Noh, a form of Japanese music, dance and theater that dates back to the 14thcentury, and Kyogen, a kind of humorous play, is to make its American debut in three performances at the Temple of Dendur inthe Sakler Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Performances begin at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 570-3949.
APRIL 20, 22 and 24 JUILLIARD VOICE DEPARTMENT.
At the very least, the Juilliard School's student opera productions are solid and entertaining; at best, they afford opportunities to hear young singers who may have bright futures.
The school's spring workshop production is Mozart's "Magic Flute" in a production directed by Edward Berkeley.
The school is using a mixed text: the arias will be sung in German, with the dialogue in Andrew Porter's English translation.
AT the Chamber Opera Theater, Studio 335, Juilliard, 60 Lincoln Center.
Tickets are not required, but seating is limited.
Information: (212) 769-7406.
April 26 DMITRI KHVOROSTOVSKY.
The acclaimed Russian baritone should be in his element in this program of songs by Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff and Mussorgsky, including Mussorgsky's "Songs andDances of Death," at Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $42.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
May 5 and 12 ALFRED BRENDEL.
This pianist is one of the keyboard's deep thinkers, and his Beethoven is usualy illuminating and sometimes revelatory.
He is playing 9 of the 32 Sonatas in two concerts at Carnegie Hall.
On May 5, he will playthe Sonatoas Nos. 12, 13, 14 ("Moonlight"), 21 ("Waldstein") and 22; a week later, he will play Sonatas Nos. 16, 17 ("Tempest"). 18 and 28. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $50.
Information (212) 247-7800.
May 9 EMERSON STRING QUARTET.
This polished, energetic ensemble, now completing its 15th season, is to playHaydn's "Lark," Shostakovich's Quartet No. 7, Bartok's Quartet No. 3 and Beethoven's Quartet No. 8 at Alice Tully Hall. 3 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
May 15 VEXATIONS.
Erik Satie tapped into the Minimalist esthetic early in this work, composed from 1893 to 1895.
A quirky harmonized piece that in some ways prefigures early Messiaen, "Vexations" lasts only 90 second if played once.
But Satie directed that it be played 840times.
An enormous roster of pianists and composers - including Margaret Leng-Tan, Kirk Nurok, (Blue) Gene Tyhranny, Anthony Coleman, Joseph Kubera, Alvin Lucier, Kyle Gann and Chester Biscardi - are collaborating on a complete performance at Roulette, 228 West Broadway, at White Street, TriBeCa. 8 A.M. to about 3 A.M.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 219-8242.
May 20 to 31 NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC.
Kurt Masur, who has proven to be an eloquent Beethoven conductor, is offering the Ninth Symphony as part of the Philharmonic's 150th anniversary season.
The program also includes Ives's "Unanswered Question" as a kind of philosophical prelude.
Joining Mr.
Masur and the Philharmonic are Benita Valente, soprano; Janis Taylor, mezzo-soprano; Uwe Heilmann, tenor, and Robert Hall, bass, with the New York Choral Artists.
The performances at Avery Fisher Hall are sold out, but there is an open rehearsal at 9:45 A.M. on May 20.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
The orchestra is also planning a free performance on May 31 at 8 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 AmsterdamAvenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
The soloists are Miss Valente, Miss Taylor, Michael Forest, tenor, and Nathaniel Watson, bass.
Seating is first-come-first-served.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
June 5 to 10 NETHERLANDS OPERA COMPANY.
The Brooklyn Academy of Music has imported European opera productions in recent seasons with generally good results.
Its next acquisition is to be "Il Ritorno d'Ulisse in Patria," by Monteverdi, one of the landmarks of Baroque opera, by this highly regarded Dutch group and its director, Pierre Audi.
The production promises both an adventurous staging and historically informed music direction by Glen Wilson.
Brooklyn Academy of Music, Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene.
Performances: June 5 at 8 P.M.; June 6 at 3 P.M.; June 8,9 and 10 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $55.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Lisa Vittoria, James Purdy
Elisabeth Vittoria, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore J. Vittoria Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James Anthony Purdy, a son of William Purdy and Sandra Weaver, both of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
Edward Clark was assisted by the Rev.
Francis Clark, both Roman Catholic priests who are great uncles of the bride, in performing the ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church.
Mrs.
Purdy, 25, is known as Lisa.
She is a promotions coordinator at Tom Jackson &amp; Associates Inc., a marketing concern in Nashville.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father is the senior partner at Vittoria &amp; Forsythe, a New York law firm.
Her mother, Barbara Vittoria, is a special-education teacher at the Mamaroneck Avenue School in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


The Loblolly Express Falls Off Track Twice
The Loblolly Stable's relentless march to the Kentucky Derby with a herd of winning horses suffered a pair of stunning setbacks yesterday when the stable lost a doubleheader with four favored colts running in two milestone races in two states.
The debacle began in New York, where Marked Tree ran third in the $500,000 Wood Memorial at Aqueduct, and his junior partner Ozan ran sixth.
The race was won by the Florida star Storm Tower, who had been scheduled to skip the Derby on May 1 and aim instead for the shorter Preakness Stakes two weeks later.
But after outrunning the Loblolly entry, the colt's owners said they weren't so sure now that they would skip the Derby.


A Time to Feel Young (Especially If You Are)
NOW is the time for all good children to make a dash for the outdoors, starting, say, with a spring fair.
Whether they're held at schools or in parks, fairs are usually a cheap, entertaining way to spend an afternoon.
So is the Isamu Noguchi Garden Museum in Long Island City, Queens, with a courtyard that makes visitors feel as if they have entered the Shangri-La of "Lost Horizon." Spring is also a natural time to explore the sciences, including a workshop on how grass grows, presented by the New York Hall of Science in Queens.


Ellen B. Keating, H. E. Seaman Jr.
Ellen Bruce Keating, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Keating of Upper Saddle River, N.J., was married there yesterday to Howard E. Seaman Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seaman of Essex Fells, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. McDermott performed the ceremony at the Church of the Presentation.
Mrs.
Seaman is the president of Jonelle Design Associates, a graphic design firm in Caldwell, N.J.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is an internist in Suffern, N.Y.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Dr.
John H. Keating, was a trustee of Columbia University and the director of medicine at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.


Correction
Because of editing errors, a review on April 4 about "The Worst Team Money Could Buy: The Collapse of the New York Mets," by Bob Klapisch and John Harper, misidentified a former Mets player and scrambled anecdotes about other players both past and present.
The first baseman who came to a "peace meeting" with one of the authors was Keith Hernandez.
Florida prosecutors considered bringing charges of rape against Daryl Boston, Dwight Gooden and Vince Coleman, not against David Cone (none of them were actually prosecuted).
Darryl Strawberry prayed for Mr.
Klapisch's father's health, not for his own father's.


A Blessing on Your Head
THE MAN IN THE BOWLER HAT
His History and Iconography.
By Fred Miller Robinson.
Illustrated. 198 pp.
Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.


THE TEMPEST AROUND STEPHEN GREENBLATT
Stephen Greenblatt has proved to be one of the keenest minds in his field ("The Tempest Around Stephen Greenblatt," by Adam Begley, March 28).
Whether or not one agrees with his methods, the importance of his work is undeniable.
However, the Greenblatt wanna-bes who cluster around him like groupies at a rock concert, hanging on the Master's pronouncements (former members of the Church of Derrida?), make one cringe.


Rangers Begin Keenan Era
Mike Keenan says he is a new man.
The new coach of the Rangers, officially introduced yesterday afternoon, says that he is a kinder, gentler version of the raving bench coach infamous for earning both on-ice success and off-ice player animosity.
Neil Smith says he does not feel threatened.
The president and general manager just hired himself a coach with a general manager's background and a general manager's ambitions, but Smith swears that this was his decision and that the two of them will work closely on personnel decisions.


Defense Teams Are Reshuffled In Trade-Center Bombing Case
The defense in the World Trade Center bombing case is undergoing an extensive reshuffling, with several of the original lawyers either replaced or seeking to be removed from what promises to be one of the most highly publicized trials ever held in a Federal courtroom in Manhattan.
The shifts follow an order by Judge Kevin T. Duffy forbidding both the prosecution and the defense from discussing any evidence with news organizations.
They come as both sides prepare for the preliminary legal jockeying involving evidence in a trial that is scheduled to begin in September.


The Executive Computer; Canon's New Laptop Packs a Nice Printer Inside
SHOWING off its prowess in both printer and computer technology, Canon Inc. has introduced a powerful 7.7-pound laptop with a built-in ink-jet printer.
So small and unobtrusive is the printer that the Canon Note Jet 486 looks pretty much like a normal notebook computer.
Prices will start at $2,499 when the Note Jet 486's become widely available next month.


Founder's Dinner
The Pratt Institute's annual dinner dance benefiting its scholarship fund, April 12.


Beth Pinkerton, Bjorn Forfang
Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Anderson Pinkerton Jr. of Mission Hills, Kan., announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Bethany Pinkerton to Bjorn Forfang, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kolbjorn Forfang of Oslo, Norway.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pinkerton, 30, known as Beth, is an account executive at the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a master's degree in international management from the American Graduate School of International Management.
Her father is a thoracic and vascular surgeon.


Technology; Heeding the Screams of Sick Machines
BEFORE bearings, valves and other mechanical moving parts fail, they usually scream for help.
But their piercing wails usually fall on deaf ears, because the sound frequencies are far too high for humans to hear.
No wonder deteriorating components may go undetected until they break down completely.
Traditionally, the way around such calamities has been preventive maintenance, the practice of replacing components on a schedule derived from experience and intuition.
This method, unfortunately, means that some parts get replaced before their useful lives run out, while others defy the actuaries and die too young.


Yale Holds the Mayo On Student Demand
GRUMBLING about the food in the college cafeteria seems as much a part of higher education as long hours in the library, but there's less cause for complaint at Yale University these days.
After a series of meetings with student groups last fall, Yale unveiled a new menu in its dining halls this semester to offer what students' changing tastes demand.
There is more pasta, more vegetarian dishes, and nonfat frozen yogurt in the ice cream freezer.


MOUNTAIN MANNERS
Anthony DePalma is a very good writer (About Men: "Mountain Manners," Feb. 28).
But he is dead wrong about his place among bears and us mountain folk.
As fervently as he might otherwise wish, weekenders are, by definition, outsiders.
And outsiders are, in practice, intruders.
Weekenders can be good people; they can be good neighbors.
They can help us mend a fence or dig a ditch.
They can even be welcome intrusions from the local news of floods, bar fights, basketball games, haircuts and budgets, but everyone knows they are not here for the long haul.
They arrive Friday nights and go home Sunday afternoons.


Club Pro in Hero Role; Wargo Leads Seniors
Looking distinctly like Cinderella, despite a silver mustache and a muscular swing, club professional Tom Wargo continued to outplay a host of better-known golfers and take a commanding lead today in the 54th PGA Seniors' Championship.
The 50-year-old pro, superintendent and part owner of the Greenview Golf Club in Centralia, Ill., shot a five-under-par 67 over the PGA National Resort and Spa for a 54-hole total of 11-under-par 205.
That put him three shots ahead of Isao Aoki of Japan and four ahead of Tom Weiskopf and Bruce Crampton.


Zoning Fight on Great Neck Water
A PART of the smallest of the nine Special Ground Water Protection Areas on Long Island is at the center of a controversy among environmentalists, residents and officials.
The deep-flow recharge area provides drinking water for the entire Great Neck peninsula.
The controversy stems from a proposal for the Village of Lake Success to rezone three sites from one-acre residential lots to two and a half acres.


APRIL 11-17: Troubled Waters; As Milwaukee Stops Boiling, States Should Start to Worry
The immediate crisis with contaminated drinking water in Milwaukee ended last week, but the city's problems taught Americans something they might not have wanted to know: no public water system in the country routinely monitors the drinking water for common parasites that can cause flu-like illnesses.
A Government study released last week raised further concerns by reporting that state programs to inspect the nation's water systems are in disarray.
On Wednesday, Mayor John O. Norquist of Milwaukee withdrew an eight-day-old advisory that had urged citizens to boil water for drinking and washing food.
He said the city's water was finally free of the microscopic parasites called cryptosporidia, which live in the intestines of cattle.
The spring run-off had brought an unusually large amount of animal waste into Lake Michigan, which provides the city's water supply.
During the past few weeks, the contaminated water sickened more than 1,800 people and may have hastened the deaths of a cancer patient and three AIDS patients.


Gadflies Represent Democracy at Work
Re: "Gadflies Growing Older and Smarter," about the considerable increase in municipal or local gadflies, or as I prefer to be viewed, community activists:
As a retired academic, I got involved in South Orange affairs because I did not like what was going on in village governance and administration -- constantly increasing property taxes, poor services, lack of accountability by elected and appointed officials and out-and-out lies by public officials and administrators.
This has resulted in my publishing annually "A Citizen's Report on the State of South Orange" for the last three years.
Other residents agree with me that South Orange's government must change and be more responsive and inclusive of all residents, not just a few.


Miss Sheehan, Kevin Arquit
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Sheehan of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret Orr Sheehan to Kevin James Arquit, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Arquit of Ithaca, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Sheehan is the deputy managing director for Lehrman Bell Mueller Cannon Inc., an economic forecasting firm in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a partner at the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.


Many in Litchfield Want to Keep the Little Jail on the Common
Benjamin Rodriguez shakes his head in frustration when he thinks about the Governor's proposal to close the jail he has called home for six months.
It's not just that the window across from his cell looks out on one of the prettiest town greens in New England, or even that he is allowed to have a day job outside the jail.
Mr.
Rodriguez, who began his four-year sentence on a drug-related crime at the state prison in Enfield and has 14 months remaining to serve, says the Litchfield jail simply gives him hope.


Quartet to Play Piece by Composer From Yonkers
WESTCHESTER residents are prominent in musical circles this week, starting today at 2:30 P.M. when five musicians, calling themselves the Westchester Saxophone Quartet Plus One (the outsider is the pianist Rick Prokop) offer "a great afternoon of classical and original jazz" at the White Plains Public Library.
Among other pieces on the program is "A Little Sax Suite" by Milton Kabak of Yonkers.
More information is available by calling the library at 422-1400.
Also today, at 3:30 P.M., William Wolfram, the prize-winning White Plains pianist, appears with the Philharmonia Virtuosi in an all-Beethoven concert at the State University of New York at Purchase.
Mr.
Wolfram will play the Second Piano Concerto and the "Choral Fantasy," with the Taghkanic Chorale joining in the "Choral Fantasy." Also on the program are the Overture to "The Ruins of Athens" and the Eighth Symphony, all conducted by the music director, Richard Kapp.
Ticket information can be obtained by calling the box office at 251-6200.
The general information number for Philharmonia Virtuosi is 693-5595.


Many Gay and Lesbian Groups Want Big March to Back Clinton
Just a week away from a huge gay march on Washington, leaders of gay and lesbian organizations are rallying behind President Clinton, trying to prevent the demonstration from becoming a protest against him.
But some other homosexuals and AIDS organizers, disappointed in the President, are threatening anti-Clinton outbursts at the march next Sunday.
"Clinton talks a good game," said Adam Mailor, a 24-year-old Seattle teacher.
"But what's he doing? We need to put the heat on him." Mr.
Mailor plans to carry a sign that asks: "Bill, Where's the Beef?"


A la Carte; The Saturday Special, on German Rye
EATING the Saturday special at Koenig's, a half-century-old German restaurant at 85 South Tyson Avenue in Floral Park (354-2300), is a reminder that superior versions of simple food are as satisfying as elaborate, fancified, complex dishes.
After all, what could be more basic and straightforward than a ham sandwich?
But the ham sandwich at Koenig's is like few others.
It is one of Long Island's great sandwich finds.


THE TEMPEST AROUND STEPHEN GREENBLATT
The "new historicism" appears to share an old misconception with Marxists, Freudians, New Critics and deconstructionists: the belief that ideas, movements, neuroses, religious conflicts, social upheavals and political crises write books.
But this is not so.
Only writers write books.


Demonstrators in Queens March Against Intolerance


A Press at The New York Post Damaged in Arson
A fire that the authorities said had been deliberately set damaged one of four presses at The New York Post building in lower Manhattan yesterday morning, the police said.
The fire followed an agreement between the newspaper and its pressmen to put aside their differences for the weekend in a dispute over the size of the crews staffing the presses.


Making a Difference; Letting the Good Times Roll
HUMAN bowling, Velcro wall jumping, tricycle races and TV theme singalongs aren't exactly by-the-books business strategies.
But they've helped two brothers turn one restaurant/bar into a multi-million-dollar franchise during both a recession and an era of drinking less.
In six years, the two brothers, John and Jim Ressler, who've yet to turn 30, have opened six successful places in Manhattan and Long Island under their umbrella company, Global Enterprises, with themes from the Wild West to a fraternity basement.
Their current venture is the Aces &amp; 8's bar in the East Village.


Sex, Lies and Statistics
SINCE the days of the first Kinsey report in 1948, its finding that one person in 10 is gay or bisexual has been repeated over and over.
Now comes a study of male sexuality that leaves conventional wisdom in tatters, indicating that the number of men willing to call themselves gay is closer to one in 100.
The new figure has been disputed by gay rights groups arguing that, however confidential a survey, many gay men won't take the risk of identifying themselves.


Giving Different Grains a Touch of Italy
THE much-publicized Mediterranean diet points the way to highlighting grain dishes on the menu.
Italian food in particular, with its emphasis on pasta, rice and cornmeal polenta, has become an excellent vehicle for using grain as a centerpiece for a meal.
But plates of spaghetti tossed with tomatoes, bowls of risotto mixed with asparagus or dishes of polenta topped with wild mushrooms are not the only choices when it comes to grains.
There are other grains in the pantry that are not commonly used in Italian cooking but which can be given a touch of Italy with the right seasonings.


Head Trips From the Fringes of Hip-Hop
"What's This?" Prince Be asks in "Plastic," a song on P. M. Dawn's new album.
"This" is the sound of turntables scratching above four different vamps, and the answer to the question is clearly "hip-hop." But in the hands of P. M. Dawn and Basehead, both of whom have just released their second albums, and of performers like Arrested Development, Me Phi Me, Divine Styler and Papa's Culture, the borders of hip-hop have grown fuzzy.
Now there's not only hip-hop that speaks to urban teen-agers but hip-hop for students and suburban slackers, for dreamers and for lovers.
The music is no longer just the public sound of street parties and booming car stereos; it can also be the private, playful, sometimes trippy results of musicians toying with instruments and samples and words.
Instead of the stark rhymes and basic funk of old-school rap, some hip-hop embraces melody, digressions and introspection.
Without speculating on the musicians' drug predilections -- though Michael Ivey regularly mentions smoking joints on Basehead's "Not in Kansas Anymore" (Imago 72787 21016; cassette and CD) -- the music might be called psychedelic hip-hop.
Old hippies would appreciate its open-ended forms, free-associative lyrics and earphone-friendly solipsism.


Life Stories


NOTES
On Monday, Jerry Della Femina, the adman and restaurateur, put a contemporary spin on the 1970 Stephen Sondheim musical, "Company," which is about a perennial bachelor and all his married friends.
The crowd at the Vivian Beaumont included Mario Buatta and Tonya Pinkins (wearing a Victor Alfaro dress complete with train).


Two Routes To Cheaper Hospitals
AS the Clinton Administration's health-care advisers look for new ways to cut medical costs, they are being flooded with studies that seek to prove that the Government must -- or must not -- try to control the prices that doctors, hospitals and insurers can charge.
There are two favorite examples of successful cost-cutting cited by the opposing sides: the Maryland way and the Minnesota way.
As the debate proceeds, it is enlightening to compare the two, even though no one knows whether the local measures would be effective in a sweeping national program.


Lawyer for Fugitive Drug Trafficker Is Killed


Corrections
Because of a producer's schedule change, an article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Roy Cohn misstates the opening date for the Broadway play "Angels in America" in some copies.
It has been delayed to May 4 from April 29.


Stylists Of The Times?
To the Editor:
I think you should rename Styles of The Times the Ross Bleckner, Susanne Bartsch and David Barton Gym section.
PAUL HALLASY New York


He's Fearless, but Is It an Advantage?
For Nigel Mansell, the defending Formula One world champion, living well -- and racing without rancor -- will be the best revenge.
He already has a grasp on the former, and has come to America to find the latter.
Mansell, a 39-year-old Englishman, has left Formula One, where he set a record last season with nine victories, to join Mario Andretti on the Indy-car team owned by Carl Haas and the actor Paul Newman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the National Archives misstated the affiliation of Don W. Wilson, the former archivist.
He is now director of the George Bush Center for Presidential Studies at Texas A &amp; M University, not director of the Presidential library.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Far West Village
THE tiny neighborhood of the Far West Village, sandwiched between Hudson Street and the Hudson River, has been a colorful mix of the socially acceptable and the offbeat since the early 1700's, when Sir Peter Warren, a privateer who had amassed his fortune by plundering Spanish galleons in the service of the English Crown, established a farm there.
Nearly every building and street seems to have a story to tell.
Bank Street, for instance, was cut in 1798, when several banks bought land for branches to serve wealthy New Yorkers fleeing the yellow fever epidemic that gripped the lower tip of Manhattan.


Lisa Ann Grill, M. A. Berkowitz
Lisa Ann Grill, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Grill of Cedarhurst, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Michael Alan Berkowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Berkowitz of Hampton Bays, L.I.
Rabbi Arnold Marans performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst.


Miro Exhibition In Barcelona
The Joan Miro Foundation in Barcelona has designated 1993 as "The Year of Miro" and has organized an exhibit in honor of the Catalan surrealist, who was born 100 years ago on April 20.
The show will be held from April 20 to Aug. 30 at the foundation, which the artist created in 1971.
The splendid building on the heights of Montjuich overlooks Barcelona harbor and the Mediterranean.
To illustrate Miro's development as an artist, hundreds of his paintings, drawings and sketches will be displayed along with his writings and correspondence.
The works will be drawn from the foundation's permanent collection, and more than 500 pieces will be lent by various museums.
Works to be exhibited will include "Self-Portrait" (1919) and "Dutch Interior 1" (1928).


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
I was quite disturbed that the Ms.
Foundation is not sponsoring a more gender-neutral day such as "Take Our
Children


What Russia Wants: Less Pain, a Strong Hand
BORIS N. YELTSIN says he is putting his trust in democracy and the common sense of the Russian people in the crucial plebiscite next Sunday on his performance as President.
But given the underlying attitudes of Russians, as expressed in a recent series of opinion polls, Mr.
Yeltsin's best chances may lie in the continuing popular attractions to authoritarianism and a strong hand, rather than any deep popular belief in democracy or a free-market economy.
Mr.
Yeltsin is in the piquant political situation of leading a Government pursuing increasingly unpopular economic policies without a legislative majority.
For a year now, his opponents in the Congress of People's Deputies have been stripping away his powers in the name of "constitutionality" and "stability," capitalizing on popular confusion and pain over high inflation and economic change.





In the Region: Putnam County; Recent Sales
Port Chester, N.Y.  $205,000
66 Shelley Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 58-year-old Tudor; dining room, fireplace, sun roomn, stone terrace, 1-car garage; taxes, $3,265.
Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $205,000
83 Pinebrook Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 83-year-old colonial; sun porch, dining room, powder room, detached 1-car garage; taxes, $4,519.
Somers, N.Y.  $146,000
29 Krystal Drive  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; fireplace, deck, basement; common charges, $145, taxes, $2,950.
Cheshire,Conn.  $115,000
122 Edwards Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; beamed ceiling in living room, enclosed porch, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,209.
Milford, Conn.  $173,000
26 Apple Hill  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 10-year-old raised ranch; new carpeting, open floor plan, rear deck, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,805.
Woodbridge, Conn.  $435,000
27 Grouse Lane  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; 2-story foyer, oversized kitchen with breakfast area, 1.9 acres; taxes $10,874.
OTHER AREAS Byram Township, N.J.  $104,500
1 Crescent Drive South  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch, stone firepace, new deck, lake view; taxes $3,016.
Edison, N.J.  $135,000
126 Roosevelt Blvd.  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old colonial; fireplace, newly painted, bar in basement; taxes $2,646.
Great River, L.I.  $215,000
81 River Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 130-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,500.


King of the Hill, Top of the Heap
A PHOENIX IN THE ASHES
The Rise and Fall of the Koch Coalition in New York City Politics.
By John Hull Mollenkopf. 285 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $35.
TO BE MAYOR OF NEW YORK
Ethnic Politics in the City.
By Chris McNickle.
Illustrated. 403 pp.
New York: Columbia University Press. $29.95.


Pamela Warren, Peter Lawrence
Dr. and Mrs.
Porter H. Warren of Cornwall, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela Christine Warren to Peter Scanlan Lawrence, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond E. Lawrence of Woodstown, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Warren, 30, is a production editor at Heinle &amp; Heinle, a publisher of textbooks in Boston.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in Spanish literature from Boston University, from which her fiance received a law degree.


When a Long Therapy Goes a Little Way
IF the custody battle between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow has revealed anything, it is the remarkable reliance by Mr.
Allen and Ms.
Farrow on psychotherapists -- indeed, what may seem to some an addiction to therapy.
Virtually everyone in the Farrow-Allen menage seems to be or have been in therapy.
Mr.
Allen has said in court that if he wins custody of his children, they will have their choice of therapists; their son, Satchel, began therapy at age 3, and their daughter Dylan at 5.


SPORTS
Here is a sampling of spectator sports in the New York metropolitan region and participatory sports in New York City this spring.
Dates and times are subject to change.
FOR SPECTATORS
Baseball Home Games
SHEA STADIUM, Flushing, Queens.
New York Mets.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:40 P.M.
Tickets range from $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.


Moving Ahead on Head Start
President Clinton wants to increase funding for Head Start by $1.3 billion, a whopping 46 percent increase.
It's a big vote of confidence for a program that's weathered a lot of criticism recently.
But, Mr.
Clinton has made the right decision.
Continued careful expansion of Head Start, addressing its problems along the way, is desirable.
Probably the best known and most successful of the Great Society efforts, Head Start is a comprehensive early childhood development program that aims to give low-income children educational and social skills needed to succeed in school.
Beyond that, the program gives its 3- to 5-year-old participants health and nutrition services and offers a range of social services to their families.
It also places heavy emphasis on parent involvement.


For Chefs, an Inspiring Bounty
JET transportation may have mitigated the seasonal produce-deprivation in the East, making restaurant menus look the same year round, but it has not replaced the sweet bliss of spring's first local strawberries.
Nor has it diminished the wonders of soft-shell crabs, shad or delicate new potatoes.
New York chefs are reinvigorated at this time of year, as is evidenced by the elan and creativity of their spring menus.
Today's health-conscious cooking, with seasoned broths and infused oils replacing cream and butter, is ideally suited to spring's bounty.
And restaurants are rising to the challenge.


Foreign Affairs; Pretending About Bosnia
After some legitimate dallying and weighing of options, the Clinton Administration has adopted the European approach to Bosnia: Let nature take its course toward a Serb victory over the Muslims -- while pretending to do otherwise.
Today, watching Srebrenica fall; tomorrow, Sarajevo.
This policy is very "realistic." It avoids all the political and military risks of getting trapped in a place hardly anyone cares about, especially when nations must tend to their own domestic woes.
It is also devastatingly cynical.
And for that reason alone, President Clinton should reconsider it.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Recent Sales Byram Township  $104,500
1 Crescent Drive South  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch, stone firepace, new deck, lake view; taxes $3,016.
Edison  $135,000
126 Roosevelt Blvd.  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old colonial; fireplace, newly painted, bar in basement; taxes $2,646.
Hopatcong  $125,000
35 Fordham Trail  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old bi-level; woodburning stove, deck, professionally landscaped; taxes $3,097.
Jefferson Township  $100,000
47 Mase Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-year-old Cape Cod; beamed cathedral ceiling, h/w floors, fireplace; taxes $2,166.
Medford  $182,500
8 Meadow Wood Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 12-year-old colonial; sunroom with skylights, new kitchen; taxes $3,742.
Rockaway Borough  $121,000
73 Keller Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old ranch; full basement, eat-in- kitchen, public utilities; taxes $2,403.
OTHER AREAS  Somers, N.Y.  $146,000
29 Krystal Drive  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; fireplace, deck, basement; common charges, $145, taxes, $2,950.
Cheshire,Conn.  $115,000
122 Edwards Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; beamed ceiling in living room, enclosed porch, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,209.
Great River, L.I.  $215,000
81 River Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 130-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,500.


Raising the Roof As the Economy Lifts
HOME builders usually are hard at work when a teetering economy has begun to recover, and that is happening now in many parts of the nation.
Wood frames for single-family homes are going up at what analysts estimate is the fastest yearly pace since 1986.
But this is not a typical home-building resurgence.
The industry recovery, which took its first, small steps as the Persian Gulf war ended two years ago, has hit its stride in the last year only for the big companies that generally build 1,000 or more homes a year in a business where most competitors build fewer than 20.


Beck's Reasoning Was Sound, So Stop the Second-Guessing
Bernhard Langer's performance at the Masters was dominating, but in its aftermath, the golf community has concentrated instead on criticizing the performance of Chip Beck.
Beck was the last hope to make the 1993 Masters exciting, and in many minds, he failed himself and the demands of the moment by not attempting to reach the green of the par-5 15th hole at Augusta National with his second shot while trailing by three shots.


Bits of Time, Captured Through a Lens
FROM the Bronx to the Battery - and to Staten Island too - New York City has long offered artists a dazzling variety of subjects.
With its climbing skyscrapers and congested streets, its puling energy and unparalleled diversity, New York in the 1920's and 30's was regarded as the prototypical modern city. a symbol of both the possibilities and problems of the industrial age.
But both before and after that period, the city held a deep allure for artists.
In 1912, the printmaker Joseph Pennell expressed in rhapsodic terms the attraction the city had for artists of the day, writing that "the towering splendor of New York is one of the marvels of the world," and later describing the view of Manhattan from Brooklyn Heights as "the most wonderful, the most fairylike, the most magnificent view in the world."
At any given time, pictures of New York past and present are apt to be featured in a wide range of exhibitions around town.
Here are a few places to find images of the city in the coming months.
Paired Visions
No clearer evidence of artists' enduring fascination with the city can be found than in an exhibition opening Wednesday at the Museum of the City of New York.
Titled "Shared Perspectives: The Printmaker and Photographer in New York, 1900-1950," this intriguing show will juxtapose prints of familiar places in the city, taken from the collection of Reba and Dave Williams, with photographs of the same locations from the museum's holdings.
The paired prints and photographs provide glimpses of the changing face of the city in the first half of this century.
In choosing work for the show, Leslie Nolan, the museum's curator of prints and photographs, tried to find images that showed places in the city from the same point fo view, and as a result viewers can compare sytlistic differences in artists' approaches to their shared subjects.
At times, the pictures are remarkably similar.
The hulking form of the el station that hovered above Christopher Street in Greenwich Village, with its pagodalike roof and its gingerbread trim, is depicted both in berenic Aboot's crispy detailed 1936 photographs and in Howard Cook's 1928 woodcut.
Other subjects' allowed artists freedom to play with their subjects' expressive qualities.
Times Square at night is presented in shimmering photographs by Samuel H. Gottscho, from 1932, and Andreas Feininger, from around 1950, as well as in a lithograph by Eugene Fitsch from around 1926 in which the bright advertising signs and marquees dance across the paper.
Skyscrapers captivated artists in the first part of the century, and "Shared Perspectives" abounds with images of the towering buildings that cmae to symbolize New York.
John Marin's etching of thw Eoolworth Building, designed byCass Gilbert and the world's tallest building when it was build in 1913, was done shortly after construction was completed.
Irving Underhill's photo, made the same year, offers a more sober depiction of the building's Gothic forms than Marin's giddy impression, but records it with a mixture of down-to-earth factuality and pride.
Lewis Hine's breathtaking photos of the Empire State Building under construction, with workers precariously perched on steel beams high above the city, are echoed in prints by Sherril Schell, James E. Allen and Samuel L. Margolies.
The completed building was, in its turn, the subjet of prints by a number of artists, as well as Edward Steichen's classic multiple-exposure view, made in 1932, of the towering sturcture seen from its base.
Skyscrapers, soaring bridges, run-down tenements and elegant brownstones were all recorded by the artists and photographers included in "Shared Perspectives."
But of particular note is a series of pictures of the Flatiron Building, built by the Chicago architect Daniel Burnham in 1902, whose triangular shape entranced artists of the period.
A history of photographic style in the first third of the 20th centurycould be traced through pictures of the oddlyshaped buildings, from Edward Steichen's dreamy Pictorialist rendering of its pointed form, swaddled in blue dusk, made in 1907, to Walter Gropius's Constructivist depiction of it, in 1928, as a sharp diagonal form.
Neither of those famous pictures is here, but "Shared Perspectives" features photographs of the Flatiron by Jessie Tarbox Beals, from 1906, and by the T.H.
McAllister Company, from 1909, as well; as a 1908 mezzotint of the building byPennell and an etching by Childe Hassam from 1916.
Paired Artists
Among the many other prominent photographers who tried their hands at depicting the Flatiron Building was Alfred Stieglitz, who is featured as an artist and an influence intwo important exhibitions in the city this spring.
Stieglitz and Georgia O'Keeffe played out much of their fabled romance against the backdrop of New York, and the city plays an important role in "Two Lives: A Conversation in Paintings and Photographs," an exhibition opening April 27 at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art that willfocus on the work of these two proud artists.
Stieglitz, the legendary photographer and central figure in the introduction of modern art to America, first say O'Keeffe's abstract watercolors in 1915 and immediately decided to show them at 291, his pioneering gallery.Later, the two met and fell in love, beginning a stormy personal and artistic relationship that would last three decades.
Much of the show at the I.B.M.
Gallery will consist of O'Keefe's close-up abstractions of flowers and other natural forms and Stieglitz's studies of clouds over his country house in Lake George, N.Y., as well as his portraits of O'Keeffe.
But New York City was an important subject for both artists, and "Two Lives" will include examples of their depictions of the city.
Steiglitz is represented by a soft-focus view of the lower Manhattan skyline from 1910, as well as moody shots of skyscrapers at dusk from the early 1930's, while O'Keeffe's hallucinatory painting of New York City, from the mid-1920's, emphasize its dizzying perspectives.
Another Protegee
In a coincidence of scheduling, Stieglitz and New York are strong presences in another exhibition this spring.
The International Center of Photography is presenting, through June 27, "Intimate Visions: The Photographs of Dorothy Norman." Mrs.
Norman met Stieglitz in 1928, worked with him at his gallery An American Place and began to photograph under his tutelage.
The show includes a range of Mrs.
Norman's pictures of Stieglitz himself, with his distinctive black cape, wire-rimmed glasses and shaggy white mustache, as well as portraits of such artists and intellecutals as Elia Kazan, Harold Clurman, Charles Demuth and Edgard Varese.
Also featured are Mrs.
Norman's tiny, jewel-like images of New York, most of which date from the 1930's.
In these quiet pictures, none bigger than a hand, she reduced the overlapping buildings of the city to collagelike patterns of dark and light forms.
A Defining Era
As a booming metropolis of skyscrapers and industry, New York achieved pre-eminence between the world wars.
But many of the buildings that define the city today were built earlier.
In a period that stretched from roughly 1880 to 1930, a group of architects, many of whom had studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, produced public and private buildings, based on classical European models, that expressed the city's new wealth and self-confidence.
Some of the city's most famous landmarks were built in this period, including the Woolworth Building, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Grand Central Terminal.
These and other buildings of the time are featured in "Beaux-Arts New York," an exhibition at the New York School of Interior Design through May 13.
Theough period photographs, architectural drawings, sketches and other documents, the exhibition records the flowering of the Beaux-Arts style in New York in such famous buildings as the Old Penn Station, designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White, which was opened in 1910 and destroyed in 1965; the Brooklyn Museum, also by McKim, Mead &amp; White (1897), and the New York Public Library, by Carrere &amp; Hastings (1911).
Then and Now
Images of New York can also be found in other exhibitions around the city this spring.
Through Jan. 2, the Alice Austen House on Staten Island is Presenting "A Century Apart," in which photographs of Staten Island by Austen, a wealthy turn-of-the-century amateur, are being shown alongside contemporary images by Lisa Clifford, an architectural photographer.
And in SoHo, Helen Levitt's marvelous photographs of children playing in the city streets in the early 1940's are being featured through May 15 in a show at the Laurence Miller Gallery, along with photographs of children at play in Spain and England by Henri Cartier-Bresson and Roger Mayne.
Pictures of the city can be found in many places, and not just in special shows.
The recently reinstalled permanent exhibition of the photography collection at the Museum of Modern Art includes a 1910 Stieglitz photograph of an ocean liner leaving New York Harbor, as well as Aaron Siskind's 1936 shot which has the noble austerity of a photograph by Eugene Atget; he has a friend there, on of the concessionaires, who sometimes discreetly gives him a break on lunch.
Or he checks out the Conservatory Water, a concrete pool where visitors watch silent and stern middle-aged men sailing remote-control model yachts; the snack bar there offers the best hot dog in the park.
"I'm moving all over the place," he says.
"You've got to deal with allsorts of shady characters in the park. They're not all lollipops, you know."
But Poet O.'sheart is somehow tied to Strawberry Fields.
He currently has a room in a hotel for the elderly on West 43d Street, but "my big dream is to get an apartment in the Dakota, right there on the corner," he says wistfully.
He has a poem, "Grief," that he wrote during the all-night vigil after Lennon wasshot; he says it was later published by Hunter College.
If bell-ringers seem particularly attentive to Poet O.'s kooky commands, he will sometimes reward them with a rousing and theatrical reading of the work.
Hos words tumble out, here smooth and clipped and manicured, there coarse and stuttered and guttural, depending on the sentiment.
Or if the wishers be lovers, he will sometimes recite another poem, "A Fantasy Delight": "Let (bland) and (blank)" - fill in the names of lovers - "take a memorable voyage calculated to please, complete relaxation is a necessary part of our trip, free from the ties of our daily vexations, we must enjoy our paradoxical fantasy to the utmost . . . "
On paper, Poet O.'s words glimmer with a deep-rooted majesty, but his is not an art of the printed page.
It is as lush and tumultuous and grimy and resplendent and uncontainable as Central Park itself.
Suddenly he leans in close, and his rugged, venerable face cracks into a mischievous grin.
"I know every corner of this park," he whispers.
"I know all its characters and hiding places. I know its secrets."
Here are the addresses, hours and admission prices for the exhibitions mentioned: "SHARED PERSPECTIVES: THE PRINTMAKER AND PHOTOGRAPHER IN NEW YORK, 1900-1950." Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Wednesday to Sept. 19.
Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays, for pre-registered groups only; closed Mondays.
Admission: $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"TWO LIVES: A CONVERSATION IN PAINTINGS AND PHOTOGRAPHS," I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, 590 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street.
April 27 to June 26.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Free.
Information: (212) 745-5214.
"INTIMATE VISIONS: THE PHOTOGRAPHS OF DOROTHY NORMAN," International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street.
Through June 27.
Hours: Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 860-1777.
"BEAUX-ARTS NEW YORK," New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street, Manhattan.
Through May 13.
Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, noon to 6 P.M.; Fridays, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Closed Saturdays and Sundays.
Information: (212) 753-5365, extension 36.
"A CENTURY APART," Alice Austen House, 2 Hylan Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Photographs of the buildings of Staten Island by Alice Austen and Lisa Clifford.
Through Jan. 2.
Hours: Thursdays through Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays through Wednesdays.
Admission: $2.
Information: (718) 816-4506.
LAURENCE MILLER GALLERY, 138 Spring Street, SoHo.
Photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson, Helen Levitt, and Roger Mayne.
Through May 15.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Free.
Information: (212) 226-1220.
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Hours: Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Fridays through Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Wednesdays.
Open Memorial Day.
Admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Information: (212) 708-9500.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly; free under age 12.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
LOWER EAST SIDE TENEMENT MUSEUM, 97 Orchard Street.
Photographs by Arnold Eagle and Wijnanda Deroo.
Hours: Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.; closed Mondays and Saturdays.
Admission: (tuesdays through Fridays) Free, Sundays, $3; $1 for children under 18, students with identification and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
"NEW YORK IN THE 30'S: SKYSCRAPERS AND STREETS," New York Bound Bookshop, lobby of the Associated Press Building, 50 Rockefeller Plaza.
Through June 30.
Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, noon to 4 P.M.; closed Sundays.
Information: (212) 245-8503.


Struggle in the Balkins; U.S. SAYS BELGRADE JOINED IN ATTACKS
United States officials said today that military forces from Serbia had joined Bosnian Serbs in attacking Bosnian forces in the recent fighting in eastern Bosnia.
They said Serbian artillery had fired across the border at Srebrenica, the besieged Muslim town.
And according to intelligence reports, Serbian Army tanks and artillery units had also joined in the attack.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LADIES OF THE COURT Grace and Disgrace on  the Women's Tennis Tour.
By Michael Mewshaw.
Crown, $22.


Gadflies Represent Democracy at Work
The March 14 article "Gadflies Growing Older and Smarter," about concerned citizens in several New Jersey towns who brave an often arrogant and abusive political establishment to bring their views into the public arena, was both condescending and destructive to the spirit of democracy by the people.
Even the idea of labeling them gadflies insults their efforts.
Their remarks would be neither irritating nor annoying if they were not taken that way by public officials.


Talking: Rent Freeze; A Boon To Aging Tenants
ONE in seven New York City residents, slightly more than a million people, is now at least 62 years old, according to the Census Bureau.
Although many may be eligible for a rent freeze, too few bother to apply, according to the city's Department for the Aged.
And that's a pity.
A recent relaxation in eligibility requirements and an increasingly aging population may have produced more qualified tenants than ever before.


Republicans Hold Clinton Accountable; Senate Childishness
To the Editor:
Our Government should not be run by filibuster.
As a responsible Republican who cares more for country than for party, I deplore the power games being played by the Republicans in the Senate (news article, April 13).
Their stall and obfuscation tactics lead to the conclusion that, like spoiled children, if they can't set the rules they won't play the game.


This Proposal Is for Status Quo
POPULAR entertainments being what they are, attempts to analyze a movie these days may produce the uneasy sense that you are critiquing a cartoon.
Still, Hollywood cartoons can impinge on a nerve, activating reservoirs of shame and secret longing, tapping into inadmissible impulses, in the process providing a release for moral and sexual anxiety in much the way that horror movies are said to release other types of tension.
Consider "Fatal Attraction," "Pretty Woman," "Basic Instinct" and, with an opening-week gross of $25 million, the current leading box-office attraction, "Indecent Proposal," a film that begins in the soft focus of a Kotex ad, and goes on to prove that nothing is sacred.
The picture's evocative title instantly telegraphs the link it draws between sex and money, the two issues that even the most sanguine individuals are least sanguine about.
This combination is examined through a premise that is as bogus as it is intriguing: can a middle-class marriage survive after a devoted wife sells herself for an evening to a stunning-but-lonely billionaire winsomely played by a guarded-yet-tender Robert Redford?
Or, to recycle the question Erich Segal posited more than 25 years ago, does being in love really mean never having to say you're sorry?


Penn Oarsmen Top Yale To Take Blackwell Cup
Penn's improving crew won the Blackwell Cup from Yale today in the fast time of 5 minutes 39.98 seconds on the swollen Housatonic River.
The Quakers were ahead by 5.26 seconds at the end of the 2,000-meter course, or more than a boat length over a crew that had beaten them by one second at the San Diego Classic two weeks ago.
"They were even at 1,000 meters and then took off," Coach Stan Bergman said of his eight oarsmen, two of whom are powerful seniors from Australia, Jahnusz Hooker at stroke and Andrew May at No. 7.


Quick! Enjoy the Springtime. Too Late. It's All Over
WINTER is a snap to hate, with its cold, snow, ice and weathercasters who've never met a storm they couldn't whip into a cataclysm that only a yeti's mother could love.
Summer is loathsome, too, with its heat, humidity, teeming beaches and men who look better in Speedos than I would if I owned a Speedo.
I do my best to hibernate during both seasons.
My job criticizing television sports allows me liberal time inside my new apartment with three air conditioners.


State Is Trying to Arrange Another TV Broadcast by Rioting Ohio Inmates
State negotiators worked today to arrange another live broadcast for rioting inmates at a maximum-security prison here, raising hopes that a third hostage may be released.
Five corrections officers are still being held by the inmates.
In a pattern emerging in the seven-day-old rebellion at the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility, a hostage has been released after inmates are allowed a live radio or television broadcast about their grievances.
One corrections officer was released Thursday night after a radio broadcast by an inmate, and another officer was released Friday after a televised broadcast by another inmate.


When the Twain of Science and God Meet; Seeking Independently
To the Editor:
Bryan Appleyard has "discovered" in "In Science We Trust" (Op-Ed, April 8) what he believes is a significant change in attitude of scientists toward religion, in that they are now appropriating God.


Sheryl Kurtz, J. B. Halberstadt
Marilyn and A. J. Kurtz of Norwalk, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Sheryl Tabitha Kurtz, and Jeremy Brian Halberstadt, a son of Vivian Halberstadt and Bert Halberstadt, both of Wilmington, Del.


Leave Those Stock Options Alone
To the Editor:
Your article correctly points out that the impact of the proposed stock-option accounting-rule changes may not be as great as people seem to fear.
What it does not discuss is whether companies that do choose to cut back on options will do so by limiting them to just a few key employees.
As recent research has persuasively demonstrated, companies that provide ownership just to a few key people perform substantially worse than those that provide ownership more broadly.
COREY ROSEN Oakland, Calif., April 12  The author is executive director of the National Center for Employee Ownership.


24 Candidates in Search of a City
On the umpteenth wet and dreary day of a peculiar California winter, the drought-resistant plants are drowning in the muck in Ed Begley Jr.'s front yard.
Atop his cozy, unpretentious house, solar panels search the sky in vain for sunlight.
Inside, the gangly actor pads around in tennis shoes, greeting guests and switching off lights.
Two dozen people who don't have to be anywhere at 9:30 on a weekday morning mill about in Begley's living room, sipping mugs of coffee in the energy-saving gloom.
They are middle-aged, liberal and well-to-do, and some are involved in the entertainment industry.
The license plate on a new Pontiac van parked out front broadcasts the good fortune of its owner: GOTAGIG.


Some of the Best Works Turn Out to Be Three-Dimensional
THE nude sculpture shown on this page is made of honeycomb cardboard cut in layers as in a contour map and painted -- tan for the flesh, blue for the spring water she is drinking.
It is the ingenious and well-drawn work of Bill Barrell, one of the 39 artists in "The Source" and, with Lily Prince, its co-curator.
The show is displayed on the fourth floor of the Lorillard Building, at 111 First Street.
It closes next Sunday.


Struggle in the Balkins; U.N., With Abstention by Russia, Tightens Its Sanctions on Belgrade
After a day of tense negotiations, the United Nations Security Council brushed aside a new cease-fire agreement in the battered Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica and voted late tonight to impose Draconian new sanctions on the rump Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro.
Russia had fought hard to delay the vote until after the April 25 referendum on President Boris N. Yeltsin and his economic reforms because his nationalist opponents sympathize with the Serbs.
But after hours of brinkmanship, Russia finally accepted defeat and abstained instead of using its Security Council veto to block the new sanctions.
China also abstained.  'Total Isolation'
But all 13 other Security Council members voted in favor of the punishing new sanctions, which France's representative, Jean Bernard Merimee, described as "the total economic and financial isolation of Serbia."


Japan's Newest Princess-to-Be
After six years of saying no thank you, Masako Owada last week gracefully accepted her royal suitor's traditional gifts of fish, wine and cloth -- and his marriage proposal -- and Japan was riveted by the making of its most modern princess-to-be.
In an ancient ceremony surrounded by the austere pomp of the Japanese Imperial family, Miss Owada, 29, took a step closer to the chrysanthemum throne as she became betrothed to Crown Prince Naruhito, 33.
Everything was tightly rehearsed, but the news coverage was breathless as Miss Owada, an American-educated diplomat and a commoner, was presented with two 15-pound tai (similar to red snappers but far more expensive), six bottles of sake and five bolts of silk.


Robbery of Cabbie Foiled
Three people were arrested yesterday after the police said they tried to rob a livery cabdriver in Brooklyn at about 5 A.M.
The police said the driver broke free of two passengers in a struggle during which a gun was fired by one of two other passengers.
He then flagged down two officers, who arrested Jerry St.
Rose, 21, Yassinna Watson, 18, and Tyronnde Cherry, 16, in front of 150 Halsey Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
They were charged with attempted robbery, attempted murder, reckless endanferment and resisting arrest.


No Headline
GOLF  Edwards Bogeys Back Into Tie for Lead  David Edwards made bogeys on the final three wind-swept holes of the Harbour Town Golf Links yesterday to fall back into a tie with Paul Azinger and David Frost for the lead in the Heritage Classic in Hilton Head Island, S.C.
Edwards, who burst in front with four birdies on the front nine, gave back his lead with four bogeys onthe last five holes.
He finished with a 70 for a nine-under 204.
Frost, who shared the second-round lead with Edwards and Bernhard Langer, also ended with a 70.
Azinger had less trouble with the wind and blasted into contention with a 66.
The three were a stroke in front of John Cook, who had a 69.
Langer, trying to follow a Masters victory with a Heritage title for the second time, opened with a double bogey and slid to a 74, leaving him at 208 and four shots behind.
Peter Jacobsen and Larry Nelson each shot 67 and were among a large group at six-under 207. (AP)


Verdict in Los Angeles; 2 of 4 Officers Found Guilty in Los Angeles Beating
A Federal jury today convicted a police sergeant and the officer who delivered the most blows to Rodney G. King in a beating two years ago and acquitted two other officers.
Their civil rights case focused the nation's attention on police misconduct and urban problems.
Many residents of this tense city greeted the convictions of Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon and Officer Laurence M. Powell with cheers, while the police, on full mobilization with riot gear, relaxed their guard.
Reaction centered more on the two convictions than on the acquittals of Officer Theodore J. Briseno and former Officer Timothy E. Wind, who played smaller roles in the beating, which was captured on amateur videotape and shown nationwide.


Transforming the Commonplace Into Uncommon Images
THE Queen Elizabeth 2, leaving the Port of New York, is a stirring sight but it is not the kind of subject that photographers choose with any but monetary, sentimental or ironic motives.
Yet George Forss chose it, in 1977, and it is plain that his reasons were none of the above.
On top of that, the picture, one of 32 black and whites on view at Weston Town Hall, is unforgettable.
This is partly because the liner, sliding past the World Trade Center on inky water, seems to have acquired the two towers as extra funnels.
But it also has to do with the weird contrast between the buildings on either side, shrinking back under a dark Ansel Adams sky and the glare from the setting sun that lights up the towers like an explosion.
Recent events have rendered downright eerie a photograph that was strange enough to begin with.


Louise Rambo, Caleb K. King
Louise Birch Rambo and Caleb Kimball King, both fourth-year medical students at Harvard University, were married yesterday in Mount Pleasant, S.C.
Bishop C. FitzSimons Allison, the retired Episcopal bishop of South Carolina, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
King, 26, and her husband graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is the daughter of Dr.
William M. Rambo of Mount Pleasant and the late Sara W. Rambo.
Her father is the chief of surgery at Charleston (S.C.) Memorial Hospital and is a professor of surgery at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston.
Her stepmother, Dr.
Lydia A. Englehart, is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Mount Pleasant.


Trollope's Batting Average
To the Editor:
Granting all that N. John Hall says about Anthony Trollope's abiding popularity ("A Corner of Westminster Abbey That Will Always Be Anthony Trollope," March 21), one must take issue with his placing Trollope in the august company of Dickens, Thackeray and George Eliot.


Now Is the Time to Repair Flagstone Walks, Steps and Patios
SETTLING and repeated freezing and thawing can crack or tilt flat masonry surfaces, especially flagstone walks, steps and patios.
Repair is usually not too difficult, but it should be done in the spring to lessen chances that uneven pavement might cause a fall and to prevent damage from worsening.
Flagstones set without mortar have the greatest tendency to shift, but they are the easiest to fix.
Start by prying up the stones that have tilted or sunk, using a crowbar.
Rest its fulcrum on a board to protect other flagstones.
Pry carefully if you use a shovel or garden fork, as their handles break easily.


Rebecca Lipman, John A. Cutler
Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin D. Lipman of Green Farms, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rebecca Lisa Lipman to John Asher Cutler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen D. Cutler of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lipman, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College, from which she also received a master's degree in Russian.
She received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a real-estate investor in Westport, Conn.
Her mother, Dr.
Myra R. Lipman, is an educational consultant in Green Farms.


What Small Business Really Wants
To the Editor:
Are you implying that President Clinton invented the wheel?


Israeli Pop Finds a Harder Edge for Its Voice
Aviv Geffen, a 19-year-old Israeli rock star, says his record company, Hed Arzi, would like him to tone down his anger just a little.
His second album, now being recorded, contains a cut called "I Hate." In the litany of things Mr.
Geffen hates are "Hatikva" (the Israeli national anthem), religious people ("I tell them to go study with the monkeys") and Adam and Eve ("Adam was horny, and Eve was a nymphomaniac").
"The company doesn't like that I go so far," he says.
"It wants me to be a little bit nice. I could be selling even more if I wore a tie and a big smile and said, 'Hi, everybody.' "


Trading Up With the Help of the Builder
A HOUSE in the country, on a stream with a paddock and a pool out back.
Such are the things dreams of made of.
And when Monika Klein and her husband, Barrington J. Fludgate, first saw North Salem, Ms.
Klein said her dream began taking shape.
"We fell so in love with North Salem that we began to look for a house in the area," Ms.
Klein recalled.
"But when we couldn't find anything that really clicked, we decided to build, especially after we saw a spectacular 10-acre property with a stream and a dam on it at Grant's Farm. And 13 months ago, March of last year, we actually bought it."


New Home Set for U.S. Embassy in Ottawa
For 60 years, the center of American diplomatic activity in Canada has been the honey-colored Beaux-Arts building directly across the street from Canada's Parliament.
The graceful building, whose Stars and Stripes flaps in the wind off the Ottawa River, was designed by Cass Gilbert, a New York architect also responsible for the United States Supreme Court building and the Woolworth Building in Manhattan.


Making a Difference; Letting the Good Times Roll
HUMAN bowling, Velcro wall jumping, tricycle races and TV theme singalongs aren't exactly by-the-books business strategies.
But they've helped two brothers turn one restaurant/bar into a multi-million-dollar franchise during both a recession and an era of drinking less.
In six years, the two brothers, John and Jim Ressler, who've yet to turn 30, have opened six successful places in Manhattan and Long Island under their umbrella company, Global Enterprises, with themes from the Wild West to a fraternity basement.
Their current venture is the Aces &amp; 8's bar in the East Village.


Conversations/Bill Cash; Dogging His Party, a Tory Urges A Trouncing for Maastricht Treaty
THE address is 17 Great College Street.
But the narrow town house around the corner from the Palace of Westminster really sits atop the fault line that runs through Britain's governing Conservative Party.
It was where Margaret Thatcher set up office for a year to ruminate after the party dumped her as Prime Minister in 1990.
And it is now the headquarters from which, with Lady Thatcher's more or less open blessing, Bill Cash is leading a small but persistent band of Tories in opposing the Conservative Government's efforts to integrate the nation more fully into Europe by ratifying the Maastricht treaty on European unification.
"We are being asked to commit voluntary euthanasia in the British Parliament," said the 52-year-old Mr.
Cash, sitting in the cluttered house among whirring fax machines and earnest young aides who obviously relish their roles as self-appointed defenders of British sovereignty.
"Once this has happened, you can't reclaim the powers you have built up over 200 years. People fought and died in two world wars to save ourselves from being taken over."


APRIL 11-17: Eighth-Grade Habits; Among the Youngest, a Rise In Marijuana, Cocaine, LSD
Just as Americans were beginning to feel that the nation's drug problem was fading away, researchers and rehabilitation specialists reported signs of an upswing in the use of marijuana, cocaine and LSD by young teen-agers.
A survey of eighth graders conducted by researchers at the University of Michigan, along with independent findings by specialists at treatment centers around the country, came on the heels of the disclosure that President Clinton had quietly released a new drug budget that offered little change from those of his predecessors -- lots of money for law enforcement and not much for treatment and prevention.


Where Are Details On the Olympus Deal?
Now that the residents of Melville-Dix Hills and the Town of Huntington are going to court to stop the state from illegally using the "Urban" Development Corporation to destroy a suburban community's constitutional right to home rule, those egging on U.D.C. are desperately doing all they can to detract attention from the growing number of embarrassing questions about the "sweetheart deal of 1993."


Gary S. Scurka and Kathleen Wolff
Kathleen Patricia Wolff, a correspondent in Chicago for ABC network news, was married yesterday to Gary Steven Scurka, a producer for CBS network news in New York.
The Rev.
Damian O'Connell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church in New York.
Mrs.
Scurka, 35, has won three Emmy awards.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
She is a daughter of Susan B. Wolff of South Britain, Conn., and Roger F. Wolff of Brookfield, Conn.
Her father is the director of benefit plans for the Union Carbide Corporation in Danbury, Conn.
The bride's previous marriage was annulled.


Giving Different Grains a Touch of Italy
THE much-publicized Mediterranean diet points the way to highlighting grain dishes on the menu.
Italian food in particular, with its emphasis on pasta, rice and cornmeal polenta, has become an excellent vehicle for using grain as a centerpiece for a meal.
But plates of spaghetti tossed with tomatoes, bowls of risotto mixed with asparagus or dishes of polenta topped with wild mushrooms are not the only choices when it comes to grains.
There are other grains in the pantry that are not commonly used in Italian cooking but which can be given a touch of Italy with the right seasonings.


Great Neck Has Other Moral Citizens, Too
"Iranian Immigrants Blend Old and New"  [ March 21 ]  on the Iranian experience in Great Neck left me outraged.
By flaunting the Persian "embarrassment of riches," it depicted the rest of Great Neck's citizens as "morally bankrupt." In touting the close family unit and clannishness of their social life, other Great Neck families appear dysfunctional and lacking redeeming moral and cultural values.


Wesley Oler 4th and Debra Brown
Debra Diane Brown, a principal of Cabriolet Films Inc., a film distribution company, was married on Friday to Wesley Marion Oler 4th, a manager and the assistant head of the international banking and investment services department at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
L.
Denver Hart, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Ms.
Brown, 37, is a daughter of the late Bette S. and William R. Brown.
Her father was an aeronautical engineer with Rockwell International in Los Angeles.


Electoral Reform Is the Focus of Italian Referendums
Italians vote in a series of referendums on Sunday and Monday that ostensibly chart the nation's future but also provide a chance to pass a verdict on its past.
The eight proposals -- the most important of which would begin changing the entire electoral system -- offer the country's 47.5 million voters their first occasion to judge the way they are led since a year of ever-widening scandal has shown many of their leaders to be implicated in corruption even beyond cynical expectation and has linked some of them to the Mafia.


Youngest Cliburn Competitor
THE pianist Andrew Armstrong can quote Rachmaninoff and Goethe in almost the same breath, and draws connections between music and sports -- another love -- with precise brush strokes.
A first-prize winner of 14 piano competitions, the 19-year-old freshman at Columbia University knows the difference between competing and performing and discusses the pitfalls of playing to please the judges with the beginnings of mature self-knowledge.
But around the Hoff-Barthelson Music School here, where he has been a student since 1988, they are holding back their awe of Mr.
Armstrong, whom everyone seems to call Andy.
Although he is the first student in the school's history to be selected to compete in the prestigious Van Cliburn International Piano Competition -- held every four years in Fort Worth -- people here are still trying to breathe normally until May 22, when the ninth competition gets under way.


Many Gay and Lesbian Groups Want Big March to Back Clinton
Just a week away from a huge gay march on Washington, leaders of gay and lesbian organizations are rallying behind President Clinton, trying to prevent the demonstration from becoming a protest against him.
But some other homosexuals and AIDS organizers, disappointed in the President, are threatening anti-Clinton outbursts at the march next Sunday.
"Clinton talks a good game," said Adam Mailor, a 24-year-old Seattle teacher.
"But what's he doing? We need to put the heat on him." Mr.
Mailor plans to carry a sign that asks: "Bill, Where's the Beef?"


Clashing Claims, Reopened Wounds
Particularly for those American business executives who hope the 18-year estrangement between the United States and Vietnam is coming to end, the report could not have come at a worse moment: four days before a special United States envoy was to travel to Hanoi to ascertain whether the Vietnamese were cooperating in the search for missing Americans, a stunning document surfaced suggesting that Hanoi has misled the United States about the number of prisoners it has held.
The report, dug up in Moscow by Stephen J. Morris, a Harvard-based researcher who opposes rapprochement with the communist regime in Vietnam, states that in September 1972, Hanoi held 1,205 American prisoners.
If accurate, the figure is twice the 591 American P.O.W.s that North Vietnam released in 1973.
It would also suggest that Hanoi either killed the rest or, as some claim, is still holding them.


The Stubborn Man Behind a Quirky New Series
In the snappy, brightly lighted world of prime-time television, David Burke admits that his new series, "TriBeCa," stands out like a pedestrian on the Ventura Freeway.
That may be because any attempt to produce "serious" drama on television these days is regarded as the act of a lone nut who is thumbing his nose at network executives -- or as a death wish, because the chances of the program's surviving are next to none.
But Mr.
Burke, who is an executive producer of the show and its creator, is a stubborn man.
His transgressions of the laws of television begin with the fact that the concept of "TriBeCa" cannot be summed up in three words or less.


Retreats With Peace of Mind
SINCE the Middle Ages, monasteries in Europe have opened their doors to pilgrims and travelers.
Today, monastic hospitality is also extended to tourists, who are attracted by the low price tag, the secluded medieval ambiance and the unspoiled locations.Spain has several dozen monasteries and nunneries that accept guests, many in sites of great natural beauty.
Most such religious establishments in Spain are geared toward modern travelers, but some monasteries and nunneries open their doors to either men or women only and limit guests to those who genuinely seek solitude and retreat.
None require participation in religious activities although punctuality for meals and respect for the monastic way of life are requested.


How Long Will Melody Linger On?
The opening moments of "The Protecting Veil," a 45-minute work for solo cello and string orchestra by the English composer John Tavener, are hauntingly simple.
"With awesome majesty," as the score puts it, the cello plays sustained notes in F major, circling around the fourth tone of the scale.
The line has a modal, medieval feeling.
It doesn't go anywhere or resolve anything; it seems to float in melodic space.
When parts of the melody are heard later, they carry none of the dramatic weight that much of Western music associates with returning themes.
Mr.
Tavener, like his Eastern European colleagues Arvo Part and Henryk Gorecki, is after something quite different: an experience of timelessness and devotion rather than contrast and evolution.
"The Protecting Veil," which was given its New York premiere recently by the cellist Steven Isserlis and the New England Conservatory Orchestra conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas, is unevenly successful in creating that experience.
But its iconlike simplicity, along with its programmatic evocation of the life of the Virgin Mary, has helped make this piece an enormous success in a recording on (yes) the Virgin label.
Mr.
Tavener's works, like those of his Eastern European counterparts, try to strip away Western music's accouterments of harmony and development, aiming for a premodern spirituality.


THE BABIES OF BEDFORD
I read Jean Harris's poignant article with interest and hope.
Yet, I was struck by an inherent paradox that was not addressed in her account.
It seems that pregnant women who are incarcerated have a better chance of giving birth to healthy babies -- free from the effects of substance abuse during gestation -- than do their counterparts in the real world of our inner cities.
Does it take living in a monitored environment to eradicate the use of toxic substances -- alcohol, drugs, tobacco -- during pregnancy?
This is not to say that counseling these women on issues of sound nutrition and family planning is of no merit.
It is only to imply that structured pregnancy and infant-care programs should be made available to all pregnant women at high risk.


On One Team, Graves Is Pick
Mike Keenan's words said that Mark Messier is still the Ranger captain, but his actions showed that he also values another Ranger for his leadership qualities.
That player is Adam Graves, whom Keenan named captain of Team Canada yesterday as that group heads to Munich, Germany, for a two-week tournament among 12 nations that begins tomorrow.


Wall Street; Trying to Get to the Bottom of Schwab's Free Fall
WHICH is the more pertinent question: Why did the Schwab Corporation's shares fall in the first place, or why didn't they plummet more?
The San Francisco-based discount brokerage firm announced record first-quarter earnings Thursday, surprising even the analysts who already were bullish on Schwab shares.
So why did the stock fall $3.125 on Thursday, and $1.375 on Friday, to $33.75 a share?
No small matter is that Schwab was trading at a price-to-earnings ratio that was triple that of some competitors prior to Thursday's free fall; indeed, even at Friday's close, Schwab was selling at 16.23 times earnings.
Compare that with Merrill Lynch, selling at nine times earnings.


Going to Extremes: In Skiing, It Can Mean Death
From where Paul Ruff stood in Thunder Bowl late last month, he couldn't see the bottom of the cliff he was about to ski off.
But he didn't flinch.
A 28-year-old bar manager and ski model from South Lake Tahoe, Calif., he was also one of the most experienced practitioners of a sport known as extreme skiing, an offshoot of ski mountaineering that involves descents of supersteep slopes, narrow chutes and cliffs and that has become organized enough to keep official records.


Pulling No Punches
One movie mogul's grudge against Kim Basinger apparently hasn't died.
Three weeks ago, after Carl Mazzocone, the producer of "Boxing Helena," won $8.9 million in damages from Ms.
Basinger because she broke an agreement to appear in the film, he received a congratulatory call from Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios.
Mr.
Katzenberg and Ms.
Basinger, along with her boyfriend, Alec Baldwin, developed a well-known antagonism for each other in 1990, during the filming of Disney's "Marrying Man." At one point Mr.
Baldwin called Mr.
Katzenberg "the eighth dwarf -- Greedy."


Ethics Panel Interviews Packwood Accusers
Intensifying their investigation of Senator Bob Packwood, aides to the Senate Ethics Committee have traveled to Oregon in the last few days to interview several women who have accused the Senator of making improper sexual advances.
The investigation began in December after The Washington Post published accusations that Mr.
Packwood, Republican of Oregon, made uninvited advances toward female staff members, lobbyists and others between 1969 and 1990.
In all more than 20 women have made such accusations.
The inquiry bogged down for several weeks between the Congressional sessions, but it now appears to be picking up momentum.


At Wary Yale, Seeds of Hope
Following Thursday's naming of Richard C. Levin as Yale University's 22d president, administrators, students and trustees warned that their new leader had better be prepared to roll up his sleeves and dive headfirst into the institution's many financial and morale problems.
The appointment of Mr.
Levin, a homegrown leader who has spent more than two decades at Yale since arriving as a doctoral student in economics in 1971, is being received with enthusiasm and optimism.


DANCE
April THE COPASETICS: LEGENDS OF THE TAP, Walt Whitman Hall, Brooklyn Center for the Performing ARts, Brooklyn College, Flatbushand Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush.
Tap greats in the tradition of Bill (Bojangles) Robinson and the Nicholas Brothers.
Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $10 Information: (718) 951-4500.
TRISHA BROWN DANCE COMPANY, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Trisha brown will show a slower, more emotional choreographic self in new dances that include the intriguingly titled "For M.G.: TheMovie," "One Story as in Falling" and "Another Story." There will also be a reworking of "Astral Convetible" and a guest appearance by the Compagnie Bagouet from France in "One Story as in Falling." April 27 thorugh May 9.
Performances are at 7:30 P.M. on opening night; 8 P.M.
Wednesdays through Saturdays; matinees on May 1 at 2 P.M., and on Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $35.
Information: (212) 581-7907.


Paris Has Burned
LOOKING like endangered birds, the drag queens tottered on their heels as they entered -- "a bit early in the day for we girls," said one.
It was noon on a recent Saturday at the Sound Factory Bar on West 21st Street, and they were attending a memorial for Angie Xtravaganza.
One of her children, Hector Xtravaganza, kept breaking down in tears.
"It's not just her, it's all of them," he said.
"My entire gay childhood is disintegrating before my eyes." Indeed, as some of the 100 mourners rose to reminisce, it was as if their whole world, the world of drag queens and voguing and ecstatic, elaborate balls, had died along with Angie.
Though she was only 27, Angie had been a mother more than a dozen times.
Not in the usual way; she was biologically male.
"But a mother is one who raises a child, not one who borns it," Hector pointed out.
And as mother of the House of Xtravaganza, Angie had taken many rejected, wayward, even homeless children under her wing; she had fed them, observed their birthdays, taught them all about "walking the balls." Competing in categories like High-Fashion Eveningwear and Alexis vs.
Krystle, Angie was legendary, a Queen among queens, achieving in fantasy what the world had denied her in reality.


Dueling Sopranos In 'Lucia,' 'Traviata'
The almost tactile quality of a singing voice -- its size and weight and feel -- shapes portrayal of character as much as any stylistic decisions do.
A singer must first take account of his or her vocal attributes.
Only then can questions of interpretive style and, through it, projection of character begin to take tangible form.
Nowhere have contrasting interpretations dictated by vocal type been better illustrated than in four new opera recordings, two of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" and two of Verdi's "Traviata," each starring Edita Gruberova or Cheryl Studer.


Not a Virgin
To the Editor:
I realize, what with all the misinterpretations and worries we have in the world, that this does not rank high, but "Water Liars," by Barry Hannah, is one of my favorite stories, and Shelby Hearon has misremembered it in a crucial way in her review of Mr.
Hannah's "Bats Out of Hell" (March 7).
The narrator of the story is not being driven crazy because his wife has left him.
She hasn't left him.
She has revealed to him, in a perhaps ill-advised moment of mutual truth telling, that she was not a virgin when they met.
Not a virgin!
The narrator is being driven crazy by his own terrible, wonderful imagination.
He is, as he says in that indelible last line, "crucified by the truth."
There. I feel better.  ABIGAIL THOMAS New York


New &amp; Noteworthy
VERY OLD BONES, by William Kennedy. (Penguin, $10.) The author continues his saga of the Phelan family of Albany, this time focusing his story on Orson Purcell, the illegitimate son of Peter Phelan.
Orson struggles to find his identity as a man and as a writer in this novel, which our reviewer, Maureen Howard, described last year as a "grand leap, the very best of William Kennedy's work so far."
VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The Russian Years, by Brian Boyd. (Princeton University, $15.95.) Vladimir Nabokov was raised in the happiest of families in the most turbulent of times.
The son of wealthy and adoring parents, he was forced to flee Russia with the rest of the family after the Bolshevik revolution, then to flee Europe as the Nazis closed in.
Yet, as this first volume of Brian Boyd's biography shows, neither turmoil nor subsequent poverty impeded his writing.
"Nabokov's life reads like a work by a very imaginative creator," Sergei Davydov said here in 1990.
"Mr. Boyd gives us that life and ventures many shrewd glimpses beyond it. As a biography his book can hardly be surpassed." Princeton University has also reissued Mr.
Boyd's second volume, VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The American Years ($16.95), an exploration of the two decades Nabokov spent in the United States.
In 1991 our reviewer, Walter Kendrick, said: "It testifies to Mr. Boyd's skill -- and to his encyclopedic knowledge of his subject -- that he not only weaves his two Nabokovs seamlessly together but also manages to make even a teacher's life fascinating."


Now Is the Time to Repair Flagstone Walks, Steps and Patios
SETTLING and repeated freezing and thawing can crack or tilt flat masonry surfaces, especially flagstone walks, steps and patios.
Repair is usually not too difficult, but it should be done in the spring to lessen chances that uneven pavement might cause a fall and to prevent damage from worsening.
Flagstones set without mortar have the greatest tendency to shift, but they are the easiest to fix.
Start by prying up the stones that have tilted or sunk, using a crowbar.
Rest its fulcrum on a board to protect other flagstones.
Pry carefully if you use a shovel or garden fork, as their handles break easily.


With Orchestra in Tow


Provider, Protector and Felon: Freddie, 17
When night draws across the broken-faced tenements of the Hunts Point section of the Bronx, Freddie Cherokee Brown's teen-age eyes narrow and his boyish face hardens.
On the dark and dangerous streets where Freddie regularly moves like a shadow, harm's hand beckons from nearly every turn.
Crack fumes curl out of a grimy doorway.
Prostitutes troll lonely street corners for easy customers and hard cash.


Perpetuating Myths
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay "Doting on Divas: Private Jokes, Open Secrets"  [ March 28 ]  does a disservice to gay men because it perpetuates several myths that gay men are trying to dispel.
Most of us do not want to be women or anything like women.
We do not live lives like operas any more than straight men do.
We have no more facility or talent for the arts than the heterosexual community.
Many of us pump gas at service stations or drive trucks.


Maria Claveria and George Harth Jr.
Maria Jean Claveria, the daughter of Virginia Terriberry of Woodside, Queens, was married yesterday to George Joseph Harth Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harth Sr. of Wantagh, L.I.
The Rev.
Edwin J. Collins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Barnabas Church in Bellmore, L.I.
Mrs.
Harth, 24, was until recently a physical therapy assistant at Island Rehabilitation, a sports-medicine clinic in Rockville Centre, L.I.
She graduated from Nassau Community College.


Coleman Nails Jumper and Playoff Spot
During halftime of New Jersey's 104-103 last-second victory over the Washington Bullets tonight, there was a small explosion between Nets Coach Chuck Daly and Drazen Petrovic.
Petrovic was upset about being yanked from the game during the first half.
Daly wasn't happy that Petrovic was complaining, because the guard had started the game by missing his first four shots from the field.
But while the two might have been angry at halftime, they had smiles on their faces when the game was over and the Nets had ended their seven-game losing streak.
A tough victory, a passionate victory, in which the Nets trailed by 23 points with eight and a half minutes left in the game, tends to wipe away the frowns.


Not So Dour
To the Editor:
Igor Buketoff's article on the 50th anniversary of Rachmaninoff's death  [ "The Man Behind the Dour Mask," April 4 ]  brought a small incident to mind that would confirm that Rachmaninoff was anything but severe.


Coach Stays at Auburn
JOE CIAMPI, who was being wooed by Arkansas, signed a five-year contract to remain as the women's basketball coach at Auburn.
Ciampi had worked the previous 14 years (350-89) at the school without a contract. (AP)


Ms. D'Ambrosio, Paul Tramontano
Francine Diana D'Ambrosio and Paul Eric Tramontano plan to wed in September.
She is a vice president of finance at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
He is a senior vice president of investments there.
Ms.
D'Ambrosio graduated summa cum laude from Pace University.
She is a daughter of Frank D'Ambrosio and Diana L. D'Ambrosio, both of Yonkers.
Her father owns D'Ambrosio Fuel, an oil company there.


Officials Fear Low Turnout in School Vote
VOTERS in 90 percent of New Jersey's school districts will be going to the polls on Tuesday to elect local school board members and decide the fate of more than $4 billion in proposed school budgets.
Perhaps the most remarkable thing about the election is how unremarkable it is shaping up to be -- with one notable exception.
The change in the election date this year, from the second Tuesday in April to the third Tuesday, could lower voter turnout, some school officials fear, and endanger school budgets in a number of communities.


Cairo Pro and Con
To the Editor: On my return from my 27th tour of Egypt leading a small group, I was delighted to read Anne Bernays' and Justin Kaplan's timely article.
Like them, we felt no menace wherever we went; and while they stayed at five-star hotels and cruised the Nile in a luxury liner, we were the only Western guests at the simple Hotel el Hussein in the heart of Islamic Cairo, ate with the local residents in restaurants throughout Egypt, hiked to Kom el Ahmar in the Western Desert, and cruised the Nile from Aswan to Luxor in a felucca, snug at night in our sleeping bags under 10,000 stars.
We were made most welcome everywhere, although we were unmistakably Americans, and treated with great courtesy in the mosques.


Rivers Rescues Weary Knicks
The Knicks did not play particularly well last night, but they got plenty of help from the Detroit Pistons.
Isiah Thomas was ejected late in the third quarter for trying to kick Doc Rivers.
And Joe Dumars, the Pistons' All-Star guard, sat out the game because of a knee injury.
Taking advantage of the Pistons' misery and frustration, New York managed a 95-85 victory at Madison Square Garden.
It was not pretty, and it was not easy.
But it was important, because it moved New York (56-22) one-half game in front of the idle Chicago Bulls (55-22) in the race for the best record in the Eastern Conference.
It was the Knicks' 18th consecutive home victory, improving their league-best home record to 35-4.


G.O.P. Fans Out to Condemn Jobs Bill
Taking a page from the Clinton and Perot playbooks, Congressional Republicans held town meetings today in 13 states to condemn the President's budget plan, especially his package to stimulate the economy, as a collection of special favors for constituents.
In this heavily Republican New Hampshire town, 90 people gathered at the American Legion hall to hear their Representative, Bill Zeliff, and Senator Phil Gramm of Texas speak against the President's plans and vent their own frustrations about rising local unemployment, health-care costs and welfare.


Data Bank/April 18, 1993


Formula For Devils: Luck and Defense
Mario Lemieux and the Pittsburgh Penguins are awaiting the New Jersey Devils with open arms for Game 1 of the teams' first-round Patrick Division playoff series this afternoon (Channel 7, 1 P.M.).
Super Mario and the Penguins, in search of their third consecutive Stanley Cup, are playing their best hockey of the year right now.
They finished the regular season without a loss in their last 18 games, although the Devils tied them in the final one, 6-6, last Wednesday.
Despite the triumph of that tie, the Devils have allowed 19 goals in their last three games and played poorly in the 8-4 loss to the Islanders Friday night that earned them the playoff ticket to Pittsburgh instead of Landover, Md..


Cairo Pro and Con
To the Editor: Professors Bernays and Kaplan evidenced a cavalier concern about possible dangers from terrorists.
How ironic that the article followed by one day a report in The New York Times about an explosion in a coffee shop that was known to be frequented by foreign tourists.
The friends and relatives of the two foreigners who were killed and of the nine who were injured may have wished that suggestions about wearing flak jackets, which the authors had used as a clever lead to their story, had been followed.
THOMAS DEUTSCH Hartsdale, N.Y.


Abrams Warns Schools On the Use of Pesticides
THE use of pesticides without adequate controls or precautions is widespread in New York's schools, according to a report released recently by State Attorney General Robert Abrams.
The report, "Pesticides in Schools: Reducing Risks," said that 87 percent of the state's schools that were surveyed use pesticides either in the classrooms, on the playing fields or both.


EX-MINE OFFICIAL IS UNDER INQUIRY
The Bush Administration's top coal mining regulator is under investigation by the Department of the Interior over accusations that he blocked enforcement of the strip mining law, the department's chief investigator said Friday.
The investigation came to light in a House Appropriations Committee report that outlines a pattern of actions by the regulator, Harry M. Snyder, the former director of the Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement, in which he helped coal mine operators avoid prosecution and reduce fines.


BEST SELLERS: April 18, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
36
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
1
5
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
1
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide -- but may have returned to life to reap benefits.
4
3
3
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a model.
5
4
8
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
6
5
9
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a patent clerk.
7
9
2
FORWARD THE FOUNDATION, by Isaac Asimov. (Foundation/Doubleday, $23.50.) The final volume of a science fiction series about the fall of the Galactic Empire and the birth of a new order.
8
1
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
9
10
4
THE DEVIL'S HEART, by Carmen Carter. (Pocket, $20.) A new "Star Trek" tale.
10 *
1
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
11 *
12
33
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
12 *
7
6
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
13
13
21
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
14
15
6
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the story of a street boy and a genie.
15
11
6
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state and the human race is approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his fate.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
9
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
2
2
36
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
3
3
31
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
4
22
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
5
8
18
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and daily life.
6 *
7
44
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
5
7
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) J. Edgar Hoover's life.
8
9
6
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Geological history.
9
6
5
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political forces.
10 *
1
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for individuals and institutions to make civility part of their lives and functions.
11
10
30
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
12
12
13
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
13
1
MARILYN MONROE, by Donald Spoto. (HarperCollins, $25.) The life of the movie star.
14
13
8
MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The actress remembered by her daughter.
15
10
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former museum director.
16 *
15
41
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
17 *
17
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
18 *
11
8
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
2
40
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
3
4
57
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
4
1
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
5
3
58
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT: The Fraying of America, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Mr.
Hughes turns a cruel eye on the political-cultural debates of the 1980's, the pressure to recognize cultural diversity and the politicization of the contemporary art scene.
ATGET'S SEVEN ALBUMS, by Molly Nesbit. (Yale University, $55.) A scholar's large-bore analytical powers find political commitment and self-conscious intentions in the work of the Paris photographer who has been interpreted as a brilliant primitive.
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) A vivid, fine-grained, realistic and honest novel whose characters are mainly over 40 and in love for far from the first time.
SACRED COUNTRY, by Rose Tremain. (Atheneum, $21.) A large novel, Ms.
Tremain's sixth, in which three generations of Britons try to sort out who they are and how they might be happy.
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) Like all Ms.
Gibbons's fiction, this novel concerns itself with strong women: a bookish narrator, her mother, her grandmother, all of them prevailing through fierce survival instincts and folk wisdom handed down from prior generations.
CRY ME A RIVER, by T. R. Pearson. (Holt, $22.) A crime story, narrated by a cop and loser whose comrade's death brings us, eventually, into contact with a gallery of driven figures.
WORKING-CLASS WAR: American Combat Soldiers and Vietnam, by Christian G. Appy. (University of North Carolina, cloth, $39.95; paper, $14.95.) An examination of the war's demographics -- 80 percent of American enlisted men were working-class or poor -- and how that makeup may have influenced the war.


Timothy Bliss and Machael Pollard
Machael Valerie Pollard, a daughter of Thelbert Pollard Jr. of Mannford, Okla., and Valinda West of Tulsa, Okla., was married yesterday to Timothy Newton Bliss, a son of Sally B. Bliss of Oyster Bay, L.I., and the late Anthony A. Bliss.
Thomas Cruzan, an Oklahoma State Court Judge in the Juvenile Division, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Bliss and her husband are seniors at the Rochester Institute of Technology.
Her father is owner of the Pollard Construction Company in Mannford.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
James West, is a dentist in Tulsa.
She is also the stepdaughter of Kathy Pollard of Mannford.


Amazing Journey


Miss Dreyfuss, Paul A. Schnell
July wedding plans have been announced by Ralph and Helen Dreyfuss of New York for their daughter Madeleine Dreyfuss and Paul Alan Schnell, a son of Jack and Anita Schnell of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Miss Dreyfuss, 29, is a sales representative at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical manufacturer.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father, now retired, was the senior vice president at Cometals Inc., a mining company, in New York.
Her mother is a vice president and real estate broker at Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc., in New York.


Cairo Pro and Con
To the Editor: We must have crossed paths several times in Egypt with Anne Bernays and Justin Kaplan, who wrote "Taking a Chance on Cairo" (Feb. 28).
We, too, were at the Mena House, Luxor, Abu Simbel and many places they did not venture to in early January.
We, too, had a wedding at the Nile Hilton.
Our feelings and experiences were similar, with one huge exception.
At no time did we ever see more than two other tour buses.
Often we had the sites to ourselves.
We experienced no waiting in the Valley of the Kings; the usual wait was an hour and a half, we were told.
We had been warned of the crowds at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo but we saw maybe 100 other people in the whole museum.


SEPARATIST IS HELD IN BLACK'S SLAYING
The South African police said tonight that they had arrested a leading member of the Conservative Party, the main right-wing opposition party, as a suspect in the killing of the black leader Chris Hani, lending the first official credence to suspicions of a broader conspiracy behind the assassination.
The man arrested was Clive Derby-Lewis, a flamboyant former member of Parliament who has been instrumental in organizing English-speakers and white immigrants in the cause of racial separatism.


The Longest Long Shot: 108-1 and Still Dreaming
Rockamundo didn't hold his breath in the Arkansas Derby today.
But he made everyone else breathless.
The 3-year-old, whose recent defeats are attributed by trainer Benny Glass to the colt's tendency to hold his breath during races, scored a stunning 108-1 upset in Oaklawn Park's $500,000 prep for the Kentucky Derby.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  TIGHTER NOOSE ON BELGRADE


Playing It Safe With Payment
A GROUP of 16 students and teachers at Mattituck High School on Long Island paid $17,000 to a travel agent in Florida for a class trip to England and Ireland earlier this month.
But when Alan Lawrence, the social studies teacher who organized the group, had not received travel documents and was unable to reach the agent the day before the group was to leave, he began to make inquiries.
He learned, he says, that none of the money had been remitted to the airline, the hotel or the company providing the land tour.
Then he called the Martin County Sheriff, who issued a warrant for the agent's arrest on charges of grand larceny.
A week after the group's original departure date, with travel donations from Trafalgar Tours, which volunteered to help, and Virgin Atlantic Airways, the airline Mr.
Lawrence was told would be used, plus cash from a number of Mattituck community groups, the students and their teachers took off for their 10-day trip.


Bits of Time, Captured Through a Lens
FROM the Bronx to the Battery - and to Staten Island too - New York City has long offered artists a dazzling variety of subjects.
With its climbing skyscrapers and congested streets, its puling energy and unparalleled diversity, New York in the 1920's and 30's was regarded as the prototypical modern city. a symbol of both the possibilities and problems of the industrial age.
But both before and after that period, the city held a deep allure for artists.
In 1912, the printmaker Joseph Pennell expressed in rhapsodic terms the attraction the city had for artists of the day, writing that "the towering splendor of New York is one of the marvels of the world," and later describing the view of Manhattan from Brooklyn Heights as "the most wonderful, the most fairylike, the most magnificent view in the world."
At any given time, pictures of New York past and present are apt to be featured in a wide range of exhibitions around town.
Here are a few places to find images of the city in the coming months.
Paired Visions
No clearer evidence of artists' enduring fascination with the city can be found than in an exhibition opening Wednesday at the Museum of the City of New York.
Titled "Shared Perspectives: The Printmaker and Photographer in New York, 1900-1950," this intriguing show will juxtapose prints of familiar places in the city, taken from the collection of Reba and Dave Williams, with photographs of the same locations from the museum's holdings.
The paired prints and photographs provide glimpses of the changing face of the city in the first half of this century.
In choosing work for the show, Leslie Nolan, the museum's curator of prints and photographs, tried to find images that showed places in the city from the same point fo view, and as a result viewers can compare sytlistic differences in artists' approaches to their shared subjects.
At times, the pictures are remarkably similar.
The hulking form of the el station that hovered above Christopher Street in Greenwich Village, with its pagodalike roof and its gingerbread trim, is depicted both in berenic Aboot's crispy detailed 1936 photographs and in Howard Cook's 1928 woodcut.
Other subjects' allowed artists freedom to play with their subjects' expressive qualities.
Times Square at night is presented in shimmering photographs by Samuel H. Gottscho, from 1932, and Andreas Feininger, from around 1950, as well as in a lithograph by Eugene Fitsch from around 1926 in which the bright advertising signs and marquees dance across the paper.
Skyscrapers captivated artists in the first part of the century, and "Shared Perspectives" abounds with images of the towering buildings that cmae to symbolize New York.
John Marin's etching of thw Eoolworth Building, designed byCass Gilbert and the world's tallest building when it was build in 1913, was done shortly after construction was completed.
Irving Underhill's photo, made the same year, offers a more sober depiction of the building's Gothic forms than Marin's giddy impression, but records it with a mixture of down-to-earth factuality and pride.
Lewis Hine's breathtaking photos of the Empire State Building under construction, with workers precariously perched on steel beams high above the city, are echoed in prints by Sherril Schell, James E. Allen and Samuel L. Margolies.
The completed building was, in its turn, the subjet of prints by a number of artists, as well as Edward Steichen's classic multiple-exposure view, made in 1932, of the towering sturcture seen from its base.
Skyscrapers, soaring bridges, run-down tenements and elegant brownstones were all recorded by the artists and photographers included in "Shared Perspectives."
But of particular note is a series of pictures of the Flatiron Building, built by the Chicago architect Daniel Burnham in 1902, whose triangular shape entranced artists of the period.
A history of photographic style in the first third of the 20th centurycould be traced through pictures of the oddlyshaped buildings, from Edward Steichen's dreamy Pictorialist rendering of its pointed form, swaddled in blue dusk, made in 1907, to Walter Gropius's Constructivist depiction of it, in 1928, as a sharp diagonal form.
Neither of those famous pictures is here, but "Shared Perspectives" features photographs of the Flatiron by Jessie Tarbox Beals, from 1906, and by the T.H.
McAllister Company, from 1909, as well; as a 1908 mezzotint of the building byPennell and an etching by Childe Hassam from 1916.
Paired Artists
Among the many other prominent photographers who tried their hands at depicting the Flatiron Building was Alfred Stieglitz, who is featured as an artist and an influence intwo important exhibitions in the city this spring.
Stieglitz and Georgia O'Keeffe played out much of their fabled romance against the backdrop of New York, and the city plays an important role in "Two Lives: A Conversation in Paintings and Photographs," an exhibition opening April 27 at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art that willfocus on the work of these two proud artists.
Stieglitz, the legendary photographer and central figure in the introduction of modern art to America, first say O'Keeffe's abstract watercolors in 1915 and immediately decided to show them at 291, his pioneering gallery.Later, the two met and fell in love, beginning a stormy personal and artistic relationship that would last three decades.
Much of the show at the I.B.M.
Gallery will consist of O'Keefe's close-up abstractions of flowers and other natural forms and Stieglitz's studies of clouds over his country house in Lake George, N.Y., as well as his portraits of O'Keeffe.
But New York City was an important subject for both artists, and "Two Lives" will include examples of their depictions of the city.
Steiglitz is represented by a soft-focus view of the lower Manhattan skyline from 1910, as well as moody shots of skyscrapers at dusk from the early 1930's, while O'Keeffe's hallucinatory painting of New York City, from the mid-1920's, emphasize its dizzying perspectives.
Another Protegee
In a coincidence of scheduling, Stieglitz and New York are strong presences in another exhibition this spring.
The International Center of Photography is presenting, through June 27, "Intimate Visions: The Photographs of Dorothy Norman." Mrs.
Norman met Stieglitz in 1928, worked with him at his gallery An American Place and began to photograph under his tutelage.
The show includes a range of Mrs.
Norman's pictures of Stieglitz himself, with his distinctive black cape, wire-rimmed glasses and shaggy white mustache, as well as portraits of such artists and intellecutals as Elia Kazan, Harold Clurman, Charles Demuth and Edgard Varese.
Also featured are Mrs.
Norman's tiny, jewel-like images of New York, most of which date from the 1930's.
In these quiet pictures, none bigger than a hand, she reduced the overlapping buildings of the city to collagelike patterns of dark and light forms.
A Defining Era
As a booming metropolis of skyscrapers and industry, New York achieved pre-eminence between the world wars.
But many of the buildings that define the city today were built earlier.
In a period that stretched from roughly 1880 to 1930, a group of architects, many of whom had studied at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, produced public and private buildings, based on classical European models, that expressed the city's new wealth and self-confidence.
Some of the city's most famous landmarks were built in this period, including the Woolworth Building, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Grand Central Terminal.
These and other buildings of the time are featured in "Beaux-Arts New York," an exhibition at the New York School of Interior Design through May 13.
Theough period photographs, architectural drawings, sketches and other documents, the exhibition records the flowering of the Beaux-Arts style in New York in such famous buildings as the Old Penn Station, designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White, which was opened in 1910 and destroyed in 1965; the Brooklyn Museum, also by McKim, Mead &amp; White (1897), and the New York Public Library, by Carrere &amp; Hastings (1911).
Then and Now
Images of New York can also be found in other exhibitions around the city this spring.
Through Jan. 2, the Alice Austen House on Staten Island is Presenting "A Century Apart," in which photographs of Staten Island by Austen, a wealthy turn-of-the-century amateur, are being shown alongside contemporary images by Lisa Clifford, an architectural photographer.
And in SoHo, Helen Levitt's marvelous photographs of children playing in the city streets in the early 1940's are being featured through May 15 in a show at the Laurence Miller Gallery, along with photographs of children at play in Spain and England by Henri Cartier-Bresson and Roger Mayne.
Pictures of the city can be found in many places, and not just in special shows.
The recently reinstalled permanent exhibition of the photography collection at the Museum of Modern Art includes a 1910 Stieglitz photograph of an ocean liner leaving New York Harbor, as well as Aaron Siskind's 1936 shot which has the noble austerity of a photograph by Eugene Atget; he has a friend there, on of the concessionaires, who sometimes discreetly gives him a break on lunch.
Or he checks out the Conservatory Water, a concrete pool where visitors watch silent and stern middle-aged men sailing remote-control model yachts; the snack bar there offers the best hot dog in the park.
"I'm moving all over the place," he says.
"You've got to deal with allsorts of shady characters in the park. They're not all lollipops, you know."
But Poet O.'sheart is somehow tied to Strawberry Fields.
He currently has a room in a hotel for the elderly on West 43d Street, but "my big dream is to get an apartment in the Dakota, right there on the corner," he says wistfully.
He has a poem, "Grief," that he wrote during the all-night vigil after Lennon wasshot; he says it was later published by Hunter College.
If bell-ringers seem particularly attentive to Poet O.'s kooky commands, he will sometimes reward them with a rousing and theatrical reading of the work.
Hos words tumble out, here smooth and clipped and manicured, there coarse and stuttered and guttural, depending on the sentiment.
Or if the wishers be lovers, he will sometimes recite another poem, "A Fantasy Delight": "Let (bland) and (blank)" - fill in the names of lovers - "take a memorable voyage calculated to please, complete relaxation is a necessary part of our trip, free from the ties of our daily vexations, we must enjoy our paradoxical fantasy to the utmost . . . "
On paper, Poet O.'s words glimmer with a deep-rooted majesty, but his is not an art of the printed page.
It is as lush and tumultuous and grimy and resplendent and uncontainable as Central Park itself.
Suddenly he leans in close, and his rugged, venerable face cracks into a mischievous grin.
"I know every corner of this park," he whispers.
"I know all its characters and hiding places. I know its secrets."
Here are the addresses, hours and admission prices for the exhibitions mentioned: "SHARED PERSPECTIVES: THE PRINTMAKER AND PHOTOGRAPHER IN NEW YORK, 1900-1950." Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Wednesday to Sept. 19.
Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays, for pre-registered groups only; closed Mondays.
Admission: $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"TWO LIVES: A CONVERSATION IN PAINTINGS AND PHOTOGRAPHS," I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, 590 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street.
April 27 to June 26.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Free.
Information: (212) 745-5214.
"INTIMATE VISIONS: THE PHOTOGRAPHS OF DOROTHY NORMAN," International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street.
Through June 27.
Hours: Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 860-1777.
"BEAUX-ARTS NEW YORK," New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street, Manhattan.
Through May 13.
Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, noon to 6 P.M.; Fridays, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Closed Saturdays and Sundays.
Information: (212) 753-5365, extension 36.
"A CENTURY APART," Alice Austen House, 2 Hylan Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
Photographs of the buildings of Staten Island by Alice Austen and Lisa Clifford.
Through Jan. 2.
Hours: Thursdays through Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays through Wednesdays.
Admission: $2.
Information: (718) 816-4506.
LAURENCE MILLER GALLERY, 138 Spring Street, SoHo.
Photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson, Helen Levitt, and Roger Mayne.
Through May 15.
Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Free.
Information: (212) 226-1220.
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Hours: Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Fridays through Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Wednesdays.
Open Memorial Day.
Admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Information: (212) 708-9500.
BROOKLYN MUSEUM, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly; free under age 12.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
LOWER EAST SIDE TENEMENT MUSEUM, 97 Orchard Street.
Photographs by Arnold Eagle and Wijnanda Deroo.
Hours: Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.; closed Mondays and Saturdays.
Admission: (tuesdays through Fridays) Free, Sundays, $3; $1 for children under 18, students with identification and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
"NEW YORK IN THE 30'S: SKYSCRAPERS AND STREETS," New York Bound Bookshop, lobby of the Associated Press Building, 50 Rockefeller Plaza.
Through June 30.
Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, noon to 4 P.M.; closed Sundays.
Information: (212) 245-8503.


Juicy Bits of Gossip?
To the Editor:
The bickering between Carl T. Rowan and Laura Kalman (Letters, March 7) is entertaining, but while enjoying it I had to wonder why the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund files are closed.
What compelling reason does the Library of Congress have for so maintaining them?


No Record
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey ("No Underdog Ever Wins Final Four," (The Times, April 4) threw up an air ball when he credited Rob Pelinka with tying the record by being a member of three Final Four teams. The record is not three but four Final Four teams. It is a record held exclusively by three Duke University players: C. Buckley and G. Koubek '88, '89, '90, '91 and C. Laettner '89, '90, '91, '92, a record that can never be broken, only tied. DONALD Q. O'BRIEN  Bedminster, N.J.


Ms. Edelstein, Frank Stankus
Winter wedding plans have been announced for Cindy Ann Edelstein and Frank Stankus.
Ms.
Edelstein, 28, is the owner of the Jeweler's Resource Bureau, a marketing agency in New York City.
She is a graduate of both Hofstra University and the Fashion Institute of Technology, and is on the board of directors of the National Women's Jewelry Association.
Mr.
Stankus, 45, is an assistant to the technology editor of The New York Times.
Ms.
Edelstein is the daughter of Anita Edelstein and the late Alfred Edelstein.
Her mother is an assistant vice president at the Bank of New York in Secaucus, N.J.
Her father owned Forest Jewelers in Staten Island and was a vice president of the New York State Retail Jewelers' Association.


Leave Those Stock Options Alone
To the Editor:
I was unpleasantly surprised to see my commitment to continue granting stock options to every employee in my company portrayed as hiding from "truth" in accounting (chart with "In Accounting, Truth Can Be Very Scary," Market Watch, April 11).
The contention that companies are opposing the Financial Accounting Standards Board's new stock option accounting rule simply because it would cost top executives money is misinformed.


Hopatcong Journal; Fishermen Mobilize to Save Lake Hopatcong and Its Trout
THE first sign that Lake Hopatcong is in trouble can be seen in some coves where the weeds grow thick.
But for the trout that inhabit the lake, New Jersey's largest -- and the thousands of New Jerseyans who come each year in pursuit of them -- the problem is more subtle.
Runoffs from storm drains and leakage from faulty septic systems are contaminating the lake and threatening its prize catch.
Once a paradise for trout fishermen, the lake inspired a group of them 47 years ago to form the Knee Deep Club, so named because its founders had previously fished for trout in streams.
The club stocks the lake with trout, supplementing the 16,000 trout provided by the Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife.


Call for Restraint
To the Sports Editor:
Making fair moral judgments about people requires, in my opinion, judgment, restraint and humility, qualities I could not detect in Robert Lipsyte's column ("Calling Moral Court to Order," The Times, March 19).


Jan Grossman, Michael Meller
David and Hanna Grossman of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jan Esther Grossman, to Michael Victor Meller, the son of Michael N. and Elizabeth Meller of North Tarrytown, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Grossman is a program specialist with the Administration for Children and Families in the United States Department of Health and Human Services in Washington.
She graduated from Antioch College and received a master's degree in public administration from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is the president of the Nova Institute, a nonprofit policy-research consulting organization.
Her mother, now retired, was a policy analyst with the New York State Department of Social Services in New York and Albany.


Television
April
"JOHN FORD." An episode of the "Biography" series about the director of classic American westerns.
The documentary by Lindsay Anderson, the British director and Ford admirer, includes comments from Ford and stars like John Wayne, James Stewart and Henry Fonda.
Arts &amp; Entertainment, Tuesday at 8 P.M.
"CALL OF THE WILD." An adaptation of the Jack London story about the adventurer John Thornton and the Yukon gold rush in 1896.
Rick Schroder, still trying to complete his metamorphosis to adult star, plays Thornton.
CBS, April 25 at 9 P.M.
May
"BLIND SPOT." A not-quite-so-classic entry in the "Hallmark Hall of Fame," this contemporary story deals with an ambitious Congresswoman (Joanne Woodward) who has missed a growing crisis of drug abuse in her own family.
CBS, May 2 at 9 P.M.
"MURDER IN THE HEARTLAND." A new retelling of the Charles Starkweather murder rampage in Nebraska in 1958, with the emphasis as much on the courtroom drama after the spree as on the violence itself.
Did his 14-year-old girlfriend, Caril Ann Fugate, participate, or was she dragged along unwillingly?
That's the angle here.
ABC, May 3 and 4, both nights at 9 P.M.
"MONSTER: A PORTRAIT OF STALIN IN BLOOD." A four-part documentary using recently released film from Soviet archives and interviews with survivors of his reign.
The series looks at his conduct of World War II, his use of the secret police to enforce his policy of terror, his reliance on mind-control techniques and episodes from his private life.
An interesting counterpoint to last November's HBO film biography.
Discovery Channel, beginning May 4 at 10 P.M.
"ROD STEWART: UNPLUGGED." The "Unplugged" series, which has become something of a phenomenon in the music industry, reunites the gravel-voiced British rocker with the guitarist Ron Wood for an acoustic version of hits like "Stay With Me," "Hot Legs" and "Maggie May." MTV, May 5 at 9:30 P.M.
"THE TOMMYKNOCKERS." Horror from Stephen King is becoming something of a spring tradition.
This one casts Jimmy Smits as an alcoholic poet who is the only resident of a small Maine town not undone by the weird power of the Tommyknockers, who emerge from a long-buried, mysterious object that a writer of children's books finds in the woods.
ABC, May 9 and 10, both nights at 9.
"THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF 1968." Any year could be commemorated 25 years later, but 1968 did have more impact than most, with assassinations, riots, the Tet offensive in Vietnam and the election of Richard Nixon as President.
There is lots of emphasis on cultural developments as well.
Fox, May 11 at 9 P.M.
"THE SIMPSONS." The season finale finds young Bart distraught over the cancellation of his favorite show, "Krusty the Clown." Once again, the show is a star parade if you can identify the voices, including Johnny Carson (in his first post-"Tonight" appearance) Bette Midler and Hugh Hefner (who knows what
he
sounds like?). Fox, May 13 at 8 P.M.
"WILD PALMS." Surely destined to the the most talked-about show of the spring, this six-part limited run is being called an "event series" by ABC.
Set in the near future, it is an ominous, murky, mysterious and downright weird mix of what the network describes as "horrifying drama" and "hallucinatory soap opera." The story unfolds at a television network run by a power-mad senator and involves characters moving in and out of virtual reality.
The cast includes James Belushi, Dana Delany and Angie Dickinson.
Oliver Stone put it all together.
ABC, beginning May 16 at 9 P.M.
"CHEERS." The finale to what has arguably been the most successful comedy in television history is an all-night extravaganza on May 20.
First, at 8 P.M., comes the season finale to "Seinfeld," the heir to "Cheers" as the hottest comedy on television.
At 9 there is a half-hour of "Cheers" highlights.
Then at 9:30, it's the final episode itself, with Sam (Ted Danson) finally reunited with his lost love, Diane Chambers (Shelley Long).
If that's not enough, Jay Leno will broadcast the "Tonight" show at 11:35 from the Bull and Finch bar in Boston, the real-life model, with the entire cast.
May 20.


Tanana Plays Houdini, And Threats Disappear
It's as if there's a full state of baseball alert in effect when Frank Tanana is on the mound.
There is going to be trouble, sometimes lots of it.
The critical question is whether there will be damage, too.
And so from the first inning on, the manager's strategic wheels are spinning.
The bullpen is poised.
Outfielders are repeating mental drills -- how fast are the men on base, what base to throw to on the next hit.


The Story of a Nanny, From Care to Calamity
Like many children's nannies, Ann Franklin seemed to care for Kieran Dunne as tenderly as if he were her own baby.
She fed the sprightly, bright-eyed 10-month-old Cheerios and mashed carrots.
She washed his face and changed his soiled diapers.
When he was sick on her days off, she called his parents to learn how he was doing.


Inflation: Not Dying, Just Changing
WHEN it comes to inflation and share prices, the most important question is not how big the inflation is, but where it is.
When the market allows companies to raise prices almost at will, Wall Street comes to love them.
What is going on now is a reshuffling of inflationary pressures.
With the dollar down -- and the Clinton Administration evidently quite happy to keep it there -- the pressures are receding on those American companies that sell goods subject to international competition.
Mr.
Clinton's tendency toward managed trade and quotas -- illustrated last week in his talks with Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa -- also bodes well for those companies.


The Odd Place of Homosexuality in the Military
UNTIL 1942, no specific proviso barred homosexuals from serving in the military.
That year, military psychiatrists, new to the ranks, warned of the "psychopathic personality disorders" that would make homosexuals unfit to fight.
Then they devised supposedly foolproof guides to ferret them out: an effeminate flip of hand or a certain nervousness when standing naked before an officer.
It never really worked.
Homosexuals served throughout World War II and after.
In the repressive atmosphere of the 1950's, discharges for homosexuality soared; at the height of the Vietnam War, when recruitment drives were at their peak, enforcement was lax.


Trusting His Instincts To Stay Alive, Cabbie Sometimes Passes
Jose Sanchez pays no attention to the news -- "Killing. Shooting. Rodney King. Oh, no! I like to listen to the music" -- and so he did not know exactly how many cabdrivers have been killed in New York City since the year began.
But being in the business himself, he well knows its dangers.
Two or three drivers from the Bronx livery company where he works are robbed every month.
Mr.
Sanchez has been robbed twice in six years, both times by furious young men waving multiple weapons and threatening to blow his head off.


When the Twain of Science and God Meet
To the Editor:
"In Science We Trust" (Op-Ed, April 8) by Bryan Appleyard wants scientists to stop talking about God.
That's easy for scientists who are atheists.
But for religious scientists, every discovery increases their awe of God the Creator.
Scientific breakthroughs can spark moments of joy, wonder, excitement, revelation -- religious experiences for some people.


When the Twain of Science and God Meet; Einstein's Faith
To the Editor:
"In Science We Trust" (Op-Ed, April 8) by Bryan Appleyard, which addresses the relationship of physics to God, makes reference to Albert Einstein in support of its thesis, even calling him "the godfather of this rhetoric." Mr.
Appleyard states that "God, for Einstein, had a certain reality, a moral force." These views represent common, serious misconceptions about Einstein's religiosity or lack of it.


The Couple That Plays Together . . .
NAMES: Michael Imperioli and Lili Taylor.
IDENTITIES: Actors.
The couple performed together most recently in Frank Pugliese's play "Aven' U Boys."


Ellen M. Shickich, Gerald Cromack 2d
Ellen Marie Shickich, a daughter of Jacob and Mary Ann Shickich of Palm Desert, Calif., was married yesterday to Gerald Henry Cromack 2d, a son of J. Robert and M. Barbee Cromack of Tempe, Ariz.
Msgr.
James O'Neill, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cromack is the fashion market director at YM magazine in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father, now retired, was the budget director for the Wyoming Highway Department in Cheyenne.
Her mother is a special-education teacher at the Agua Caliente Elementary School in Palm Springs, Calif.


Adventure Is Blowing in the Wind
CABIN fever is lapsing.
The season has changed, and what is needed to stir the blood is a new outlook on life, a change of perspective.
One could run, ride horses or fall dangerously in love, but all of this involves energy.
Bungee jumping is appealingly passive but probably too drastic.
What about hot-air ballooning?
From winter quarters on the couch, it sounded like an ideal psychic pick-me-up.
The imagination took over.
I could see myself wafting over a picturesque landscape like the great balloonists: the Montgolfier brothers, who first wafted before the French Revolution; Malcolm Forbes; Jules Verne's hero Phileas Fogg and, of course, Babar, the elephant king.
My wife was consulted.
Fine, sure, she said, let's go.


Alexia Hamm, John Pickett 3d
Alexandra Hersey Hamm, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Hamm 3d of San Francisco, was married yesterday to John Olen Pickett 3d, a son of Mrs.
William I. Hollingsworth 3d of Locust Valley, L.I., and Mr.
Pickett Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla.
John M. Allin, a retired Archbishop of the Episcopal Church, performed the ceremony at Bethesda-by-the-Sea Church in Palm Beach.
Mrs.
Pickett, who is known as Alexia, graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is an investor in San Francisco.


Poets and Penguins Add Special Flavor To an Urban Oasis
POET O. has been coming to Central Park for 55 of his 72 years, and at some point on that long lifeline he developed what he calls his shtick.
It starts with a cheap, shallow basket lined with old wax paper and a small brass bell with a handle shaped like a unicorn.
The beast is perched on its hind legs, pawing the air with its front hooves, and its horn is bent instead of straight; for this eccentricity, Poet O. was able to buy it for the reasonable price of $5 in an East Village junk shop.
The bell is just the right size that, when placed upright in the basket, it obscures whatever loose change may be lying around the bottom.
On weekday afternoons, Poet O., as he calls himself, sits on a bench in the Strawberry Fields section of Central Park, his basket and bell in his lap, and waits for the right people to come along.
He always knows the right people.
It is part of the inscrutable mystery of his shtick.
The right people may be a young couple walking hand in hand, or a solitary, roaming hippie type with long hair and an uncombed beard, or a chubby, preppy young girl in a Central Park T-shirt, or a busload of Japanese tourists.
When Poet O. spies his prey, he calls out, in his cracked and aged New York accent, "Ring the bell. Make a wish."


Verdict in Los Angeles; CLINTON SATISFIED BY JURY'S DECISION
President Clinton expressed satisfaction today with the verdict in the police beating trial in Los Angeles and then used the decision as a platform to promote spiritual and economic revitalization.
In an interview at the airport in Pittsburgh with radio station KDKA shortly after the verdict, Mr.
Clinton said of the jury, "No one knows exactly why they did what they did, but it appears that they really tried to do justice here."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'SOWING HOPE'  The future of Russia's agriculture and environment will be the subject of a two-part conference at the University of Connecticut in Storrs tomorrow and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Murray Feshback, an author of "Ecocide in the U.S.S.R.," published last year, will be the speaker tomorrow.
Mr.
Feshback is a research professor of demography at Georgetown University and was a former advisor to the General Secretary of NATO.


SURFACING
REVIVALS --
Nina Simone:
Her soulful sounds help the murderous heroine of the movie "Point of No Return," connect with her humanity.
And she's not the only one: the soundtrack is creating a new generation of Simone fanatics.
CLOTHES --
HYP hats:
Baseball caps with tongue-in-chic emblems like "Blah, Blah, Blah" offer a case study in how attitude can be used to turn a profit.
The logo can be pronounced as either "hip" or "hype." You decide.
OVEREXPOSURE --
"Angels in America":
Will Tony Kushner's Pulitzer Prize-winning play prove to be Broadway's savior?
Are you tired of reading that question in every publication?
And the play hasn't even opened.


CHINESE ADOPTIONS
I have recently adopted a Chinese infant and proudly contributed my family photographs to your story on adoption in China.
Could I proudly show your cover, stating "China's Market in Orphan Girls," to my child?
No.
I believe the only marketing involved is being done by The New York Times.


Of Ballets and Buildings
George Balanchine was a teacher as well as a choreographer, and his classes were not restricted to New York City Ballet dancers.
They also included New York City Ballet audiences.
Balanchine taught his dancers in the morning, his audiences at night, and in the early 1970's I enrolled myself in what felt like the most glorious night school ever assembled.
Though Balanchine had little to say on the subject of architecture, he strongly influenced my view of it.
My immersion in his work coincided with the emergence of post-modernism (Charles Jencks first used the term in 1975) and with the efforts of Charles Moore, Michael Graves, Ricardo Bofill and others to recycle the historical styles.
Balanchine's classicism was a useful lens for looking at their work and for correcting its distortions.


Unwelcome Aboard
THE GOLDEN THIRTEEN
Recollections of the First Black Naval Officers.
Edited by Paul Stillwell.
Foreword by Colin L. Powell.
Illustrated. 304 pp.
Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press. $21.95.


'Song of Singapore' Revived in Bridgeport
TWO years ago, Off Broadway producers were scouting for just the right space to contain a screwball musical set in a waterfront Singapore dive.


Sound Bytes; PC Watcher: Innovation Is a Sell, Stability's a Buy
Jim Seymour, a computer consultant to large businesses, helps companies choose the right technologies and the right ways to use them.
He is also one of the industry's more prolific writers, with a series of books and regular opinion columns in PC Magazine, PC Week and PC Sources.
Before becoming a consultant in the early 1970's, he worked as a jazz musician and a freelance photographer for magazines and newspapers including Life, Time and The New York Times, and ran his own film production company.
He is married to Nora Seymour, a writer and former magazine editor, and is teaching his 2-year-old son, Graham, to fly-cast.


Exchange Sacrifice, Perfectly Exemplified
TO sacrifice the exchange is to give up a rook, a major piece, for a minor piece, either a knight or bishop.
It is similar to ordinary exchanges, like that of pawn for pawn, in that quantitatively the transaction is even; but it differs in that qualitatively a piece of greater value, a rook, is given up for a knight or a bishop, either one being of lesser value.
The justification is that in the specific situation on the board, the extra minor piece that the sacrificer is left with exercises greater power than the opponent's extra rook.
A perfect example of this can be seen in the game between the grandmasters Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine and Evgeny Bareyev of Russia in Round 8 of the Linares International Tournament in Spain.
It took place on March 6.


A Killing May Hasten South Africa's Power Shift
AMONG the grimly familiar scenes of the past week in South Africa -- the body in its pool of blood, the fields of fists raised in anger, the skittish white policemen clutching shotguns -- there was one new and mesmerizing image that helps explain why, through shock after shock, the transformation of South Africa continues.
It was the face of Nelson Mandela, broadcast again and again on state television, delivering a sober appeal for calm that was in effect a presidential address to the country.
For the white Government, letting Mr.
Mandela on the air was an acknowledgement of his authority and of the state's own lack of credibility among blacks boiling with grief and anger at the assassination of a favorite leader, Chris Hani.
Mr.
Mandela has been interviewed from time to time, as all opposition leaders are interviewed, but until last week no one but President F.W. de Klerk spoke directly to the nation on the state's airwaves.


Studying the Classicos
This could be the Summer to do the Veneto, the huge, vine-covered region of northeastern Italy that stretches from Lake Garda in the west to the Adriatic.
Nowhere is the variety of wine more dazzling: elegant cabernet blends, new-style Soaves and Valpolicellas, delicious roses and one of the newest of the nouveaux -- or as they call them in Italy, novellos.
And, of course, there are oceans of inconsequential but fresh and light jug wines.
There are magnificent cities here, Verona and Venice; superb scenery, Lake Garda and the Piazza San Marco; fine architecture (this is Palladio country), and terrific food: Harry's Bar in Venice, of course, and you must try the little Trattoria Dalla Rosa Alda at San Giorgio di Valpolicella.


CHINESE ADOPTIONS
In titling Bruce Porter's article "China's Market in Orphan Girls" (April 11) and subtitling it "China's Newest Export," you have done a serious disservice both to the Chinese Government and to families adopting in China.
As New Yorkers who have recently adopted in China, we can attest firsthand to the seriousness with which China and its officials take the adoption process.
Even after extensive investigation in the United States, prospective parents are required to travel to China to be interviewed by a number of Chinese officials about such matters as their ability to educate and care for children they adopt.


Seeing Double On a Lyricist
To the Editor:
Re: "Music du Jour," Bryan Miller's article about music in restaurants (April 4).
Being an entertainer in restaurants is a fine place to observe humanity's foibles.
In my job at Hampton Square, in Westhampton Beach, L.I., I field many requests at the piano, and since my specialty is show tunes, I often follow the rendition with a little history.


Song of Broadway


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, some copies of the New Jersey Weekly today omit page 7 and carry a duplicate page from the Real Estate section in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the missing page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Deals and Discounts
BIG APPLE BARGAINS The New York Convention and Visitors Bureau has issued a free coupon booklet offering savings on restaurants, shopping, hotels and sightseeing.
"Big Apple Bargains" has 33 coupons offering a variety of deals, such as a $95 rate at the Holiday Inn on Lafayette Street; 20 percent off regular adult admission at the Empire State Building; $3 off several Gray Line tours; $1 off regular admission at the Whitney Museum of American Art, and 10 percent off some merchandise at the Canal Jean Company on lower Broadway.
The coupon booklet must be picked up in person at one of four Visitor Information Center offices: 2 Columbus Circle; Broadway and 42d Street; Grand Central Terminal, and Kennedy International Airport.
Coupons expire May 31.


A Sleek Bistro for Downtown Hartford
SOMETIMES in life you meet and make friends with the younger members of a family first and later discover how congenial their parents are as well.
That's what happened to us with Max on Main in downtown Hartford.
We knew its more robust, country-style offspring, Max A Mia in Avon, but only recently became acquainted with the more sophisticated parent.
A sizable storefront space has been transformed into a sleekly casual place that would be right at home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, with a stylish menu that punches all the culinary hot buttons.
Styling itself a city bistro, the restaurant has looks that are an understated pleasure: Art Deco-style glass bricks in the entrance and in the main dining area, lacquered pine floors, a color scheme of gray, white and black, black lacquer chairs, well-spaced and smartly napped tables, good but subdued lighting and an open kitchen area in the rear where you can watch the cooks at work.
Service is quick, informed and gracious.
The printed menu is changed daily, so our recommendations may be gone when you visit.


Clinton Campaign Avoided Workers' Taxes
Bill Clinton's 1992 Presidential campaign listed scores of campaign workers as self-employed consultants, allowing the campaign to avoid paying the Social Security taxes that employers must pay for their employees, CBS News has reported.
On reports to the Federal Election Commission for September and October, the official committee of the Clinton-Gore '92 campaign listed about 100 campaign workers as "advance consultants" who were paid as independent contractors, CBS reported Friday night.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
112.25
113.34
138.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6166
1.6046
1.7515
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2598
1.2571
1.1523
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5245
1.5285
1.6885
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$338.50
$337.00
$353.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Danbury Musicians In Pops and Recital
ORCHESTRAL musicians, whether performing chamber music, playing the pops or out in full symphonic array, help make this an especially busy week.
This afternoon at 3, members of the Danbury Community Orchestra are dividing into various ensembles at the Music Center to perform a flute quartet by Kuhlau, Milhaud's Suite for clarinet, violin and piano, and other works of Vivaldi, Pachelbel and Mozart.
It is a free concert, so no tickets are required.
It's season-finale time for the New Haven Symphony, and the group's music director, Michael Palmer, has added a vocal component to Tuesday's 8 P.M.
Woolsey Hall concert, the 150 voices of the combined Connecticut State University choruses joining the orchestra for Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass.
Taking further advantage of the singers' presence, Mr.
Palmer has scheduled Ravel's "Daphnis and Chloe" Suite No. 2, using the original scoring with women's voices, while John Corigliano's "Gazebo Dances" round out the program with a touch of contemporary spice.


'Purgatory' Party
Celebrating Dominick Dunne's new book, at the Four Seasons, April 13.


Commercial Property: 420 Fifth Avenue; A Conversion Transforms a Nightmare Office Rental
BY all accounts, the 28-story office building at 420 Fifth Avenue was a developer's nightmare.
Begun in 1988, when Manhattan's commercial real estate market was teetering, and finished in 1989, when it had collapsed, it was yet another new office tower without tenants in a location, between 37th and 38th Streets, that was "slightly off the mark," according to Edwin A. Cogan, a consultant to the developer, the Hammerson Property Investment and Development Corporation of London.


Old M.I.A. Theory Is Given a New Life
A document recently unearthed in Moscow has breathed new life into one of this city's most enduring conspiracy theories: that the Reagan and Bush Administrations covered up attempts by Vietnam to trade American prisoners of war for cash.
The theory, which remains unproved, holds that Vietnam held back hundreds of P.O.W.s to make sure Washington paid war reparations, and then kept them as bargaining chips when no aid was forthcoming.


'The Police Are Against Young People and Young People
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q We're going to talk about cops -- police and young people.


Hospitals' New World
New York City's hospitals are scrambling to prepare for a new era of competition that is unclear but seems inevitable.
Article, page 39


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
Regarding "When Daughters Invade the Office" (April 4), if it is good when a major corporation develops a good family leave policy, it should be equally worthy of celebration when individual women develop coherent and satisfying approaches to the dual challenges of a profession and family responsibilities.


As Building Slows, So Does Demolition
WHATEVER goes up must come down, the old saw goes.
But the saw-maker wasn't thinking of buildings, and certainly not those that have gone up so recently that they have never even been occupied.
It has fallen to Big Apple Wrecking and Construction Corporation, a 14-year-old Bronx contractor, to take down the top 12 floors of the never-occupied but largely completed 32-story residential building at 108 East 96th Street, condemned as in violation of the height restrictions in New York City's zoning code.
Big Apple believes it is making demolition history by taking down so large a piece of newly built space that is both structurally sound and economically viable.
It is happening at a time when demolition for its more accustomed purpose -- site clearance in preparation for something new -- is at a low ebb.
The lack of work underscores the low state of expectations for new private commercial or residential construction.


Perspectives: Use-Based Billing; New Buoys on the Water-Meter Course
BEWARE the "extraordinary leak." John Alexiou apparently had one in the building he owns at 31-21 23d Avenue in Astoria, Queens, where he runs an insurance business and rents out two apartments upstairs.
He was accustomed to water bills of $300 or $400 a year.
When the bill for last year's service arrived in February it was for $5,551.


Waking Up Early Isn't the Answer
The Southern Cross is a bright, easily found constellation, in Argentina as much as anywhere else, but nowhere near bright enough to land a sullen three-pound brown trout by.
So although it was startling to hear the four-wheel drive van start up, the reason was quickly clear, as its headlights swung onto the water, and the fish could be beached, unhooked and released.
Another day in Patagonia had ended with some furious fishing at dusk.


Fixing Blast Damage Isn't an Economic Lift
To the Editor:
You report April 8 that economists of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey estimate the World Trade Center blast is providing an economic benefit.
You have fallen prey to an old economic fallacy often called the "broken window fallacy."


A Clinton Doctrine, Perhaps, to Be Tried Out in Haiti
IT is only a matter of weeks since a mood of defeatism hung over close supporters of Haiti's exiled President, a mood so powerful that many of them had already begun to plan privately for what was being called "l'apres Aristide."
President Clinton, after all, had unexpectedly continued the Bush Administration policy of repatriating boat people, and many Haitians saw this as a betrayal, the final backtracking on American promises to reverse the military coup against the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected leader.


Sitting Pretty
My Mother is the Vince Lombardi of beauty: Looking good isn't everything, it's the only thing.
If she passed along one truth when I was growing up, it was that I had an obligation to take care of myself, and she didn't mean it in a feminist kind of way.
Years before I reached puberty, she began what she called my "Gigi lessons," after the scene in the movie where Isabel Jeans teaches Leslie Caron how to eat ortolans.
"Life is not one big drudge," Mom explained.
While her curriculum covered fine food (eating, not cooking, it) and helpful hints on choosing and graciously accepting expensive jewelry (a skill that has, alas, gotten rusty), the bulk of her instruction focused on the fine art of body maintenance.
Some women have warm fuzzy memories of bonding with Mom in the kitchen, but I get misty when I see the red door of Elizabeth Arden.
By the age of 14, I had been introduced to facials, pedicures, manicures, brow waxing, lash tinting, custom-blended makeup and, of course, the psychological advantages of an expert wash and set.


Moral Ambiguity Carries a Bitter Price
I don't want to exaggerate the importance of a couple of scene changes, since they account for no more than a minute or so of the 75 minutes that make up Jon Robin Baitz's play, "Three Hotels." Yet whenever I think back on the evening, and a steadily absorbing evening it is, that's what I see first in my mind's eye -- a flurry of furtive activity in the semi-darkness.
Of course, scene changes tend to take place in half-light or just enough light so that the performers who are making their way onto the stage and those who are leaving it don't collide with one another or the prop person.
But the shadowy interludes are a perfect expression of what's going on in Mr.
Baitz's play when the lights are burning their brightest.


Struggle in the Balkins; Cease-Fire in Battered Muslim Town Seals a Key Victory for Serb Forces
United Nations officials said tonight that the commander of the Bosnian Government Army had agreed to a cease-fire around the besieged city of Srebrenica and other steps intended to turn the town into a "safe area" to avert a battle to the finish with the town's Serbian attackers.
Though the accord was reached in response to a demand by the United Nations Security Council on Friday, it involves the disarming of the devastated city's Muslim defenders and allows for an exodus, goals long sought by Serbian nationalist forces.


Now Is the Time to Repair Flagstone Walks, Steps and Patios
SETTLING and repeated freezing and thawing can crack or tilt flat masonry surfaces, especially flagstone walks, steps and patios.
Repair is usually not too difficult, but it should be done in the spring to lessen chances that uneven pavement might cause a fall and to prevent damage from worsening.
Flagstones set without mortar have the greatest tendency to shift, but they are the easiest to fix.
Start by prying up the stones that have tilted or sunk, using a crowbar.
Rest its fulcrum on a board to protect other flagstones.
Pry carefully if you use a shovel or garden fork, as their handles break easily.


Cairo Pro and Con
To the Editor: The article on Egypt was flip and superficial.
It devotes more space to Abu Simbel and "canned mango juice" en route than to Clephren's pyramid (built 1,200 years previously), an awesome, humbling chamber, looted but still majestic with its empty sarcophagus; and dismissed with a childish "get me out of here!"


Edmund C. Horman, 87, Is Dead; Inspiration for the Film 'Missing'
Edmund C. Horman, whose crusade in investigating his son's disappearance and death in a Chilean coup was portrayed in the film "Missing," died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Robert L. Jennings, Executive, 64
Robert L. Jennings, a retired president of the United States Woolworth division of the F. W. Woolworth Company, died on Thursday at a hospital in his hometown, Edgewater, N.J.
He was 64.
His doctor said the cause was a heart attack or stroke, his family said.


Ms. Applegate, Bruce Tulgan
September wedding plans have been announced for Deborah M. Applegate, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Applegate of Clackamas, Ore., and Bruce L. Tulgan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry Tulgan of Pittsfield, Mass.


Collegians on U.S. Team
The United States Olympians MIKE DUNHAM and TED DRURY will be joined by 14 National Hockey League players on the United States team at the world championships in Germany.
Dunham, a goaltender, is a junior at Maine.
Drury, a forward, is a junior at Harvard.
The N.H.L. players include Ranger forwards TONY AMONTE, ED OLCZYK and DARREN TURCOTTE and goalie MIKE RICHTER.
The United States team plays its first game, against the Czech Republic, in Dortmund tonight. (AP)


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 3  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill  $585,000
4 East 95th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,847, 33% tax-deductible (Brokers: Stribling &amp; Associates-Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village  $925,000
377 West 11th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. duplex-penthouse co-op in a loft building; dining area, library, 14-ft. wall of windows, 20-ft. ceilings, 1,000-sq.-ft. roof terrace, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $953, 55% tax-deductible (Brokers: Hunt/ Kennedy-Debra Kameros Co.)  Kipps Bay  $184,000
200 East 27th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,115-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 3 exposures, common roof garden; maintenance $928, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  TriBeCa  $237,500
100 Hudson Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; elevator, 12 windows, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $875, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-J.I. Sopher)  Upper East Side  $895,000
25 East 86th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $2,165, 40% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-David Day Realty)  BRONX  Morris Park  $145,000
1708 Matthews Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  Riverdale  $65,000
5775 Mosholu Avenue  (Fieldston Plaza)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar condo; elevator, dining el, hardwood floors, 2 exposures; common charge $187, taxes $2,244 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Kensington  $118,000
239 Parkville Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, parquet floors, full basement, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Prospect Heights  $270,000
138 Underhill Avenue  2-family, 4-story attached brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen in other; stained-glass windows in each; full basement, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,142 (Broker: Cole &amp; Cole Realty)  Windsor Terrace  $265,000
41 Fuller Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; front porch, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Elmhurst  $220,000
49-02 93d Street  2-family detached frame house; 6 bedrooms in primary unit; 5 bedrooms in other; dining room, 2 baths in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  Forest Hills  $426,500
67-61 110th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick colonial; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, terrace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft, lot; taxes $3,200 (Broker: Realty Executives F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Mariners Harbor  $135,000
501 Netherlands Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached ranch; remodeled eat-in kitchen and bath, full basement, private driveway, 51- by 99-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Westerleigh  $125,000
442 College Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 57- by 103-ft. lot; taxes $1,667 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)


News Magazines Step Up in the World
Network news magazines are alive, mostly profitable and reproducing.
Seven can now be found on the prime-time schedule, with at least three more on the way.
Their importance was confirmed this month by the naming of Andrew Lack, known for his work on CBS news magazines (most recently "Street Stories"), to head NBC News.
In announcing the appointment, Robert C. Wright, the NBC president, said prime-time news shows would be "our main area of focus over the next few years."
These programs, like the mass-circulation print magazines America had to make do with in the drear days before television, occupy that large territory between the higher, somewhat sedate reaches of journalism and the pulps.
Nowadays, that means between PBS documentaries and "Hard Copy."


Rachel Weinstein, Steven I. Scharf
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Weinstein of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rachel Ann Weinstein, to Steven Ira Scharf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Scharf of Seaford, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weinstein, 27, teaches at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
She graduated from the University of Delaware and received a master's degree in public health from New York University.
Her father is the vice president of finance and administration of the LeFrak Organization, the real-estate development company in Rego Park, Queens.
Her mother is a case manager in Syosset, L.I., at the Variety Preschooler's Workshop for children with learning disabilities.


State and P.S.C. Protect Greedy Monopolies
The letter from Alan Pall  [ March 21 ]  complaining about the rise in Cablevision rates correctly blames the problem in part on the fact that cable is a monopoly and suggests letting Ma Bell and her brood get into the game to compete with cable, while allowing cable to compete with the phone system.
Of course, "it would be great for the public," with "better service and lower prices all around!"
This competition is exactly what makes a free economy work, compared to the disasters of a regulated economy, and some of the cable companies are already offering connections to long-distance carriers which bypass the Baby Bells.
The large bandwidth and low noise of the fiberoptic cable used by both phone and cable companies should make them natural competitors and do more to serve the public than any amount of regulations by public -- read political -- service commissions.


The Sayings of Chairman John
WHEN JOHN FROHNMAYER went to Washington to head the National Endowment for the Arts in July 1989, he plunged into the middle of the art wars -- ambushed on the way into town, he says, by Artists Space, a New York gallery that seemed determined to provoke a confrontation.
His lively account of this and other adventures appears in "Leaving Town Alive: Confessions of an Arts Warrior," to be published later this month by Houghton Mifflin.
Here is a sampling.
"It never occurred to me in my wildest dreams that I could not do this job brilliantly and gracefully. I fully expected to be Washington's darling -- loved, respected and sought out. I was in la-la land."


The Magician Who Nearly Vanished
Who was Mandrake the Magician?
"Part of a glut of 40's superheroes," said Ken Sanzel, an owner of Four Color Images.
"They attempt to revive him now and again."
Here's the top-hatted Mandrake, looking at a woman he has shrunk into his palm.
"Cheesecakey, congenial and harmless," Mr.
Sanzel said.


Multiculturalism And Betrayal
To the Editor:
To ridicule and mock Jesus, as does "Deep in the Soul of Texas" (April 4), is an inexcusable insult to all Christians.
It violates the toleration that must permeate our pluralistic society.
It is a gross betrayal of the multiculturalism that you advocate so unceasingly that it causes you to blur the line demarcating comment from news.
T.
JOSEPH REDDAN Pearl River, N.Y.


Miriam C. Gosnell, Kevin S. Murphy
Miriam Carroll Gosnell, a daughter of David L. Gosnell and Judith G. Tisdale, both of St.
Louis, was married yesterday to Kevin Sean Murphy, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Murphy of Syosset, L.I.
Judge George C. Pratt of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Uniondale, L.I., performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Mrs.
Murphy, 27, is a fashion associate at Vogue Patterns, a sewing-patterns magazine, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father is president of the Q.E.D.
Consulting Group, a marketing and management consulting concern in St.
Louis.
Her mother is director of science at the Community School there.


ENDPAPER: Life and Times; Cash on Delivery
Journalists like to think of themselves as advocates for the dispossessed, friends of the little guy, but the feeling is not necessarily mutual.
Most of the little guys I've met are not looking for affection or support from reporters.
Their first request tends to be more specific: "How much you pay me to talk?"
I've heard this from villagers in Africa and Asia, tenement dwellers in New York, drug addicts, panhandlers, runaway teen-agers, squatters in shantytowns, street criminals and others whose education did not acquaint them with the taboo against checkbook journalism.
Sometimes I explained that I couldn't pay them but that I could buy them a meal during the interview.
Things would go well until we sat down in a restaurant and the person announced: "I'm not hungry now. Just give me the money and I'll eat later."


A Place to Remember, To Touch the Unbearable
James I. Freed began designing the Holocaust Memorial Museum uncertainly, with sketches on an airline cocktail napkin after visiting Nazi concentration camps, "scratching on things I could disavow," the architect said.
After a lifetime of spent mostly forgetting his boyhood in Nazi Germany, Mr.
Freed, who had designed the Jacob K. Javits Center, was overwhelmed by troubled recollection to create a museum whose grandeur is tempered by the darkness of what it chronicles.


Sylvie Falzon and Claude Kunstenaar
Dr. and Mrs.
Norbert Falzon of Forest Hills, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sylvie Dominique Falzon, to Claude Kunstenaar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Kunstenaar of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Falzon, 31, teaches computer courses, music and French at the Birch Wathen Lenox School in New York.
She graduated from Marymount Manhattan College and received a master's degree in music administration from New York University.
Her father, a retired director of the resources and transportation division at the United Nations Secretariat in New York, is a natural-resources economist.


What Small Business Really Wants
To the Editor:
The small-business men and women I know would give up all the "little apple seeds" of tax incentives the Administration is promising in exchange for the elimination of two of the rotten apples in his plan -- the tax increase on individuals and the energy tax. ("Clinton Plan -- Small Businesses Smile," March 28.)


O'Rourke Case and the Spirit of the Law
AS the District Attorney's office begins an investigation into whether County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke used public office for personal gain, questions are being raised about the effectiveness of statutes governing conflicts of interest.
And while Mr.
O'Rourke maintains that he did not break any laws, Westchester District Attorney Carl A. Vergari and legal experts watching the case agree that a key issue is not whether the letter of the law but that its spirit was violated.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Islip  $155,000
64 Airline Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $5,600.
East Hills  $505,000
10 Redwood Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 33-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, 0.5 acre; taxes $10, 300.
Great River  $215,000
81 River Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 130-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 0.75 acre; taxes $5,500.
Old Bethpage  $225,000
66 Berry Lane East  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $5,800.
Westbury  $223,000
145 Heywood Court  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $6,200.
West Sayville  $130,000
70 Tyler Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, porch; taxes $3,400.
OTHER AREAS Somers, N.Y.  $146,000
29 Krystal Drive  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; fireplace, deck, basement; common charges, $145, taxes, $2,950.
Cheshire,Conn.  $115,000
122 Edwards Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; beamed ceiling in living room, enclosed porch, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,209.
Edison, N.J.  $135,000
126 Roosevelt Blvd.  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old colonial; fireplace, , bar in basement; taxes $2,646.


Giving Different Grains a Touch of Italy
THE much-publicized Mediterranean diet points the way to highlighting grain dishes on the menu.
Italian food in particular, with its emphasis on pasta, rice and cornmeal polenta, has become an excellent vehicle for using grain as a centerpiece for a meal.
But plates of spaghetti tossed with tomatoes, bowls of risotto mixed with asparagus or dishes of polenta topped with wild mushrooms are not the only choices when it comes to grains.
There are other grains in the pantry that are not commonly used in Italian cooking but which can be given a touch of Italy with the right seasonings.


Smiles Over the New Free Agency? No, Frowns.
For the years after a labor agreement in 1977, National Football League owners restricted most of the league's star players from moving to new teams.
In the last 49 days, more stars have moved to new teams than did in those 16 years combined.
The N.F.L.'s new free-agency system is bubbling along.


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
The "genteel" library degree referred to in the article is now a master's degree in library and information science.
Librarians not only find sources of information, but suggest other lines of inquiry.
They administer computers and computer networks and have taught a generation of doctors, lawyers, business people and the general public how to do research with computers.
They also review and purchase books, journals and software, balance the budget and write grant proposals.


In a Changing School District, Diversity Is an Issue
Along Broadway in Elmhurst, Queens, on a block with a Chinese-owned bakery, a Korean-run station ery store and a Bangladeshi-owned grocery and signs in Spanish and English, Louisa M. Chan handed out campaign pamphlets to passers-by, most of them seemingly apathetic or bewildered.
Speaking alternately in English and two dialects of Chinese, Ms.
Chan nonetheless pursued a singular goal in her campaign to win a seat on the school board of District 24: to have a board that would for the first time in years reflect the diversity of the neighborhoods it serves.


French Inn
To the Editor: Catherine Texier's article on medieval hilltop villages in Southern France was very good ("Glimpses of the Real Provence," Feb. 14).
It did not, however, mention a place in Seillans that is an unbeatable base for exploring the whole area -- Domaine de la Collette St.
Pierre.
This is a 260-acre estate rebuilt by a British-American couple offering accommodations varying from a simple studio apartment to a two-bedroom, two-bath apartment.
All five living units have full kitchens and modern baths and can be rented for short or long visits.
Rates average $100 a night per couple.
Linens and a laundry are provided.


Sitting Pretty
My Mother is the Vince Lombardi of beauty: Looking good isn't everything, it's the only thing.
If she passed along one truth when I was growing up, it was that I had an obligation to take care of myself, and she didn't mean it in a feminist kind of way.
Years before I reached puberty, she began what she called my "Gigi lessons," after the scene in the movie where Isabel Jeans teaches Leslie Caron how to eat ortolans.
"Life is not one big drudge," Mom explained.
While her curriculum covered fine food (eating, not cooking, it) and helpful hints on choosing and graciously accepting expensive jewelry (a skill that has, alas, gotten rusty), the bulk of her instruction focused on the fine art of body maintenance.
Some women have warm fuzzy memories of bonding with Mom in the kitchen, but I get misty when I see the red door of Elizabeth Arden.
By the age of 14, I had been introduced to facials, pedicures, manicures, brow waxing, lash tinting, custom-blended makeup and, of course, the psychological advantages of an expert wash and set.


Mutual Funds; A Gabelli Guarantee to Ponder
MARIO GABELLI, the mutual fund manager well regarded for his investing acumen, is introducing a new fund with a difference -- a guaranteed investment return.
Sounds good, but it is a difference that the investor would be wise to study well.
The new Gabelli ABC Fund is of a type created by mutual fund companies in the last few years to lure bank-account and certificate-of-deposit savers -- those used to insured investments but distressed by tumbling interest rates.
One new product puts the stress on less volatile share prices while others, like the Gabelli fund, provide some sort of investment guarantee.


Working at Home, for Better for Worse
VIRGINIA R. COFFEY, a vice president at Bankers Trust, shares her office two days a week with a 4-year-old and an 18-month-old.
Working out of her Brooklyn house, she is at one moment handling the accounts of banks in Australia and New Zealand, and at the next moment attending to the needs of her two children.
"At the office, I have one function," she said.
"At home, I'm a mommy and a banker." It is, to say the least, "a wearing situation."
Some of her colleagues are skeptical about her working at home the past four years; they "think it's a bunch of malarkey," Ms.
Coffey said.


Gustaf Wachtmeister, Ann Wiberg
Ann Dillon Wiberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sten A. Wiberg of Nassau, the Bahamas, was married there on Friday to Count Gustaf Carl Jacob Wachtmeister, the son of Count Otto Wachtmeister of Knislinge, Sweden, and Countess Karna Wachtmeister of Stockholm.
Bishop Michael H. Eldon performed the Anglican ceremony at Christ Church Cathedral.
Countess Wachtmeister is a teacher at the Hill House International School in London.
She graduated from Pine Manor College and received a master's degree in teaching from Trinity College in Washington.
Her father, an investment lawyer and real-estate investor in Nassau, is the Consul General of Sweden to the Bahamas.


Discovering the Woods Around the Corner
THIS actually happened just a few yards from the high-rises and the parkways and the bodegas of this huge city.
An Urban Park Ranger, Karen LeRiche, was conducting a nature tour in a city park when nature cooperated in a most graphic fashion.
"All of a sudden, I just said, 'People . . .' " Ms.
LeRiche recalls.
"It was a red-tailed hawk, swooping down. He grabbed a squirrel in his talons. Everybody was in awe. He flew onto a branch right above us and started tearing it apart. He must have been hungry because he didn't go too far away. We were very respectful. The people on my tour thought I planned it that way."
Not exactly.
Ms.
LeRiche cannot press a computer button and summon one red-tailed hawk and one squirrel to fulfill their destinies for the benefit of walkers in the woods.
But there are many other more subtle surprises within the boundaries of New York.
Spring is one of the best seasons for rediscovering the life that pulses not far from the nearest fast-food emporium and subway stop.
For one thing, Ms.
LeRiche notes, male birds are decked out in their brightest plumage because it is
that
time of year.
In the coming weeks, there will be dozens of tours of the woods and lakes and hills and shoreline that have survived the invasion by all the foreigners in recent centuries.
May your tour guide be as dedicated as Ms.
Le Riche, one of the green-uniformed Urban Park Rangers who patrol the city parks, armed mostly with walkie-talkies and a love of the outdoors and a mission to teach.
The Rangers, formed in 1979 by Gordon Davis, then the New York City Parks Commissioner, attracted Ms.
LeRiche, a native of Lewiston, Me., who was working as a paralegal in New York.
Seeing the Rangers as a liberating way of being outside and working with young people, she does not plan to go back indoors any time soon.
Ms.
LeRiche speaks lovingly of Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx (where the hawk's encounter with the squirrel took place), and she also loves giving tours at the Gerritsen Creek Nature Trail in Marine Park in Brooklyn.
She took me on a tour of Prospect Park, that oasis in the heart of Brooklyn available to millions of people without cars.
On Saturday, a ranger will give a tour called "A Tree Still Grows in Brooklyn" at 2 P.M., starting at the lovely Boathouse in Prospect Park.
Next Sunday, a ranger will lead the "Spring Into Spring" tour, also at 2 P.M. from the Boathouse.
My personal tour was held in March, when the snow was still blanketing the park, but nonetheless there was nature.
"This is my personal view," Ms.
LeRiche said as we tromped off in the snow, "but I think Prospect Park is more natural than Central Park. I think Olmsted and Vaux got it right this time. The landscaping keeps you from noticing the traffic on the roadways."
She had a point.
Prospect Park is on the edge of the glacial deposits, and Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux took advantage of hills to block out the surrounding neighborhoods.
Then again, there is no Manhattan skyline dominating the view, as there is in Central Park.
Anyway, the feeling in Prospect Park is often of isolation.
Near the Boathouse is the famous Camperdown Elm, a hybrid planted in 1872, still extending its long squiggly limbs.
"Our crowning curio," it was called by Marianne Moore, Brooklyn's beloved poet laureate, in 1967.
"I couldn't tell you how many different trees are in Prospect Park," Ms.
LeRiche said.
"There are so many. The policy is toward native species rather than invasive species that grow easily, like the Norway maple or the sycamore maple. But Olmsted and Vaux believed in a Chinese motif. They brought in many ornamental trees. Why? They look beautiful."
One tree with Asian roots is the Ailanthus altissima, the star of "A Tree Grows in Brooklyn," the 1943 best seller by Betty Smith that was later turned into a movie and a musical.
The hardy tree was taken from China to England by a Jesuit priest and was later introduced to the New World, where it flourished in urban spaces.
Ms. LeRiche picked up a fan-shaped leaf from the slushy ground.
"This is from the 'dinosaur tree,' " she said.
"A ginkgo tree. People thought it was extinct, but some Chinese monks had preserved it in a monastery. We always tell people that if they like the tree to plant a male tree. The fruit from the female tree smells terrible. People don't know that."
We trudged through the late-winter muck.
There were lone men staring at the ponds and creeks, lovers walking arm in arm on the hills, joggers on the main road, one school class.
The city's budget problems have led to disintegration in the parks, but rangers like Ms.
LeRiche try to teach the young to do the right thing with nature.
Bicycles and power bikes in the woods cause erosion.
Pulling up saplings isn't fair.
Dogs can run free until 9 A.M., but everybody should pick up after his pets.
Sometimes she will hand out garbage bags to picnickers as a subtle hint to clean up.
Fishing is allowed in Prospect Lake, but all the catch must be returned. ("I've seen bass this big," she said, holding her hands a foot apart. "I've seen large carp. Or maybe it's the same carp over and over again.")
Her main goal is to make walkers sensitive to the abundant life in the city -- the squirrels, chipmunks, cottontail rabbits, the occasional raccoon.
"Snapping turtles," Ms.
LeRiche said.
After listing more trees and mammals and reptiles and insects found in Prospect Park, Ms.
LeRiche let me in on a secret: birds.
Every ranger has a specialty, she said.
Hers is birds.
She carried powerful binoculars and a well-used copy of a Roger Tory Peterson field guide, autographed by the venerable guru himself.
"A couple of rangers were lucky enough to go along on a tour he gave in Central Park once," she said.
"His eyesight isn't so great, and he was going by sounds. He would say: 'That's a water thrush. That's a yellow-rumped warbler.' I'd love to be able to do that. I'm taking piano lessons, partially to work on my sense of hearing."
Prospect Park is not on a flyway, but Ms.
LeRiche can spot shore birds that have wandered five miles to the north.
She thrilled to the return of red-winged blackbirds from their winter migration, back to the reeds in central Brooklyn.
She squinted into her binoculars and found some northern shovelers and American widgeons and mallards.
At the widest part of the lake, she spotted a red-breasted merganser diving for fish, and she remembered how thrilled she was the day she actually saw a purple gallinule.
"They're all in here," she said, patting her Peterson "Field Guide."
You just have to know where to look.
In the coming weeks, there will be no lack of expert guides like Karen LeRiche, willing to point out abundant nature.
Even in the middle of New York.
Here is a sampling of spring nature walks in New York City.
Admission is free, unless otherwise noted.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Today
"DEEP ECOLOGY," Central Park.
A nature walk led by Urban Park Rangers, who will discuss Deep Ecology, a philosophy developed by the Norwegian ecologist Arne Naess.
Meets at 2 P.M. at 100th Street and Central Park West.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"EARLY MORNING WARBLER WATCH," Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
Colorful migratory birds are likely to be seen on this nature walk, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Binoculars are recommended.
Meets at 8 A.M. at the Prospect Park Boathouse, from entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"THE VALE OF CASHMERE," Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A tour of a garden area of the park that was formed by a glacial kettle, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Grand Army Plaza park entrance.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
JAMAICA BAY WILDLIFE REFUGE, Gateway National Recreation Area, Cross Bay Boulevard, Broad Channel, Queens.
A self-guided walk through an area that is home to more than 350 species of birds.
Open daily, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (718) 318-4346.
CLAY PIT PONDS STATE PARK PRESERVE, Carlin Street off Sharrotts Road, Charleston, S.I.
Two self-guided hiking trails with access to wetlands, fields, sandy barrens, spring-fed streams and woodlands.
Open year-round, sunrise to sunset.
Information: (718) 967-1976.
Saturday
"HAWKWATCH '93," Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A hawk identification walk, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Binoculars are recommended.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the west end of Dyckman Street, by the Hudson River.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"MARSHLAND MEANDER," Marine Park, Brooklyn.
A tour of the marsh area of Gerritsen Creek, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the parking lot on Avenue U. Information: (718) 287-3400.
"A TREE STILL GROWS IN BROOKLYN," Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A walk through the remnants of a forest that once covered the area, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Boathouse, near the entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
April 25
"SPRING INTO SPRING," Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A look at the changes in the park at springtime, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Boathouse, near the entrance at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
"AFTERNOON WATERFOWL WATCH," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A walk along the shores of Kissena Lake to see cormorants, herons and wood ducks.
Led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
April 26
"WALK THROUGH THE RAMBLE," Central Park.
A search for spring warblers and other migrant birds, led by Starr Saphir of the New York Audubon Society.
Meets at the southeast corner of 81st Street and Central Park West at 7:30 A.M.
Fee: $4.
Also on April 28, and every Monday and Wednesday through June 2.
Information: (212) 691-7483.
May 1
"THE GREAT SAUNTER," Manhattan.
A daylong, 32-mile walk along the shores and wetlands of the borough of Manhattan, beginning and ending at the South Street Seaport.
Led by Shorewalkers Inc. 7:30 A.M.
Fee: $10; free to members.
Information: (212) 663-2167.
"WARBLER WATCH I," Forest Park, Queens.
A tour in search of migrating warblers, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 9 A.M. at Metropolitan Avenue and Forest Park Drive.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 2
"EARLY BIRDS," Central Park.
A bird walk led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the Loeb Boathouse on the East Drive at 74th Street.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"KISSENA'S PAST," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A tour of the natural shrubs and blossoming trees of the park, the site of a former nursery.
Led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 6
"THE CONSERVATORY GARDEN," Central Park.
A tour that focuses on the history and design of the park, led by Sarah Price, a curator of the garden.
Meets at 6 P.M. at the Vanderbilt Gate, 105th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Information: (212) 860-1311.
May 8
"PATTERNS OF SPRING," Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A search for evidence of nature's springtime activities, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Seaman Avenue and Isham Street park entrance.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 9
"KINDRED SPIRITS," Central Park.
A stroll combining poetry and nature with readings by Urban Park Rangers and others.
Meets at 10 A.M. at 100th Street and Central Park West.
Free.
Information and meeting place: (212) 427-4040.
THE MEADOWS, WOODS AND WATERS OF PROSPECT PARK, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A tour of the natural terrain of the park.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Tennis House, Park Drive West near Ninth Street entrance.
Also on May 30, June 6 and 20 at 1 P.M.; May 22 and 23 and June 13 at 2 and 4 P.M.
Information: (718) 788-8500.
"MOTHERS OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
A tour that looks at the furry, feathered and hard-shelled mothers in the park's animal kingdom, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 15
"WONDERFUL WOODLAND WILDFLOWERS," Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan.
A wildflower identification walk, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Seaman Avenue and Isham Street park entrance.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"WOODLAND WALK: SPRING HAS SPRUNG!," Wave Hill, 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
A walk led by Todd Miller, a naturalist.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Wave Hill House.
Free with admission to grounds: $4; $2 for the elderly and students; children under 6 free.
Information: (718) 549-3200.
May 16
"STOP! DON'T LOOK, JUST LISTEN," Central Park.
An auditory bird and nature walk, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at 100th Street and Central Park West.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 19
"BIRDS, BEES, FLOWERS AND TREES," Central Park.
A look at the interdependence of organisms, from bugs to people, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 1 P.M. at 72d Street and Fifth Avenue.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 22
"RIVERDALE RAMBLE," Riverdale Park, the Bronx.
A hike through the southern end of Riverdale Park to learn about forest inhabitants and their relationships to each other.
Meets at 11 A.M. at West 232d Street and the Henry Hudson Parkway service road.
Information: (718) 548-7070.
May 23
'NATURE'S WAKE-UP CALL," Central Park. An early morning walk, led by Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 7 A.M. at 100th Street and Central Park West. Information: (212) 427-4040.
"ALL INSECTS, GREAT AND SMALL," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens.
An exploration of the insect world, with the help of hand lenses, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
May 29
"PEEP SHOW," Alley Pond Park, Douglaston, Queens.
A look at spring peepers, tiny frogs that make a great deal of noise, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 7 P.M. at the schoolyard of Public School 213, 233d Street and 67th Avenue.
Information: (718) 699-4204.
May 30
"ROCK AROUND THE PARK," Central Park.
A look at the rocks that are native to the city, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at 72d Street and Central Park West.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"THE WATERING HOLES," Kissena Park, Flushing Queens.
A look at the difference between lakes and ponds, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard.
Information: (718) 699-4204.


Head to Head With the Japanese
IF there was any doubt in the minds of the Japanese that the rules have permanently changed in their dealings with Washington, it ended last week when Secretary of State Warren G. Christopher flew into town for an emergency meeting about aiding Russia and stopped by to meet Japan's new Foreign Minister, Kabun Muto.
In years past there would have been lots of reassuring talk at such a first meeting about how crucial the Japan-America relationship was, as the linchpin of stability and democracy in East Asia.
Instead, the two men started talking about personal computers.
Halfway through Mr.
Muto's explanation of the wonders of Japan's new $116 billion economic stimulus package, which includes the purchase of more high-tech equipment for Japanese schools and universities, Mr.
Christopher cut to the heart of the matter: Would the program result in more opportunities for the likes of I.B.M., Compaq and Apple, whose share of the Japanese personal computer market, while growing, is nothing to celebrate?


Work and Worry in Vineyards
IN the Napa Valley, it is a clear, crisp night in early sprint.
It is the hour before dawn, and the still-bare vines are enveloped insilence, and deadly frost.
One by one, lights pop on here and there among the vines.
Then, from the distance, comes the thud-thud-thud of a helicopter.
Soon it is over the vineyard, swooping down first on one light, then another.
It hovers over each until the light goes out.
When they are all extinguished, the chopper moves off into the darkness, leaving behind onlysilence and the stars overhead.
More than that, actually; in 5 or 10 minutes, it has saved a vineyard's life.
The lights turn on automatically when the temperature in the vines drops to the frost level.
The helicopter hovers overhead, stirring up the cold air from the ground level and mixing it with warmer air from higher altitudes.
When the light go out, the danger has passed; the pilot moves over the next light.


Struggle in the Balkans; U.S. SAYS BELGRADE JOINED IN ATTACKS
United States officials said today that military forces from Serbia had joined Bosnian Serbs in attacking Bosnian forces in the recent fighting in eastern Bosnia.
They said Serbian artillery had fired across the border at Srebrenica, the besieged Muslim town.
And according to intelligence reports, Serbian Army tanks and artillery units had also joined in the attack.


Robust Eating for the Full-Plate Club
LONG ISLAND'S love affair with family style Italian restaurants goes on.
These casual spots serving gargantuan portions of homey Italian peasant food continue to pop up like mushrooms after a spring rain.
Only those residents who have spent the last few years on another planet need the explanation that dishes at these restaurants are designed to serve two or more people.
These bountiful platters of hearty food are especially appealing in recessionary times.


Benefits
Battery Dance Benefit
THURSDAY -- A benefit celebrating the 17th season of the Battery Dance Company begins at 7:30 P.M. at Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street.
Dinner at Scarlatti, 34 East 52d Street, will follow the performance, which features four dance premieres and benefits the company.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 219-3910.
Angels for Amfar
THURSDAY -- A benefit for the American Foundation for AIDS Research (Amfar) will feature a preview performance of "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches" at 8 P.M. at the Walter Kerr Theater.
Preceding the show will be a 6 P.M. reception with the author of the play, Tony Kushner, at the Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the performance alone, from (212) 682-7440, ext. 110.
African Spring Rites
THURSDAY -- Thirty children will perform African dances at "Rites of Spring," a benefit for Batoto Yetu, a nonprofit youth development program in Harlem.
A champagne reception at 6 P.M. at the Industria Super Studio, 775 Washington Street at Jane Street, will be followed by the 7 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $75, children, $25, from (212) 932-2434 or at the door.
Flamenco in Astoria
THURSDAY -- The Thalia Awards dinner, a benefit for the Thalia Spanish Theater, will feature tango, flamenco and opera performances.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception precedes the 7:30 dinner and 8 P.M. performance at the Astorian Manor, 25-22 Astoria Boulevard at Crescent Street, Astoria, Queens.
Claire Shulman, Queens Borough President, will be honored.
Tickets, $65, from (718) 729-3880.
Antique Show Preview
THURSDAY -- A preview of the Fifth Avenue Art and Antiques Show will raise funds for the Children's Hope Foundation, whose volunteers arrange outings for children with AIDS.
The preview begins at 6:30 P.M. with champagne and hors d'oeuvres at 2 East 79th Street and continues until 9:30 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 249-4865.
Cherry Blossom Festival
THURSDAY -- International House, which provides housing for 700 students from 80 countries, will benefit from a Sakura Festival (sakura means cherry blossom in Japanese).
It starts with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. in Sakura Park, Riverside Drive and 122d Street, followed by dinner at International House, across the street at 500 Riverside Drive.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 316-8423.
Ellis Island Revisited
THURSDAY -- The Lower East Side Tenement Museum and the National Park Service will offer a re-creation of the immigrant experience of 1907 on Ellis Island to benefit the museum.
Bread and water will be served during the boat ride over and visitors will be shown the orientation process immigrants faced on arrival.
Members of the Hypothetical Theater Company, dressed in period costume, will serve as guides.
A Circle Line boat will depart from Battery Place and West Street promptly at 6:30 P.M.
A meal typical of those eaten by immigrant arrivals will be served in the Great Hall after the tour.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 431-0233.
Hot Line Benefit
THURSDAY -- A Food and Hunger Hot Line dinner-dance will benefit the Vanguard Cafe, a nonprofit restaurant developed by the anti-hunger organization to train and employ low-income New Yorkers.
A 7 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner at 9 P.M. and dancing.
Harry Belafonte will present an award to Susan Sarandon for her anti-hunger activities.
Tickets, $250, or $75 for the reception and presentation alone, from (212) 737-9010.
Concert for Stay'n Out
THURSDAY -- The Stay'n Out program of New York Therapeutic Communities Inc., a nonprofit rehabilitation program for former prisoners, will benefit from a concert featuring Noel Pointer, a jazz violinist, and the Jeanie Bryson quintet.
The 8 P.M. concert in the Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall will be followed by a dessert reception with the performers on the 45th floor of Carnegie Hall Tower.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $125, or $75 for the concert alone, from Cecile Scott at (212) 971-6033.
'Goodbye Girl' Gala
FRIDAY -- An 8 P.M. performance of "The Goodbye Girl" at the Marquis Theater will raise funds for the National Association for Visually Handicapped.
A supper party at the Algonquin will follow.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 889-3141.
Just One Auction
FRIDAY -- Just One Break, which places disabled workers in jobs in New York City, will benefit from an arts show and auction featuring works of disabled artists.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served at 7 P.M. in the atrium of the RJ Colors restaurant, 237 Park Avenue at 46th Street.
Kathy Buckley, a deaf comedian, will perform.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 725-2500.
Mixed Media Concert
FRIDAY -- A mixed media concert featuring Lee Genesis, a singer, and Robert Leach, a painter, will benefit God's Love We Deliver, a food program for people with AIDS.
Cocktails and a buffet begin at 6:30 P.M. at the Wings Theater, 154 Christopher Street at Greenwich Street, followed by the 8 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $50, from (718) 788-4951 or at the door.
Kosciuszko Foundation Ball
SATURDAY -- The Kosciuszko Foundation, which promotes Polish culture, presents its 58th annual dinner and debutante ball in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria.
A 7 P.M. cocktail reception will precede dinner and dancing, which begin at 8 P.M..
Polish dances will be performed after the 10 P.M. debutante presentation.
Black tie.
Tickets, $125, or $95 for college undergraduates, from (212) 734-2130.
Riverdale Gala
SATURDAY -- The Riverdale Mental Health Association, a nonprofit mental health clinic in the Bronx, will benefit from a spring gala at the Estherwood mansion, 49 Clinton Avenue, Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Following cocktails at 7 P.M. and dinner at 8 P.M., there will be a silent auction featuring weekend trips and tickets to cultural and sporting events.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $185, from (212) 796-5300.
Greenwich Village a la Carte
TONIGHT -- The Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation will benefit from a reception at La Belle Epoque, 827 Broadway (12th Street), from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M.
Champagne and hors d'oeuvres will follow a panel discussion about the history of eating and drinking in the Village.
Michael Batterberry, the publisher of Food Arts magazine, will be host.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 924-3895.
A Pair of Spring Dances
MONDAY -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art will benefit from a spring dinner-dance at the museum.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. in the Lila Acheson Wallace Memorial Gallery will be followed by dinner at 8:30, then dancing in the Carroll and Milton Petrie European Sculpture Court.
The museum's junior committee is sponsoring another dance at 9:30 in the Charles Engelhard Court and the Temple of Dendur.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, or $125 for the junior dance alone, from (212) 570-3956.
Broadway Tribute
MONDAY -- The York Theater Company celebrates its 24th anniversary with a benefit honoring Charles Strouse, the Broadway composer.
Adolph Green, Betty Comden, Barbara Cook and Ann Reinking will be among those performing at 8 P.M. at the Church of the Heavenly Rest, 2 East 90th Street.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Blau, 1115 Fifth Avenue (93d Street), precedes the event, which will include a post-performance reception at the church.
Tickets, $200, or $90 for the performance and late reception, or $30 for the performance alone, from (212) 874-5457 or at the door.
Children's Aid
MONDAY -- A dinner and auction will benefit the Rhinelander Children's Center of the Children's Aid Society.
Cocktails at 7 will precede the 8 o'clock dinner at Jim McMullen's restaurant, 1341 Third Avenue (77th Street).
Items and services to be auctioned will include tennis lessons with the actor Dabney Coleman.
Tickets, $101, from (212) 876-0500 or at the door.
Meals on Wheels
MONDAY -- The ninth annual salute to Citymeals-on-Wheels by the New York fashion and fragrance industry will start with a 6 P.M. champagne reception and buffet, to be followed at 7:30 by a raffle of designer jewelry and clothing.
The event, at the restaurant One Fifth Avenue, at Eighth Street, will help finance deliveries of food to homebound elderly people in New York City.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 687-1234.
Help for Armenia
MONDAY -- The Armenian General Benevolent Union, a nonprofit, nonpolitical organization in New York, will ship food and medical supplies to Armenia with the proceeds from a variety performance featuring the actor Eric Bogosian, the comedian Andrea Martin and others at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 765-8260 or at the door.
A Christie's Preview
MONDAY -- A cocktail reception and preview of English furniture and art objects will raise funds for the nonprofit Vacations and Senior Centers Association, which provides outings for New York City's elderly poor people.
The benefit runs from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M. at Christie's, Park Avenue and 59th Street.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 645-6590.
Banking on Laughs
MONDAY -- Comedy Tonight, a comedy review at Caroline's Comedy Club, 1626 Broadway (49th Street), will benefit the Bank Street School for Children.
The 8 P.M. cocktail reception and 9 P.M. show will be followed by a raffle of a vacation trip to San Diego.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 875-4607.
School Volunteers
TUESDAY -- A performance of "The Goodbye Girl" at the Marquis Theater is to benefit the New York City School Volunteer Program, which provides tutors in New York City public schools.
The 8 P.M. show will be preceded by a 6 P.M. cocktail buffet on the 49th floor of the Equitable Tower, 787 Seventh Avenue (52d Street).
Tickets, $375, or $175 for the performance alone, from (212) 213-3370.
Chamber Symphony
TUESDAY -- Young Concert Artists, a nonprofit organization that seeks to develop the careers of classical musicians, will benefit from a performance of the New York Chamber Symphony.
Three new soloists -- Todd Palmer, Chee-Yun and Mikhail Yanovitsky -- will make debuts in the 8:30 P.M. performance, conducted by Gerard Schwarz, at the 92d Street Y (Lexington Avenue).
A 6:15 P.M. dinner at Mortimer's, 1057 Lexington Avenue (75th Street), will precede the event and a champagne reception will follow at the Ukrainian Institute, 2 East 79th Street.
Transportation will be provided among the three events.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, or $75 for the concert and reception, from (212) 307-6655.
United Nations Ball
WEDNESDAY -- The United Nations Association presents its 35th annual ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Gen.
Colin L. Powell and Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations will be honored.
A 7 P.M. cocktail reception in the grand ballroom will be followed by dinner at 8 and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 685-0113.
Riverside Symphony Gala
WEDNESDAY -- Andrew Imbrie, an American composer, will give the premiere performance of his Piano Concerto No. 3 at the Riverside Symphony's benefit at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center.
A champagne reception with Mr.
Imbrie will follow.
Tickets, $50, or $14 for the performance alone, from (212) 864-4197.
Emergency Services Benefit
WEDNESDAY -- The Lenox Hill Hospital Auxiliary is sponsoring a benefit performance of "The Goodbye Girl" at 8 P.M. at the Marquis Theater, to raise funds for a new ambulance.
A cocktail reception begins at 5:30, followed by dinner at 6:15, at the "21" Club.
Transportation will be provided between the restaurant and the theater.
Tickets, $235, or $175 for the show only, from (212) 439-2544.
Bearing the Burden
WEDNESDAY -- An auction of personalized teddy bears from Martin Scorsese, Pat Riley, Mike Ditka, Kim Basinger and other celebrities will benefit the Greenwich House Children's Safety Project, a child-abuse prevention and treatment program in New York.
The 6:15 P.M. auction, presided over by the actress Ellen Barkin, will be preceded at 5:30 P.M. by cocktails and hors d'oeuvres.
Tickets, $75, from Deborah Valentin at (212) 924-1091 or at the door.
Settlement House Gala
WEDNESDAY -- Takashimaya New York, the Japanese store chain's new outpost opening to the public on Friday at Fifth Avenue and 55th Street, will be the scene of the Lenox Hill Neighborhood Association's annual spring gala, benefiting the social service programs of its settlement house.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed at 7:30 by a Noh dance performance by the Matsuyama-Takao troupe.
At 8:30 two events will be held: a dinner and a junior committee cocktail buffet and dance.
Tickets, $250, or $75 for the junior event alone, from (212) 744-5022, extension 237.


Veronica Deasy, Peter Goodrich
Veronica Marie Deasy, a manager of a Banana Republic clothing store in New York, was married yesterday to Peter Barnard Goodrich, the vice president of worldwide concert and artist activities for Steinway &amp; Sons, the piano maker in New York.
The Rev.
Gary Fertig officiated at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Kenneth Deasy, a Roman Catholic priest and a brother of the bride, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Deasy-Goodrich, 37, graduated from the College of Notre Dame in Belmont, Calif.
She is a daughter of the late Edward and Elizabeth Marie Deasy.
Her father was a vice president of the Kent Coffee Furniture House, a furniture retailer in Los Angeles.
Her mother was a manager of retail merchandising at Robinson's Department Store in Pasadena, Calif.


INSIDE
Turkey's Leader Is Dead
President Turgut Ozal died in Ankara, and officials there said a grueling tour of Central Asia may have hastened his death.
He was 66.
Page 46.
Italy Votes on Its Future
After a year of widening scandal, Italian voters are going to the polls to determine the shape of their government's future.
Page 3.
Insurer Audit Faults Market
An audit of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield cited management errors but said the insurer's worst problems were beyond its control.
Page 37.
A Famous Son Leaves Home
"We will bury you," his father is said to have told the United States decades ago.
But now Sergei Nikitich Khrushchev is coming to stay.
Page 22.


In Italy, the Arts Are Schooled for Scandal
In a season of gloom and uncertainty provoked by a traumatic corruption scandal, Italians are finding society's woes mirrored at every creative turn: in the cinema, on television, in books and in the theater.
Sometimes, all the Italians can do is laugh -- at themselves, their plight and their leaders -- possibly to free themselves from what seems to be an unending crisis.
The arts community has indeed been galvanized by what Italians call "Tangentopoli," which translates literally as "Bribe City" and describes the past 14 months of disclosures of bribes and kickbacks among the business and political elite.


APRIL 11-17: Failure in Bosnia; Srebrenica: A Symbol Of Serbian Brutality And the World's Impotence
Serbian forces in Bosnia last week launched a final assault on the eastern town of Srebrenica after a siege emblematic of the horrors of the Balkan war and the outside world's inability to stop it.
The United Nations, having failed to organize action that might have saved the Muslim-held enclave, was reduced to efforts to minimize the carnage of its evacuation.
The town's plight seems to illustrate conclusively, if there were any doubt, that the Bosnian Serbs intend to use force to consolidate their position while the world dithers.
Negotiating, if necessary, comes later, from a vantage of strength.


Ernest Dickerson Would Rather Be Called Director
Ernest Dickerson has heard the comparisons before -- that he is to Spike Lee what Sven Nykvist is to Ingmar Bergman, or what Gordon Willis has been to Woody Allen.
But he cringes at the compliments.
He would rather not be the lesser half of a famous director-cinematographer duo.
He would rather be the Bergman, Allen or Lee.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van, boat and foot that are scheduled during the spring in New York City.
Nature tours are listed on page 4.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"SPANNING THE PARK," Central Park.
A tour and discussion about the bridges in the park, led by Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 10 A.M. at 59th Street and Central Park West.
Free.
Information: (212) 427-4040.


Human Pheromones
WHAT: Human pheromones (or at least their synthetic equivalents) in new as-yet-unnamed his and hers fragrances scheduled to go on sale this fall at premium prices but only via infomercials.
WHAT ARE THEY Pheromones are chemicals that carry signals that drive the libido to do the lambada, among other things.
Animals like pigs and deer and bees and silkworms also use pheromones to stake out territory and send warnings to other members of their species.
A male pig, for example, spits in the face of his favorite fertile sow and -- presto! -- she temporarily becomes a nymphomaniac.
WHY?
The search for human pheromones that, like those of their animal counterparts, would enhance sexuality and excite Eros has long been an obsession of the $4.8 billion fragrance business.
Fragrance companies, struggling to heat up stagnant sales with something truly new, have spent millions, if not billions, trying to isolate human pheromones.
If the Erox (echoism intended?) Corporation, a new company in Menlo Park, Calif., has indeed identified human pheromones -- and scientists and fragrance experts are dubious -- and can obtain patents on their synthetic versions, it has stumbled onto a financial mother lode that could take the perfume business into a whole new realm.
WHY ELSE?
Until a few years ago, scientists took as gospel a 1938 study by an eminent neuroanatomist who contended that humans lacked the proper apparatus, a vomeronasal organ, with which to sense pheromones.
And anyway, if we did have one, it was vestigial.
Human pheromones do not have smells, scientists advising Erox say.
So unless we had a working vomeronasal organ, we couldn't detect human pheromones, even if they did exist.
But Dr.
Larry J. Stensaas, a professor of neuroanatomy and physiologist at the University of Utah who advises Erox, said he had discovered a human vomeronasal organ, which he nicknamed "the VNO," along the septum.
Dr.
Luis Monti-Bloch, another professor at Utah, has devised a gadget to test whether it works.
They say initial studies show it does.
WILL HUMAN PHEROMONES HAVE THE SAME EFFECT AS PIG SPIT?
No.
Although popular myth and Madison Avenue have suggested that pheromones behave as aphrodisiacs to stimulate the opposite sex, the Erox fragrances are not formulated to attract hordes of libidinous construction workers, for example, to a female wearer.
The pheromone compound in the male fragrance was deliberately selected to have the greatest impact on a male wearer, while the female fragrance is steeped with one appealing most to a woman.
Such a state of affairs would seem to defeat the purpose of Erox's grand marketing strategy, which is aimed at heterosexuals, not gays.
In fact, neither fragrance claims to be a sexual magnet for members of either sex.
Instead, people who have used the fragrance say it has enhanced their self-confidence and sense of well-being, which, the folks at Erox suggests, may make the wearer more attractive.
"A sense of confident ease, being more comfortable, may increase sensuality," said Pierre de Champfleury, Erox's president and chief executive.
"By feeling more confident, the wearer might feel more free to approach someone he or she might otherwise not approach." SOCIAL STUDIES: Remember Musk by Jovan?
Perfumers have been using pheromones like musk from deer and castoreum from beavers to concoct fragrances since the pyramids were blueprints.
The chemicals act as preservatives and, in some cases, contribute to a scent.
But while advertising often suggests that animal pheromones (or the synthesized equivalents used in modern perfumes) will cast the same spell over humans as they do over animals, pheromones work only on members of the same species.
The synthesized pheromones in the new fragrances are clones of extractions from human skin, so they supposedly have an effect on humans.
SMELLS FISHY?
The experts aren't convinced, either.
Their reactions to the notion of human pheromones range from snorts of disbelief to credulity couched in careful language.
"I've always been extremely skeptical until the last few years," said Dr.
Gary K. Beauchamp, director of the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia, a leading research institute that studies smell and taste.
"But there have now been a number of investigations suggesting that people do have a vomeronasal organ.
"Whether it's functional or not is another question."


(Sub)culture Clash
To the Editor:
Opera-loving wives often have difficulty persuading their husbands to accompany them to Atlanta's excellent performances.
If these gentlemen were to learn that they might be joining a gay subculture, the results could be devastating.


Corrections
An answer in the The Q &amp; A column on March 28 referred incorrectly to the choice of whether the interest on a tenant's security deposit is paid annually or is accrued.
Generally the choice is the tenant's, not the landlord's.


A Reader's Guide to the Balkans
HISTORY, like hate, is the product of memory, and memory is composed of unforgettable detail -- sights, smells, sounds, exalted emotions, grim statistics and cruel ironies.
A memory is not subject to condensation.
Made to fit inside the narrow strictures of a television sound bite or a newspaper column, it loses all meaning.
It becomes just another lifeless fact that can never convey
how
people have come to think and behave as they do.
The Balkans are a region of pure memory: a Bosch-like tapestry of interlocking ethnic rivalries where medieval and modern history thread into each other.
More complicated and less visually exotic than the Middle East, the Balkans are unsuited to the reductions of the television camera. (A recent ABC News special, "Land of the Demons," showed footage from Bosnia, but even with rock music playing in the background the effect was flat.) Whereas the Middle East is a game of checkers -- Arabs versus Israelis, with a modern history that began only in 1918 -- the Balkans are three-dimensional chess.


Tigers and Athletics Find That Their Movers Can Also Be Their Shakers
In the Detroit Tigers' first three games of the season, Tony Phillips started at three different positions: left field, third base and center field.
In his first four games of the season with the Oakland Athletics, Jerry Browne started at four different positions: third base, second base, center field and right field.
Bip Roberts of Cincinnati, on the other hand, has gone nearly two weeks starting at only one position: second base.
Told that Phillips would probably toss him out of the special-membership club, Roberts said, "It was he who started the club."


Egypt Warns C.I.A. Chief on Iran-Backed Terror
The Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey, made a secret visit to Egypt this week in which President Hosni Mubarak warned of the dangers posed by Iran-backed Islamic extremists in the Middle East, American officials said today.
The officials described the trip as part of an orientation tour that took Mr.
Woolsey to Israel, Italy and other countries, and said it had been kept secret only for security reasons.
But they made clear that Mr.
Mubarak had raised specific concerns about Iran's role in promoting Islamic violence against Egypt's secular Government and elsewhere in the region.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
March housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.21
1.20
March building permits, millions, annual rate
1.14
1.16
Wednesday
March budget deficit, billions of dollars
47.6
40.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
335
345
Friday
Mar. durable-goods orders, percent change
2.4
-0.8
Mid-April auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.5
6.5
Monday: Group of 10 central bankers meet in Basel  Wednesday: Lech Walesa meets with President Clinton  Thursday: Bundesbank council meeting


Deals and Discounts
BIG APPLE BARGAINS The New York Convention and Visitors Bureau has issued a free coupon booklet offering savings on restaurants, shopping, hotels and sightseeing.
"Big Apple Bargains" has 33 coupons offering a variety of deals, such as a $95 rate at the Holiday Inn on Lafayette Street; 20 percent off regular adult admission at the Empire State Building; $3 off several Gray Line tours; $1 off regular admission at the Whitney Museum of American Art, and 10 percent off some merchandise at the Canal Jean Company on lower Broadway.
The coupon booklet must be picked up in person at one of four Visitor Information Center offices: 2 Columbus Circle; Broadway and 42d Street; Grand Central Terminal, and Kennedy International Airport.
Coupons expire May 31.


A Sabertooth in SoHo! (To Be Continued)
"PRIMAL CHANGE," "Blood Tie" and "King Hell Turtles" are not the names of heavy-metal bands.
They are the titles of original works of comic art for sale at the month-old Four Color Images gallery in SoHo.
"We represent the artier side of comic books," Ken Sanzel, an owner, said one recent afternoon.
"Most of what we sell falls somewhere between mainstream comic art, which is Marvel, D.C. -- what everybody thinks of as comics -- and underground comic art, which deals with drugs, sex, anarchy, whatever is taboo."


Quota Systems, Anyone?
To the Sports Editor:
The politically correct want to have it both ways.
One wonders what the reaction would be if whites were to call for affirmative action on the playing fields of America, now dominated by blacks far beyond their representation in the general population.
It will be argued that blacks are the better athletes.
How does that differ from the argument that whites may be better in the dugouts and clubhouses and front offices?


Verdict in Los Angeles; Points of Evidence, Not Emotion
In the end, it was a criminal case.
The symbolism of the gripping videotape, the nationwide outcry, the political pressures, the rioting and continuing social tensions were all distilled into the fine points of legal battle and the formalities of courtroom procedure.
The jury's split verdicts today in the civil rights trial of four officers accused in the beating of Rodney G. King seemed to show a careful reading of the evidence and close attention to the special hurdle faced by the prosecution -- the need to show that the officers acted with criminal intent.


Indian Troops Are Blamed As Kashmir Violence Rises
Since the turn of the year, and especially in the last two weeks, the Kashmir Valley, a Muslim region seeking independence from predominantly Hindu India, has been engulfed by a storm of violence.
A seemingly endless tide of death, arson, torture, kidnapping and disappearances has swept the Himalayan valley, and large sections of its capital, Srinagar, have been burned.
More than 125 people have been killed in the last week, some in the fires in the Lal Chowk commercial center of Srinagar.
Sixteen people were machine-gunned to death as they floated down the Jhelum River, and others were hauled from their homes and shot in the streets by security forces.


Peter Fleischmann, 71, Who Led The New Yorker Into the 1980's
Peter F. Fleischmann, the former president and chairman of The New Yorker magazine, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 71.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Corrections
A map on March 21 with an article about Fillmore Street in San Francisco misidentified several streets.
A corrected version appears below.


Republicans Hold Clinton Accountable
To the Editor:
In "Dances of the Cranes" (editorial, April 7), you castigate Senate Republicans for stymieing President Clinton's $16.3 billion economic stimulus plan.
According to your analysis, the Republicans are thwarting the will of the voters by preventing the Democratic President and Democratic Congress from enacting the program they were elected to enact.
Such reasoning is seriously flawed since 43 percent of the voters who supported candidate Clinton never endorsed a program that would tax the middle class and increase Government spending by $202 billion from 1993 to 1997.


The Big Rigs That Give Kids a Big Thrill
"BIG Truck Day is kind of a spiritual thing for my boy it's the zen of trucks," Kathie Swenson said, as she watched Mac, her 3-year-old son, climb into the driver's seat of a huge yellow backhoe and pretend to drive.
"I'm not sure if we fantasize at his age," she said, "but if we do, Big Truck Day is it for him."
The concept of this event is simple.
For the last four years, one day each spring the Chappaqua Library has closed its parking lot to regular traffic and moved in the stuff of dreams for little boys and girls.
This year the lineup included a police van, two firetrucks, a dump truck, an ambulance, a backhoe, a front-end loader, a steamroller, a fancy blue race car and a mower -- the kind that trims the grass on highways.


Carol Struzziero, Michael Dannenberg
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Ralph Struzziero of Lynn, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Carol C. Struzziero to Dr.
Michael J. Dannenberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Dannenberg of Huntington, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Dr.
Struzziero is an internist at the Hunter McGuire Veterans Hospital in Richmond.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.D. degree from Tufts University.


L.I.E. Walls Work, For Some
I was put off by the arrogant tone of Daniel A. Salmon's letter regarding the L.I.E. sound barriers  [ "Expressway Noise Walls Disputed," Feb. 14, and Letters, April 4 ] .
He seems most disturbed that the view from his car window has been spoiled by these so-called "ugly" walls of wood.
Apparently, Mr.
Salmon can't see the forest for the trees.
Long Island is blessed with a wealth of scenic beauty, from the Garvies Point Preserve in Mr.
Salmon's own backyard of Glen Cove to the majestic South Shore of Robert Moses State Park.
This is to say nothing of the much-vaunted East End, which I would wager most Long Islanders have never even seen because they can't afford it!


Giving Different Grains a Touch of Italy
THE much-publicized Mediterranean diet points the way to highlighting grain dishes on the menu.
Italian food in particular, with its emphasis on pasta, rice and cornmeal polenta, has become an excellent vehicle for using grain as a centerpiece for a meal.
But plates of spaghetti tossed with tomatoes, bowls of risotto mixed with asparagus or dishes of polenta topped with wild mushrooms are not the only choices when it comes to grains.
There are other grains in the pantry that are not commonly used in Italian cooking but which can be given a touch of Italy with the right seasonings.


Enchantments of a Swiss Town
A TRIO of the world's most accomplished robots are driven by intricate wheelworks and levers rather than by electronics, wear 18th-century costumes with fichus and perform in a charming city on a Swiss lake.
They are the famous automates, the three mechanical puppets of the Museum of Art and History in Neuchatel.
The cleverest of the three figures is the Scribe, a life-size barefoot boy, 3 or 4 years of age, who is seated at a mahogany desk.
Wielding a goose quill, he tips it in an inkwell and with perfect penmanship writes a short text while his eyes attentively follow the tracing of each letter.
His movements are a bit jerky, but surprisingly lifelike.
The second figure, also a little boy, in a reddish-brown jacket, is known as the Draftsman.
Interchangeable sets of rotating cams tell the puppet to draw; he blows dust off the drawing paper by means of a bellows concealed in his head.
The Musician, the central figure, is larger than the other two, representing a teen-age girl with blond curls wearing an elegant blue-and-gold dress.
She plays rococo tunes on a period instrument described as an orgue-clavecin, a cross between a harpsichord and a harmonium.
She seems to breathe as her chest heaves, she moves her head and eyes, and at the end gets up and makes a graceful bow.
The effect is eerie.


Khrushchev's Son to Reside Permanently in U.S.
Sergei Nikitich Khrushchev, son of the Soviet leader whose 1962 confrontation with President John F. Kennedy over Soviet missiles in Cuba brought the world to the brink of nuclear war, expects to walk into a small immigration office in Providence, R.I., on Monday and become a legal permanent resident of the United States.
Sixteen months after the disintegration of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union, the 57-year-old engineer-turned-political-scientist and his wife, Valentina, expect to receive their alien residence cards, or green cards.


Deborah E. Copaken, Paul M. Kogan
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Copaken of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Elizabeth Copaken to Paul Mikhailovich Kogan, a son of the late Rachel Kogan and his adoptive parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Swergold of New York.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Copaken, 27, is a senior production associate in New York with the ABC News program "Day One." She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner at the Washington law firm of Covington &amp; Burling.


Wildflowers Bring Color to the Season
THE garden is waking up from its long winter rest.
All kinds of little evidences of new life are appearing.
It is a time for everyone to be careful when working outside, lest a delicate plant be trampled.
This is also a time of great anticipation.
Visits to the garden are important now just to see what is coming along.
Day by day things change.
Many of spring's loveliest flowers last but a few days and unless the gardener is alert to what is coming up and leafing out, some of these beautiful flowers could be missed.


Oslo
Oslo has a kind of perennial holiday atmosphere.
The Norwegians have a great passion for the outdoors, and flexible work hours are prevalent, making it possible for many people to leave work no later than 4 P.M. most days and to take Friday afternoon off.
The tram from downtown Oslo to Holmenkollen, 1,150 feet above sea level, is equipped with ski racks, and in summer the Oslo Fjord ferries are crammed with commuters who have taken up temporary residence on summer resort islands in the city.
Even in town, a pleasure-loving spirit prevails.
Aker Brygge, the newly developed waterfront only five minutes' walk from the center, is always filled with people, many of them enjoying a beer with a bagful of shrimps, which can be bought straight off fishing boats.
The bars and cafes along Karl Johan, which runs from downtown to the Royal Palace, all spill over onto the sidewalk.


Children's Day at Muscoot: Lending a Hand With the Chores
RAIN or shine, the animals know when it's breakfast time at Muscoot Farm, Westchester County's own interpretive farm here.
Some Saturday mornings, children are invited to help the farmhands fill pails with grain and wheelbarrows with hay and give the feed to the animals, who loudly honk, moo and baa until they are fed.
A group of children and their parents rose early one recent morning to help carry the pails through the mud and mist, accompanied on their rounds by an equally hungry flock of pigeons.
They learned from Joe Plummer, the farm's foreman, that this was no petting zoo but a real barnyard with animals that might kick, bite or peck.
They also learned that one of the farm's five cows would give birth at any moment.
And Charlie Acocella, a farm worker, let them feel the pregnant belly of Rosie the goat.


World Trade Center's Grand Vista Is Again Available


Two New Hotels For Caribbean
Vacationers to the Caribbean have two new resorts to choose from: one, a luxury hotel in Curacao; the other, a smaller resort 20 miles south of Cancun, Mexico.
The 248-room Sonesta Beach Hotel and Casino, near Willemstad, Curacao, is the first new hotel on that island in more than two decades.
Facilities include three restaurants, a casino, an outdoor pool and a health club.
Through Dec. 19, a double room with a balcony or patio starts at $150.
There is a 12 percent service charge and a 7 percent government tax.
For information call (800) 766-3782.


A Reasoned Verdict in Los Angeles
The two Los Angeles police officers convicted in the Rodney King beating committed national crimes.
Sgt.
Stacey Koon directed and Officer Laurence Powell carried out an excessive, at times vicious use of official force.
They violated a citizen's Federal right to receive justice in a court of law, not the on-the-scene, summary punishment shown in a shocking amateur videotape.
A city and nation that were alarmed over the beating and torn by riots after last year's state trial are entitled to a new national, collective sense of relief that due process has prevailed.
The verdicts are a jury's eloquent answer to a distressed people whose former President, George Bush, rightly dispatched Federal prosecutors to safeguard the national interest.


Design/Build
To the Editor:
We at Karco-Davis Inc. read with interest your article on March 28  [ "Pros and Cons of Under-One-Roof Architects' Firm" ]  referring to Meli Borrelli as the city's first pure design/build architectural firm.
Karco-Davis was founded in 1962 and has pioneered the concept in the New York Metropolitan area.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BERNARD SHAW Volume Four, 1950-1991: The Last Laugh.
By Michael Holroyd.
Random House, $35.


The Rhythms Of the City
GARRISON KEILLOR is spending April in Manhattan, broadcasting his Saturday evening show, "The American Radio Company," from Town Hall.
The Minnesota-born creator of "A Prairie Home Companion" lived in New York from 1987 to 1992, but recently moved back to the heartland.
When he lived in New York, he rode the subway a lot.
He rode from the apartment he still keeps on the Upper West Side to his office at The New Yorker.
Sometimes, he would just ride a train to see where it would take him, and he'd end up writing a "Talk of the Town" item about it.


Katherine Reed, Paul Weisenfeld
Katherine Lynnette Reed, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Reed of Fairfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Paul Thomas Weisenfeld, the son of Erika H. Plischke of Great Neck, L.I., and Paul J. Weisenfeld of Levittown, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard L. Rush performed the ceremony at the First Church Congregational.


Familiar Tune
To the Editor:
There can be no question that Wayne Koestenbaum's book "The Queen's Throat" is the richest and most expansive discourse yet published on the relationships between gay culture and opera.
But to state that that connection "has never been analyzed -- at least not until now," as Edward Rothstein does, is inaccurate.


Struggle in the Balkans; U.N., With Abstention by Russia, Tightens Its Sanctions on Belgrade
After a day of tense negotiations, the United Nations Security Council brushed aside a new cease-fire agreement in the battered Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica and voted late tonight to impose Draconian new sanctions on the rump Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro.
Russia had fought hard to delay the vote until after the April 25 referendum on President Boris N. Yeltsin and his economic reforms because his nationalist opponents sympathize with the Serbs.
But after hours of brinkmanship, Russia finally accepted defeat and abstained instead of using its Security Council veto to block the new sanctions.
China also abstained.


EMMA THOMPSON'S FAMILY BUSINESS
I had already pegged Emma Thompson as the most refreshing actress in or out of Hollywood.
Russell Miller's article "Emma Thompson's Family Business" (March 28) confirmed my suspicions.


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
The "genteel" library degree referred to in the article is now a master's degree in library and information science.
Librarians not only find sources of information, but suggest other lines of inquiry.
They administer computers and computer networks and have taught a generation of doctors, lawyers, business people and the general public how to do research with computers.
They also review and purchase books, journals and software, balance the budget and write grant proposals.


CRIME
James Lee Burke has made it his literary mission, in his lushly atmospheric crime novels, to dig up all the singing bones buried deep in the historical memory of the swampy bayous of southern Louisiana.
IN THE ELECTRIC MIST WITH CONFEDERATE DEAD (Hyperion, $19.95), the sixth in his evocative series, yields three generations' worth of violent death: the fresh remains of two young prostitutes, murdered in a manner suggesting a sadistic serial killer; the skeleton of a black man lynched in 1957; and the ghosts of a Confederate general and his wounded soldiers, who starved in a cypress swamp.
"For God's sakes, what's wrong with you?" the general's wraith challenges Dave Robicheaux, the Cajun cop whose conscience compels him to speak for the dead.
"Venal and evil men are destroying the world you were born in." A man of action, Dave doesn't really need this ghostly goading.
But there are so many villains on the scene -- from the savage pimps who have moved into the rural parishes of Vermilion and Iberia to the New Orleans mobsters who are bankrolling a Civil War movie being filmed in the Atchafalaya swamp -- that Dave is a bit overwhelmed.


Designer Revelries
A bash for Stephen Sprouse at Club USA, April 14.


A Revival of 'Two for the Seesaw'
HOW to revive "Two for the Seesaw," William Gibson's 1958 comedy with two characters -- a lonesome lawyer and a "lovable waif" -- and two telephones that ring a lot?
Keep it in period and risk being passe? Or slam it right into the 90's?
Either way, it's a no-win prospect.
Ultimately one has to put up with a play that calls for camouflage, not a comeback.
Ergo, option No. 3.
Get an actor with the adroitness to deal with the lawyer, who happens to be an analytical windbag, the sort who goes on for pages and then says: "I have to talk."
And the catch: find an actress who can be a "lovable waif." Really.


Hungarian Youth Party Tries a Grown-Up Appeal
Seeking to broaden its appeal, Hungary's most popular opposition party has voted to remove a ceiling on the age of its members in opening its campaign for parliamentary elections expected next spring.
Until now, only people under the age of 35 could join the Alliance of Young Democrats, which reached the decision to open the party to Hungarians of all ages at the opening of its congress on Friday in this town in eastern Hungary.


After a Killing, Florida Steps Up Aid to Tourists
Nervous officials in Florida are trying to gauge the fallout from the April 2 killing of a German tourist, Barbara Jensen Meller, who was robbed, beaten and run over by two assailants who bumped her rental car and attacked her when she got out to inspect the damage.
"So far the effects are minor, but time will tell," said Mayco Villafana, spokesman for the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau.
"We've seen five or six cancellations of groups in the 200 to 300 people range."
Steps are being taking to remove tags that identify rental cars and step up police patrols, particularly in the low-income areas between Miami International Airport and the tourist hotels on South Florida's beaches.
The state had been projecting an increase in visitors from 40.53 million last year to 42.4 million this year, but officials concede the negative worldwide publicity could put the industry, which generates some $28 billion, in jeopardy.


Portland Hotel Renaissance
IN the heart of Portland's newly bustling hotel and shopping district, visitors exploring on foot may stumble across Pioneer Courthouse Square, a brick plaza fronting Broadway.
Often called Portland's living room, it's a lively gathering place and frequent site for alfresco concerts.
This was once the setting for the city's grandest guest quarters, the Portland Hotel, a seven-story, Queen Anne-style beauty built in the 1880's.
After entertaining 11 Presidents, and shaping the tastes of a young James Beard, the Portland Hotel was unceremoniously razed in 1951.
The site was paved over as a parking lot.
Thirty years later, awakening to her heritage, the city reclaimed the block as Pioneer Courthouse Square, and recycled the old hotel's wrought-iron gates as a plaza ornament.


Trees That Like City Life
HAVE you planted a tree for the planet this spring?
There's still time in April.
Trees help to clean and oxygenate the air.
Their glorious shade can reduce the need for air-conditioning.
A stand of them can buffer winter winds and save on heating bills.
Their roots help to control erosion and hold water in the soil.
Their canopies provide shelter for birds and squirrels.
And they are beautiful.
Where would you rather live: on a barren street that heats up like an asphalt playground in August, or on a street lined with trees whose leaves rustle in the slightest breeze?


While Waiting for the Verdict, Los Angeles Trembled
THE waiting here ended early yesterday morning, when the verdict was finally annnounced: Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon and Officer Laurence M. Powell were convicted on Federal civil rights charges in the beating of Rodney G. King, while officers Theodore J. Briseno and Timothy E. Wind were acquitted.
Los Angeles sighed.
A week of fear and tension was over, a week in which the absence of information gave way to rumor and humor, absurdity and lunacy.
The name of the game was waiting, and more waiting, last week -- in Los Angeles as a tense city expected a verdict; in Waco, Tex., where the standoff between Federal agents and the armed and apocalyptic Branch Davidian sect ended its seventh week; and in rural Lucasville, Ohio, where eight men have died in a prisoner uprising that has lasted a week now.


Roberta Connolly, Arthur M. Miller
Roberta Beck Connolly, a vice president in the equities division of Goldman Sachs &amp; Company, was married yesterday to Arthur Madden Miller, a vice president in the company's municipal finance department.
Both work in New York, where. the Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest.
Ms.
Connolly, 42, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Winthrop College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
John Peter Connolly Jr. of Columbia, S.C., and the late Mr.
Connolly.
Her father was the manager for environmental affairs at the South Carolina Electric and Gas Company in Columbia.
Her mother, Roberta Beck Connolly, writes fiction.


Struggle in the Balkans; Cease-Fire in Battered Muslim Town Seals a Key Victory for Serb Forces
United Nations officials said tonight that the commander of the Bosnian Government Army had agreed to a cease-fire around the besieged city of Srebrenica and other steps intended to turn the town into a "safe area" to avert a battle to the finish with the town's Serbian attackers.
Though the accord was reached in response to a demand by the United Nations Security Council on Friday, it involves the disarming of the devastated city's Muslim defenders and allows for an exodus, goals long sought by Serbian nationalist forces.


Now Is the Time to Repair Flagstone Walks, Steps and Patios
SETTLING and repeated freezing and thawing can crack or tilt flat masonry surfaces, especially flagstone walks, steps and patios.
Repair is usually not too difficult, but it should be done in the spring to lessen chances that uneven pavement might cause a fall and to prevent damage from worsening.
Flagstones set without mortar have the greatest tendency to shift, but they are the easiest to fix.
Start by prying up the stones that have tilted or sunk, using a crowbar.
Rest its fulcrum on a board to protect other flagstones.
Pry carefully if you use a shovel or garden fork, as their handles break easily.


The Law That Made Amy Fisher a Victim
IT has been 50 years since Errol Flynn laid waste to his swashbuckling film career with an ill-considered romance with a teen-age girl.
Roman Polanski, the director, has spent 16 years in exile from Hollywood for the same failure of judgment.
Now, if the charges are proven, Joseph Buttafuoco, an auto body shop owner from Long Island, takes his place among the celebrities who paid dearly for the kind of liaison that for most men involved in one goes unnoticed and unpunished.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 18, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
39
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
3
64
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
53
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
5
3
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing helps others.
6
3
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested by the changing values of the past two decades.
7
17
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
8
4
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $6.99.) The tales of three Brooklyn natives, one of whom rises high in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, two who break with their Jewish heritage.
9
2
STARS, by Kathryn Harvey. (Avon, $5.99.) A scandalous past haunts a manipulative woman who runs an exclusive Palm Springs resort.
10
5
WILDEST HEARTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A businesswoman proposes a marriage of convenience to a rich man.
11 *
3
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser and his old friend Hawk investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
12
6
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
13
29
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
14
7
THE FIRST WIVES CLUB, by Olivia Goldsmith. (Pocket, $5.99.) Three women conspire to get even with the men who divorced them.
15
1
MORE THAN FRIENDS, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The fortunes of the members of two idyllically intertwined families are tested by an unexpected incident.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
493
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
2
9
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
3
8
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
4 *
14
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
5
100
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6 *
79
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
7
16
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
8
25
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
9
9
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
10 *
28
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
130
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
113
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
2
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
88
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
6
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


In the Region: Putnam County; Watchtower Project Grows in Patterson
NINE years ago, when the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society -- Jehovah's Witnesses -- bought 670 acres in the Town of Patterson in Putnam County for an educational center, residents were worried about the effect on their pastoral community.
Today, even though half the complex has been completed, residents are still waiting to feel the effects.


Struggle in the Balkans; U.S. SAYS BELGRADE JOINED IN ATTACKS
United States officials said today that military forces from Serbia had joined Bosnian Serbs in attacking Bosnian forces in the recent fighting in eastern Bosnia.
They said Serbian artillery had fired across the border at Srebrenica, the besieged Muslim town.
And according to intelligence reports, Serbian Army tanks and artillery units had also joined in the attack.


South Beach View From Knoxville
To the Editor:
You are sitting, reading The Times on a balmy spring day in Knoxville, Tenn., when you come across the article about South Beach ("Why Won't South Beach Go Away?" March 21).


Kim Cochrane and Robert C. Field 3d
CAPT.
KIM COCHRANE, 28, recently returned from Somalia, where she commanded 145 soldiers whose main duty was to escort truckloads of food inland from the port at Mogadishu, past countless bandits and ambushes.
In the Persian Gulf war, her Military Police platoon accompanied ammunition trucks from Saudi Arabia to Iraq, often driving across the desert at night with no headlights, dining on M.R.E.'s (meals, ready to eat).
"They're pretty good for meals in plastic bags that are five years old," she said.


How an Old Thing Can Be New and Enticing
ONE recent weekend morning, I suited up (warm jacket, head scarf, mud boots) to investigate my theory that April, despite its reputation for being cruel and a bit damp, is the best month for antiques-picking in New York City.
The boots were needed because, in spring, the world tends to be puddlewonderful (apologies to E. E. Cummings) and the half-dozen or so parking lots and schoolyards in Manhattan where flea markets have established themselves are no exception.


With Oilfields as Battleground, Colombia Adopts New Tactics in Rebel War
With guerrillas waging war on Colombia's vital oil industry, the authorities are fighting back with a new strategy that relies on economic tools like setting bounty for rebels and freezing assets of extortion targets.
Much the way American businesses use cost-benefit analysis to evaluate pollution, Colombian officials now weigh counterinsurgency plans in terms of economic loss and gain.
Here in the eastern foothills of the Andes, the benefit of protecting the oil industry is obvious: a newly discovered underground sea of two billion barrels of light crude.


Corrections
A subheading last Sunday in an article about the Internal Revenue Service's plans to hire private debt collectors misidentified the source of criticism of the I.R.S.'s collection process.
It was an official in the General Accounting Office, not in the I.R.S.


Democracy Struggles With Old Problems in Nepal
Three years after they were swept into power on the tide of widespread protests against the monarchy, Nepal's elected leaders are struggling with problems familiar to many democracies: meeting the high expectations of voters and coping with political rivalries.
"Sometimes, I think it was better when we were in the opposition," said an aide to Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala, who is under attack from two rivals within his own Nepali Congress Party as well as the opposition.


Montana Makes His Choice: the Chiefs
Joe Montana has all but severed his tie to the 49ers.
Wined and dined for a month by four other National Football League teams, the 36-year-old quarterback reached a verbal agreement yesterday with the Kansas City Chiefs, ostensibly ending his storied career in San Francisco.
Montana, the three-time Super Bowl most valuable player, chose the Chiefs over the Phoenix Cardinals yesterday morning and then flew to the Youngstown, Ohio, home of the 49ers' owner, Edward DeBartolo Jr.
There, Montana asked DeBartolo -- his boss since 1979 -- to trade him to the Chiefs, although 49ers officials said DeBartolo pleaded for Montana to reverse his decision and remain in San Francisco.


Border War Redux
A NEW chapter is being written in the long-running border war between New York and New Jersey.
Angered by a recently enacted New York State law that requires New Jersey limousine operators to license their vehicles and drivers in New York City if they want to pick up passengers there, New Jersey officials are preparing to impose similar regulations on New York limousines that venture into New Jersey.


Sports of The Times; Juan Gonzalez: So Good So Young
OUTSIDE the Texas Rangers' clubhouse, Juan Gonzalez suddenly recognized two New York City policemen with a Puerto Rican heritage, embraced them and spoke to them in Spanish.
But now the lean 23-year-old left fielder whose 43 homers led the American League last season was sitting in the small television studio in the Yankee Stadium catacombs.
"I need to talk English and understand the people in this country for better communication," he was saying in English.
"It's very important for marketing, for newspapers, TV, radio, commercials, whatever."


Short Cuts in One Firm's Paper Trail
Patrick J. Walsh, the director of human resources at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, was shocked.
With business booming, the investment bank's plans had called for hiring a few more people.
But for the first quarter, employment actually fell -- a testimony to the company's success in streamlining the way it does its work.
Step by step, like private investigators, Merrill Lynch staff members had traced the paths that documents traveled, items from stock and bond purchases to new customer accounts to resumes.
They were amazed to discover how many unnecessary places and hands they passed through.


Craftsmanship
To the Editor:
Is Ellen Barkin difficult?  [ "Ellen Barkin: Is She Difficult or Just Straight Outta Queens?" April 4 ] .
Try this on.
Some years ago, when she was still pretty much unknown, Ms.
Barkin had three short scenes in a television movie of which I was co-author and a producer.
The part was that of an artisan who lived and worked in a loft in SoHo.
The craft was never mentioned in the dialogue, nor would the actress be called upon to practice it.
But as a help to the set decorator, the scene description called for a loom somewhere in the background.


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
I was quite disturbed that the Ms.
Foundation is not sponsoring a more gender-neutral day such as "Take Our
Children


Boning Up on Shad
As the banks of the Hudson thaw, the sound of the river softens, blurring for a few weeks the boundary between water and land.
For as long as its history has been recorded, Hudson River shad has been a symbol of a world warming and stirring.
Bucking the runoff from the Adirondacks to make their way upstream, the shad are propelled, writes Robert H. Boyle in "The Hudson River" by "ancestral fury."
On the river bank, meanwhile, their nemesis, the fishermen, seem caught in an equally instinctive dance as they mend their gill nets and sharpen their knives.
The river men scrutinize the surface of the water for the swarms of caddis and shad flies that a warm sun brings.
They sand pine planks for smoking the fish and scrub the flat tin drums on which the roe is fried.
But mainly they study the river bank for the yellow forsythia and the white-budded shadbush that blossom when the water rises above 50, sending the shad in search of a flat, shallow spawning ground.


THEATER
April
"AIN'T BROADWAY GRAND." Mike Burstyn stars as the flamboyant producer Mike Todd in a new musical that wants to evoke the splashy, pulchritudinous musicals Todd himself put on in the 1930's and 40's.
The score is by Mitch Leigh, the lyrics are by Lee Adams, and the book is by Mr.
Adams and Thomas Meehan.
Lunt-Fontanne Theater, 205 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Opens tonight.
Tickets: $40 to $65.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"TOMMY." The Who's legendary rock opera, which started out in 1969 as a concept album, has been presented in a concert version and inspired both a movie and a ballet.
Now the composer Pete Townshend and the director Des McAnuff have turned it into a musical.
The title character is young Tommy Walker (Michael Cerveris), traumatized child, pinball wizard and saintly hero to a group of fanatical followers.
St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Currently in previews.
Opens April 22.
Tickets: $20 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"BLOOD BROTHERS." Although it won the 1983 Olivier Award, this British musical by Willy Russell ("Shirley Valentine," "Educating Rita") is just now crossing the Atlantic.
Set in Liverpool, it tells the story of the Johnstone twins, separated at birth.
One remains with his working-class mother; the other grows up in wealthy circumstances.
They meet, become blood brothers and fall in love with the same girl.
The British actor Con O'Neill recreates his performance as the poor twin.
Music Box Theater, 239 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Currently in previews.
Opens April 25.
Tickets: $40 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"SHAKESPEARE FOR MY FATHER." Lynn Redgrave remembers growing up with a celebrated father, who was, of course, the eminent actor Sir Michael Redgrave.
To help explain their relationship over the years, she draws extensively on scenes from Shakespeare's plays and, since this is a one-woman show, takes all the parts herself.
Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Previews begin April 20.
Opens April 26.
Tickets: $40 to $50.
Information: (212) 944-9450.
"AND BABY MAKES SEVEN." Paula Vogel, who likes to mix reality and fantasy in her plays, has written a comedy about two lesbians and a gay man who share a Greenwich Village walk-up.
One of the women, played by Cherry Jones, is expecting a baby.
Circle Repertory Company, at the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, West Village.
Previews begin April 21.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"KISS OF THE SPIDER WOMAN." You read the novel by Manuel Puig.
You saw the film that won William Hurt an Oscar.
Here's the musical, featuring a score by John Kander and Freb Ebb, and a book by Terrence McNally.
Brent Carver is cast as the gay prisoner in a Latin American jail who escapes the sordidness of his lot by dreaming of bygone days in the movies.
Anthony Crivello is his bitter cellmate, and Chita Rivera the movie star of his dreams.
The much-chevroned director Harold Prince has put it all together.
Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Previews begin Saturday.
Opens May 3.
Tickets: $35 to $65.
Information: (212) 563-2929.
"ANGELS IN AMERICA: A GAY FANTASIA ON NATIONAL THEMES." A sensation when it was produced at the Royal National Theater of Britain last year, "Millennium Approaches," the first part of Tony Kushner's two-part epic drama, takes a phantasmagoric look at politics and AIDS in the Reagan era.
The action unfolds in such diverse locales as New York, Salt Lake City, Antarctica and heaven.
Ron Leibman plays the lawyer Roy M. Cohn, the undisguised villain of the piece.
The director is George C. Wolfe, who wrote and directed "Jelly's Last Jam." Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Currently in previews.
Opens May 4. (Part II, "Perestroika," is scheduled to open in the fall.) Tickets: $7.50 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"PLAYBOY OF THE WEST INDIES." The Trinidadian playwright Mustapha Matura has taken "The Playboy of the Western World," J. M. Synge's classic comedy about an Irish blowhard who boasts that he has murdered his father, and transferred it to a fishing village in the Caribbean.
The lilting poetry is still there, only now it's Creole poetry.
Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.
Now in previews.
Opens May 9.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"LATER LIFE." At a cocktail party in Boston, a man (Charles Kimbrough) is introduced to a woman (Maureen Anderman) he hasn't seen since their first meeting, 30 years earlier in Italy.
They almost connected then.
And now?
The latest comedy from A. R. Gurney, the Boswell of the WASP set, is about romance, regrets and the road not taken.
Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
Previews begin April 30.
Opens May 23.
Tickets: $26.50.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
May
"PLAYLAND." The newest drama from South Africa's finest playwright, Athol Fugard, is set in an flea-bitten amusement park on New Year's Eve in 1989, where a white veteran of the border wars and a black security guard try to come to terms with each other.
Kevin Spacey and Frankie Faison star, under Mr.
Fugard's direction.
Manhattan Theater Club Stage II, 131 West 55th Street.
Previews begin May 18.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"SHE LOVES ME." Based on the popular films "The Shop Around the Corner," this 1963 Broadway musical by Joe Masteroff, Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick has long been a cult favorite.
Scott Ellis stages a long-overdue revival with a cast that includes Boyd Gaines, Judy Kuhn, Sally Mayes and Howard McGillin.
Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
Previews begin May 15.
Opens June 10; closes July 11.
Tickets: $35 until May 30; $50 through July 11.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
June
"A PERFECT GANESH." Two women, portrayed by Frances Sternhagen and Zoe Caldwell, take a trip to India in the newest work from Terrence McNally.
Fisher Stevens turns up as the various men -- some 20 of them -- they meet along the way.
Ganesh, it seems, is the Hindu god of good fortune, who also puts in an appearance in the play, to be directed by John Tillinger.
Manhattan Theater Club at City Center, Stage I, 131 West 55th Street.
Previews begin June 1.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 581-1212.


POSTINGS: Buildings on Staten Island; Pictures at an Exhibition
What is it about old buildings that makes them so compelling?
For the photographer Lisa Clifford, it is "something about the place they create, the force of character inherent in their survival and the effect they may have on a street, a square, a community and the people who inhabit the community."
In this case the community is Staten Island, and Ms.
Clifford's work may be seen as part of the exhibition "A Century Apart: The Buildings of Staten Island in Photographs by Alice Austen and Lisa Clifford," which has just opened at the Alice Austen House.


Life Lacks Warmth in 20-Something Movies
Bridget Fonda as a waitress in "Singles": "I'm 23. I think time is running out to do something bizarre."
Bridget Fonda as a waitress in "Bodies, Rest and Motion," when her lover says, "I'm the one": "I'm 28 years old. I've had lots of ones."


Heading Off Trouble Before It Starts
KELLY JOHNSON has ambitious plans for the youths of this city and burns with a determination to make things happen.
As the full-time administrator of New Rochelle's Youth Bureau, he has pledged to "give kids a role with the city," at the same time telling young people that their hometown has changed for the better.
Last spring, after the first verdict in the Rodney King beating case touched off days of rioting in Los Angeles, about 100 young people took to the streets for five hours here, breaking windows, smashing cars and setting a fire.
The outbreak reminded people that "we're not that far from being an L.A. situation," Mr.
Johnson said recently.
"It made the city of New Rochelle realize that the same thing could happen here."


Frayed, Tattered And, Yes, Stylish
THERE are those who are as intrigued by the back of a tapestry as they are by the front.
This fashion is for them.
A new generation of European designers, called the deconstructionists, is treading the tattered fringe of fashion.
What looks like rebellion against couture standards is actually a celebration of the guts of garments.
Seams are on the outside, not hidden away.
Fabric is trimmed and left to fray in an uneven fringe, not forced beneath hem tape.
Rags from the cutting floor are laced and knotted into a raggedy crochet.
Led by the Belgian designer Martin Margiela, this new breed just respects the beauty of the torn hem as much as the tidy one.


Danna Greenberg, Michael Tobin
Carole Nagelsmith Greenberg of Greenwich, Conn., and Dr.
Richard Greenberg of Riverside, Conn., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Danna Nagelsmith Greenberg, and Michael Richard Tobin, the son of Lenore Kutlow Tobin of Westhampton, L.I., and Stuart Tobin of Aquebogue, L.I.
Ms.
Greenberg, 25, graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College and is a doctoral candidate in organizational studies at Boston College.
She is the stepdaughter of Michele Greenberg of Riverside.


Streetscapes: St. Peter's Hospital; Undoing a Disastrous Alteration
EVEN from blocks away, the gruesome slash of modern tan brick and the raw decapitation of the peaked roofline look like the architectural equivalent of a bloody car wreck.
That wreck was the 1964 alteration of the 1889 St.
Peter's Hospital in the Cobble Hill section of Brooklyn.
Now the Cobble Hill Nursing Home, trying to repair that damage, is facing an unexpected problem: Under current zoning, restoring the Romanesque-style building is illegal.


Anarchy and Plain Bad Luck
RED SORGHUM
A Novel of China.
By Mo Yan.
Translated by Howard Goldblatt. 359 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.50.


The Shamas and the Gravedigger
To the Editor:
DAVID L. COWEN Rossmoor, N.J.


If Purses Could Talk . . . Ah,
WAITING in line at a fashion show, five mavens in unison turn bottoms up.
Down on the ground go their handbags: a big squashy leather Louis Vuitton bucket, its string tie loosened as fingers scrabble into the depths; the faux and the real Kellys, side by side, redundant strap fastenings dangling free; the Prada duffel, bulging like a body bag in unlikely places; a leather shopper with double straps, heaved off a sagging shoulder.
The dig for victory over, five bent bodies straighten, faces flushed, invitations flourished like unearthed treasure.
Inside the show, the front-row clients have a different kind of purse -- neat boxy bags nesting on thin thighs.
The laps of luxury cradle one classic quilted chain-handled Chanel (the owner hasn't heard that anything that isn't Chanel-funk is out) and three conspicuously new Hermes Kelly bags, one in crocodile, one in burgundy-grained leather and one tan with a nasty scar across the flap.
From across the runway, it is easy to spot the Paloma Picasso purse (X marks the status symbol) and the Gianni Versace, hung with more Roman coins than you would find in the ashes of Pompeii.
Mostly the purses are discreetly classy -- a faint F for Fendi or G for Gucci stamped into the leather and tidy gilt trimmings.
Since they are all hand-held, sleek and small, they bleep out a single signal: my car, driver and well-filled tote are waiting outside.


It Lays Nest Eggs
The Maltese Falcon is still the stuff of dreams.
An extremely rare statuette of the falcon, used as a prop in the 1941 Humphrey Bogart film, has turned up.
It was bought for $8 at a flea market.


A Rain Forest Grows in Texas
A 40,000-square-foot rain forest housed within a 10-story glass pyramid opened late last month in Galveston, Tex.
The Rain Forest Pyramid is part of Moody Gardens, a 142-acre complex whose other attractions include elaborate gardens and nature trails, a petting zoo, an IMAX theater showing nature films on a huge screen, and a white-sand beach on a lushly landscaped outlet of the Gulf of Mexico.
Inside the pyramid, more than 1,000 species of plants indigenous to Costa Rica, Mexico, Panama, the Philippines, Peru, Puerto Rico and Hawaii grow alongside pools of tropical fish and perched and wading birds, including macaws, ibises, hummingbirds and spoonbills.
A gentle rain, created by periodic mistings evokes the atmosphere of a rain forest.


Corrections
A front-page chart with the Market Watch column last Sunday misstated the Dow Jones industrial average's gain for the week.
It was 25.67 points, not 126.67.


Verdict in Los Angeles; NEW YORK GREETS VERDICTS QUIETLY
Calm prevailed across the New York metropolitan area after the verdicts in the Los Angeles beating case yesterday, but emotions were sharply mixed as public officials, spiritual and civil-rights leaders and many ordinary people voiced relief, praise, anger and disappointment over the mosaic outcome.
The verdict -- two white officers guilty and two acquitted of Federal civil-rights charges in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King in 1991 -- was the topic of the day for people across the region, as it was for millions of Americans a year after straight acquittals in a state trial that led to deadly riots in Los Angeles and other cities.


Denise E. Katsias and Elliot S. Smith
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Katsias of Virginia Beach, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Denise Eleni Katsias, to First Lieut.
Elliot Stowers Smith of the Marine Corps, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Stowers Smith of Houston.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Katsias, 26, is a candidate for an M.B.A. at the University of Virginia.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her fiance.
Her parents own the Katsias Company, a commercial real-estate brokerage in Virginia Beach.


If This Is Spring, There Are Shows
IN this season of stamp shows, dealers are hoping to encourage an interest in collecting among newcomers who have been attracted by the hoopla surrounding the Elvis Presley stamp issued Jan. 8.
Stamp shows have largely replaced retail stores as suppliers of hobby materials.
The typical show is held in a school or a hotel, where perhaps a score of dealers set up business temporarily.
At some sites, there are shows as frequently as once a month.


2 Gay Adoption Cases Go to Appeals Courts
Appellate courts in two states are to decide whether a person in a long-term homosexual relationship can adopt the children of the partner.
The Vermont Supreme Court and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Appeals Court each have before them a case in which a lesbian has asked to become the adoptive parent of her partner's children.
The rulings later this year will be the nation's first appellate-level decisions on the issue.


Public &amp; Private; What You See
I remember visiting an apartment in Brooklyn several years ago that had almost no furniture except for two televisions.
There were two of them because one was broken but was used as a stand for the working one.
The TV provided background music to fractious family life and copacetic child care, little eyes glassy in the reflected glare.
But it also brought the world into a place where most people were afraid to go out after nightfall.
Or at least the slice of the world that television shows, which had about as much to do with the life of this family as an Amy Fisher mini-series has to do with "Masterpiece Theater." The image of the two televisions stayed with me, a symbol of how powerful TV is in the lives of so many families just like that one.


Debra Ginsberg, John Goldenberg
Debra L. Ginsberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Ginsberg of New York and Rancho Mirage, Calif., was married yesterday evening to John A. Goldenberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Goldenberg of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Martin Zion performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Goldenberg is a partner and design director at Crossroads/J.
G.
Hook Accessories in New York, where her father is the chairman.
She graduated from Tulane University.


APRIL 11-17: Endangered Species Act; Babbitt Gets Between a Bird And a Logging Company
The endangered red cockaded woodpecker, which dwells in the forests of the Deep South, hasn't yet achieved the notoriety of the Pacific Northwest's spotted owl.
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt intends to keep it that way.
Last week Mr.
Babbitt signed a novel agreement with the Georgia Pacific Corporation to protect between 300 and 400 woodpeckers that reside on the company's extensive forest lands in Arkansas, the Carolinas, Louisiana and Mississippi.
The plan calls for the company to halt logging on 10 acres that immediately surround each of 110 colonies of woodpeckers on its land.
Georgia Pacific will then establish a 510-acre buffer zone around each colony; it can cut timber there, though more carefully, said company executives.


Health Advice Now Sent by Fax
Timely health advice for travelers going overseas is now available by fax from the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The service, operable from push-button telephones, is a logical follow-up to the automated voice line established three years ago.
An advantage is that the fax line allows a traveler to order authoritative printed material to guide a physician unfamiliar with tropical medicine or needing vaccine information for a particular area of the world.
A secondary advantage is that while your call to the C.D.C. is a toll call to Atlanta, the Government pays the cost of transmitting the fax sheets to you in return.
A drawback is that if you receive faxes at a shop that charges for each sheet, you do not know before you order how many sheets there will be, and there may be as many as 10.
Like the voice line, the fax line operates 24 hours day, and it will be less expensive to call in the evening or on weekends.


Madeleine Cryan, Clarence Hahn
Madeleine S. Cryan, a senior financial analyst for the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, was married yesterday to Clarence Chisong Hahn, a management consultant for A. T. Kearney Inc., a management consulting company.
Both work in New York.
The ceremony was performed there by the Rev.
Melvin Hawthorne, the chaplain of the nondenominational chapel of the Church Center for the United Nations.
Mrs.
Hahn, 35, graduated from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is the daughter of Rosemary Cryan of Aberdeen, N.J., and the late John Joseph Cryan.
Her mother, who is retired, was a home health worker for Family and Children Services of Monmouth County (N.J.).


POP/JAZZ
Wednesday
COP SHOOT COP, the Grand, 76 East 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 777-0600.
Cop Shoot Cop uses noise where other bands use melody, hurling imprecations over relentless riffs from bass, synthesizers, drums and metallic percussion.
The music growls and crunches, as implacable as it is spartan. 9 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Friday
GEORGE CLINTON AND THE P-FUNK ALL-STARS, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
His riffs have been sampled by nearly everyone in hip-hop, his ideas taken up by performers ranging from the Red Hot Chili Peppers to En Vogue.
But George Clinton still leads America's best polymorphous funk band, which takes off on three-hour jams full of humor, sly guitar interchanges, silly costumes and serious hip-shaking rhythm.
Midnight.
Tickets: $22 and $29.50.
EINSTURZENDE NEUBATEN, Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 249-8870.
Bashing on pieces of metal, adding dissonant guitars and guttural voices, Einsturzende Neubaten (the name is German for "collapsing new buildings") has recreated rock as a strategic irritant since the band was formed in 1980.
Although the band now channels some noise into ominous songs, it still knows how to derail expectations. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 in advance; $19 on day of show.
Friday and Saturday
SUN RA'S ARKESTRA, at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, at Mulberry Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
From swing-band riffs to "Space Is the Place," Sun Ra's Arkestra carries big-band music to realms both idiosyncratic and transcendent.
The two-night "Sun Ra-a-Thon," a benefit to defray Sun Ra's hospital bills, will combine the Arkestra with well-known guests including Andrew Cyril and many of the group's illustrious alumni.
Shows begin at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
April 27
ROSSY, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
One of Madagascar's top rock performers, who infuses brisk folk-rock with local influences.
Shows at 9 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
April 27 to May 2
BOBBY WATSON, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
The alto saxophonist Bobby Watson plays fervent hard-bop with his quartet, Horizon, from April 27 to 29; then, from April 30 to May 2, he expands the group to a big band to play music from his latest album, "Tailor Made." Shows at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.; also at 1 A.M. on April 30 and May 1.
Admission: weeknights, $15 with a $7.50 drink minimum; weekends, $15 with a $10 minimum.
April 30
MUHAL RICHARD ABRAMS QUARTET, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, at Mulberry Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
A pianist and composer with the entire history of jazz in his fingers and an ear for large-scale structures.
Sets at 9 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $10 in advance; $12 at the door.
April 30 to May 1
SOLOMON BURKE, Tramps, 54 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
After a string of soul hits in the 1960's, Solomon Burke went back to preaching, and on club dates he does a little of both.
But Burke, the ardent, gospel-charged tenor that made "Everybody Needs Somebody to Love" and "Got to Get You Off of My Mind" still soars.
Sets at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
May 14 to 23
COUNTRY TAKES MANHATTAN.
Radio City Music Hall jumps on the country-music bandwagon with a series of concerts at various halls.
Among the most promising is Dolly Parton at Carnegie Hall on May 14; for all her professional cuteness, she can still find the emotional center of a song. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Mary-Chapin Carpenter, Joe Ely, Lucinda Williams and Rodney Crowell -- four smart songwriters who know how to use a twang -- are to perform May 15 at 8 P.M. at Radio City Music Hall.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Clint Black and Wynonna Judd, performing May 18 and 19 at 8 P.M. at Radio City Music Hall, combine old-fashioned honky-tonk with modernizing rock touches.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
Willie Nelson, John Anderson and Asleep at the Wheel, at Radio City on May 22 at 8 P.M., dip into jazzy western swing along with honky-tonk; Mr.
Anderson and Mr.
Nelson were traditionalists long before Nashville discovered "new traditionalism." And on May 23, Mr.
Nelson, Waylon Jennings, Johnny Cash and Kris Kristofferson, jointly known as the Highwaymen, will play a benefit concert at Central Park Summerstage, at Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street. 3 P.M.
Tickets: $23 in advance, and $25 the day of the show.
Information:(212) 632-4085.
May 27
BOOZOO CHAVIS, Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 245-2950.
Boozoo Chavis's distinctive zydeco breaks free of the standard waltzes and two-steps to create a modal, Afro-Celtic hybrid that's still as down-home as a hole in a shoe.
Shows at 9 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $15.


30-Something Get-Together: A Scorecard
They were young together; now they're older.
Something has brought them to the same house for just a few days.
They eat, drink, make love, revert to past behaviors and talk their pet issues to death.
In 1990, when John Sayles created seven former student radicals who had once been arrested together in Secaucus, N.J., this was a new idea.
Now it's a genre.
But never let it be said that all reunion movies are exactly alike.
Times change but the plots barely do, as is evident int he latest entry, "Indian Summer," which opens on Friday.
Here are some of the elements that have made the four films memorable.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
NORTHERN LULLABY.
By Nancy White Carlstrom.
Illustrated by Leo Dillon and Diane Dillon.
Philomel. $15.95. (Ages 3 to 8) The lush airbrush and watercolor illustrations for this murmuring text of good-nights addressed to Papa Star, Mama Moon, Great Moose Uncle, Auntie Willow, Sister Owl and others capture images of the Alaskan night in icy pastel tones.


Manager's Profile; Caesar Bryan
Fund: Lexington Strategic Investments, the top performer in the first quarter, up 72.7 percent; $20 million in assets; manager since April 1992. (Sponsor: Lexington Management, Saddle Brook, N.J.)
Born: Dec. 23, 1954; Mauritius.


A CALMING OF THE MIND
For any who are moved to try meditation after reading Daniel Goleman's article "A Slow, Methodical Calming of the Mind" (March 21), it is important to note that much of the time one spends in meditation is spent in sheer boredom.
Meditation can help us to cope with pain; it can help us to relax; by teaching us to become mindful, it can enrich our lives in many ways.
But novice meditators should know that a large part of the challenge is in sitting through the boredom.
LEE WEINBERG
New York, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Can Rangers Ever Reach Stability?
THE frightening thing for the Rangers' fans is the evidence that hockey really does produce dynasties.
The best organizations, the ones that have a clue, actually stay at the Stanley Cup level for many years.
You don't catch lightning at the blue line.
There is no quick fix.
Mark Messier was part of a dynasty in the city of Edmonton; Mike Keenan came very close in the cities of Philadelphia and Chicago; but there is no tangible reason why it should happen on Seventh Avenue between 31st and 33d Streets, unless you believe in Tinker Bell and Peter Pan and saying, "Gee, the Rangers gotta win the Stanley Cup one of these years."


Deirdre Curtin, Thomas Hommel
Deirdre Claire Curtin, an assistant vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Edward Hommel, a senior vice president there in the company's office of the general counsel.
The Rev.
Francis J. Stinner, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph in Bronxville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hommel, 30, graduated from Rosemont College.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Brian J. Curtin of Bronxville, N.Y.
Her father is an emeritus surgeon director at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital, and an associate professor of clinical ophthalmology at Columbia University, both in New York.


Age Cannot Wither Her, Nor Custom Stale
MONDO BARBIE
Edited by Lucinda Ebersole and Richard Peabody. 185 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press.
Paper, $12.95.


On Sunday; For Watchers Of Buttafuocos, It's a Career
It was only 11 A.M., but already the New York press corps was working on the day's seventh photo opportunity of Joey and Mary Jo Buttafuoco walking somewhere.
"Don't push in, please!" Capt.
Bob Smith, a court officer, pleaded with the press from the top of the Nassau County courthouse steps here.
"I don't want anyone hurt." He'd said this 100 times, and of course, the instant the Buttafuocos walked somewhere, everyone pushed in.
Journalists had arrived in Massapequa at 7 A.M. on Thursday to catch the Buttafuocos walking from their house to their car.
"Joey came out at about 8:10 or 8:15 -- I wasn't really looking at my watch," said Mike Alexander of The Associated Press.
"I kept the camera on him, moving toward him slowly. He was putting a duffel in the trunk. I try not to be too intrusive.


Wildflowers Bring Color to the Season
THE garden is waking up from its long winter rest.
All kinds of little evidences of new life are appearing.
It is a time for everyone to be careful when working outside, lest a delicate plant be trampled.
This is also a time of great anticipation.
Visits to the garden are important now just to see what is coming along.
Day by day things change.
Many of spring's loveliest flowers last but a few days and unless the gardener is alert to what is coming up and leafing out, some of these beautiful flowers could be missed.


Struggle in the Balkans; U.N., With Abstention by Russia, Tightens Its Sanctions on Belgrade
After a day of tense negotiations, the United Nations Security Council brushed aside a new cease-fire agreement in the battered Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica and voted late tonight to impose Draconian new sanctions on the rump Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro.
Russia had fought hard to delay the vote until after the April 25 referendum on President Boris N. Yeltsin and his economic reforms because his nationalist opponents sympathize with the Serbs.
But after hours of brinkmanship, Russia finally accepted defeat and abstained instead of using its Security Council veto to block the new sanctions.
China also abstained.


Budget Peace In Trenton Looks Shaky
A few months ago, Republican lawmakers pledged to work with the state's Democratic Governor, Jim Florio, to avoid the much-maligned specter of political gridlock in an election year.
Now they are changing their tune.
"I am not saying that the era of good feeling, rapprochement, and so forth is over," said Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, the Republican Budget Officer in the Assembly, in an interview this week.
"But we have the obligation to take further steps to control the size of the state government. And yes, there could be friction."


VIDEO
April
"NIGHT AND THE CITY." The lawyer Harry Fabian (Robert De Niro), a glad-handing, ambulance-chasing kind of guy, fancies himself a boxing promoter in Irwin Winkler's remake of the 1950 Jules Dassin film.
Richard Price's dazzlingly contemporary screenplay has a bad habit of burying the finer plot points in windy monologues, but it still manages a "lively, gripping foray into the urban landscape" (Janet Maslin). 1992.
Fox. $94.98. 103 minutes.
Rated R.
"SCHOOL TIES." David Greene (Brendan Fraser) is handsome and smart, and a great quarterback.
He's also Jewish, an irreparable offense at a snobbish New England prep school, where his classmates crack anti-Semitic jokes and ready themselves for the Ivy League.
With this issue to tie into, Robert Mandel's film concentrates instead on a "leafy, genteel look that is somehow less than convincing" (Maslin). 1992.
Paramount.
No suggested price. 109 minutes.
PG-13.
"A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME." Errol Morris's study of the physicist Stephen Hawking sidesteps the difficulties of Mr.
Hawking's book to present a lively examination of the man, his work, and a coterie of associates and friends.
Ideas seem less important in a "kind of adventure that seldom reaches the screen" (Vincent Canby). 1992.
Paramount.
No suggested price. 80 minutes.
No rating.
May
"THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN." As a Congressman, the newly elected Thomas Jefferson Johnson (Eddie Murphy) strives for the same objectives, generally speaking, as he had in his phone-sex business: shake down the johns.
That he eventually succumbs to an attack of concern for the downtrodden is a predictable dose of the upbeat in a "low comedy of a highly entertaining order" (Canby). 1992.
Hollywood.
No suggested price. 105 minutes.
R.
"A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT." Norman Maclean's acclaimed family memoir is lovingly treated in Robert Redford's film about youth and the lessons passed between generations on the trout streams of Montana.
But what was a suspenseful puzzle gracefully constructed on the page becomes merely sturdy and earnest on the screen in "a loose series of handsome tableaux" (Maslin). 1992.
Columbia Tri-Star.
No suggested price. 123 minutes.
PG.
"GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS." Times are tough in the real-estate business on the North Side of Chicago in James Foley's film, adapted from David Mamet's 1984 Broadway play.
Dispatched to put some upward curve into revenue figures, Blake (Alec Baldwin) goads a desperate, down-and-dirty sales team -- including the slick Ricky Roma (Al Pacino) and the beleaguered Shelley Levine (Jack Lemmon) -- in a "mordantly funny 'Death of a Salesman' for the 90's" (Canby). 1992.
LIVE. $94.98. 100 minutes.
R.
"HOFFA." Jack Nicholson is the labor leader in a gigantic powerhouse of a performance.
David Mamet's screenplay neither sentimentalizes Hoffa nor analyzes his do-unto-others-before-they-do-unto-you philosophy.
Although Danny DeVito's film simplifies and foreshortens history, it "is conceived with imagination and a consistent point of view" (Canby). 1992.
Fox. $94.98. 110 minutes.
R.
"TOYS." The sweetly madcap Leslie Zevo (Robin Williams) tries to wrest his father's toy factory from his uncle, the mad General Zevo (Michael Gambon), who would like to turn the place into a weapons factory.
Barry Levinson's film is determined to have fun, but a crazed sort of gaiety backfires as "whimsy takes over, nausea threatens and patience runs out" (Canby). 1992.
Fox. $94.98. 110 minutes.
PG-13.
"USED PEOPLE." A Jewish widow (Shirley MacLaine) hooks up with a courtly Italian (Marcello Mastroianni) amid much clucking and kvetching from family and friends (Kathy Bates, Marcia Gay Harden, Jessica Tandy).
But not even they can save a film in which "the grotesque far outweighs the funny" (Maslin). 1992.
Fox. $94.98. 115 minutes.
PG-13.
June
"HOWARDS END." With a screenplay by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, James Ivory's film adapts E. M. Forster's novel of Edwardian England's drawing-room wars.
Emma Thompson and Helena Bonham Carter are the brainy, headstrong Schlegel sisters in a lush re-creation that may sometimes sag with wisteria but "need apologize only for its high spirits and the consistency of its intelligence" (Canby). 1992.
Columbia Tri-Star.
No suggested price. 145 minutes.
PG.


Elsie Watkins, James Patrick
Elsie Katherine Watkins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick D. Watkins of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to James McLaughlin Patrick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Patrick of New Philadelphia, Ohio.
The Rev.
Peter Grandy performed the ceremony at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church in Hartford.
Mrs.
Patrick is a legal administrator in the Stamford, Conn., office of Day, Berry &amp; Howard, a Hartford law firm.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father, a retired president of the Aetna Insurance Company, is the chairman of the Terra Nova Insurance Company in London.


Megan DeMott, David Quigley
Prof.
Benjamin DeMott, the social and literary critic, and Margaret DeMott of Worthington, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Megan Lenoir DeMott to David Vincent Quigley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick Quigley of Fair Haven, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
DeMott, 29, and Mr.
Quigley, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College.
Ms.
DeMott is a substitute teacher at Public School 130 in Brooklyn and a graduate student in education at Hunter College.
Her father, the author of "The Imperial Middle: Why Americans Can't Think Straight About Class," retired from Amherst College as the Mellon Professor of Humanities Emeritus.


At the Coachman Hotel De Facto Permanence
IT takes imagination to see a playground's swings and slides where there is nothing but a parking lot strewn with broken glass and garbage or to hear the sounds of hammers and saws in the familiar spring symphony of renovation, instead of the frustrated shouts of tired mothers trying to shepherd their children back to their rooms.
Under a plan first proposed last year by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, those are the sights and sounds that the homeless families living in the Coachman Hotel might have expected by now.


Julia Bator, Carles Duggan
Mrs.
Philip B. Kurland of Chicago has announced the engagement of her daughter, Julia Franciska Bator, to Charles S. Duggan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Duggan of New York and Boca Raton, Fla..
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Bator is a teacher at the Zervas School, an elementary school in Newton, Mass.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, the late Paul M. Bator, was a professor of law at the University of Chicago The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Mr.
Kurland of Chicago.


Peek at Whitman Wealth Puts a Foe on the Attack
Christine Todd Whitman, a candidate for the New Jersey Republican Party's gubernatorial nomination, gave a cursory peek at her personal finances last week, and it was enough to make her political opponents gasp.
Mrs.
Whitman's campaign reported that she and her husband, John, had an estimated 1992 income of $3.7 million and had paid $1,028,568 in Federal taxes and $255,000 in state income taxes.
They also paid real-estate taxes of $39,551.


Despite Surgery, Johnson Rolls On
The Nascar owner JUNIOR JOHNSON, a legendary figure on the Winston Cup circuit, said yesterday that he did not plan to retire despite undergoing surgery last month.
Johnson, 60, who underwent the bypass surgery in early March at Duke University Medical Center to correct several blocked arteries, said he feels great.
Johnson, whose Winston Cup cars have won 136 races in 751 starts for more than $17.5 million, said he was disappointed by this year's showings but denied a report that he's considering selling his racing teams.


Cutchogue Has Diner Dating From 1941
I read with interest "Diner Food With Personal Touch"  [ March 28 ] .
There is, however, a point about which I must take umbrage.
The statement about "Long Island's oldest diner" cannot be correct.


Vichy France's Complicity With Nazis Has Long Been Known; Digging in the 50's
To the Editor:
Your April 7 front page article on researches in France's World War II archives stunned me.
I could have helped Kurt Werner Schaechter if he had started his quest 30 years ago.


2 Arrested in Bronx Killing
Investigators arrested two men in the shooting death of a longtime Bronx bar owner, who was slain a week ago as he was picking up a supply of liquor with his wife and an employee, a police spokesman said yesterday.
The suspects, Miguel Vasquez, 26 years old, of 4575 Park Avenue in the East Tremont section of the Bronx, and Eddie Dobbinson, 21, of 225 East 163 Street in Manhattan, were charged in the death of James Kevin Ahern, 58, the owner of the Derby Pub in Norwood.
Mr.
Ahern was confronted by four men a week ago Saturday in a robbery outside a liquor store in the Fordham section about 10:40 P.M.
He was shot once in the chest and was pronounced dead less than a half-hour later at Jacobi Hospital.


Japanese Store In New York
On April 23, with a ribbon-cutting ceremony that will include Mayor David Dinkins, the Takashimaya Company, Japan's largest department store chain, is opening a specialty store and art gallery in New York.
At 693 Fifth Avenue, between 54th and 55th Streets, the new 20-story Takashimaya Building will also house the company's United States headquarters.
Takashimaya New York, which will occupy seven floors, will specialize in home furnishings and fashion accessories.
The store will also have an art gallery, common in Japanese department stores.
The Takashimaya Company runs 18 department stores in Japan and more than 50 specialty stores around the world.
Its specialty store in New York, on Fifth Avenue and 43d Street, will be absorbed into the new store.


Stripe Up The Pants
Long, vertical-striped trousers are separating the classic pants-wearers from those in search of trendy eye-catching styles.
Now that trousers are a fashion force, the newest twists are those in bold black, white and navy patterns that give the wearer the illusion of elongation and slimness.
The striped trousers take many different shapes, from second-skin leggings to a roomier, drain-pipe design.
The most striking are the flaring bell-bottoms.
Fabrics are both printed and woven.
The pants become a stem to a variety of jacket styles, sweaters and ponchos.
Some wearers sport matching striped jackets, or jackets of a different stripe, carrying the elongation to its extreme.
A group of three wearers (above) presented a striking effect as they stood against a railing.


They May Be 'Blood Brothers' But Class Will Tell
"An Englishman's way of speaking absolutely classifies him;/ The moment he talks he makes some other Englishman despise him." So sang Professor Higgins in "My Fair Lady." If accents continue to divide person from person in Britain, so do educational backgrounds, eating habits, drinking preferences, hair styles, pets, games, furniture, body language and a hundred other things.
From John Osborne's "Look Back in Anger" to Caryl Churchill's "Top Girls," from Alan Ayckbourn's "Absurd Person Singular" to David Hare's "Plenty," there is hardly a modern English play of any significance (or insignificance) in which the characters are not sniffing out one another's class signals as if to establish who is the mongrel and who the pedigree poodle.
Seldom can that have been more obviously the case than in Willy Russell's "Blood Brothers," the musical opening on Broadway next Sunday at the Music Box Theater.
Liverpool twins who are separated as infants accidentally meet and become friends.
Mickey (played by Con O'Neill) is brought up in poverty, goes to an inferior school, loses his dead-end job and slips into crime.
Edward (Mark Michael Hutchinson) rises to local eminence, thanks to a posh education and all the advantages of wealth.
But can the affinity they feel when they meet transcend the built-in bitterness of class?
Part folk tale, part social document, "Blood Brothers" tries to answer that question.
With Stephanie Lawrence as the tormented mother, the show also features music and lyrics by the author.


Bosnia: What Bill Clinton Can Do
With Serbian forces closing their noose around the refugee-swelled Bosnian town of Srebrenica, anguished voices cry out for urgent military intervention to save lives.
Margaret Thatcher, scaldingly likening her Conservative successor and other European leaders to "accomplices to massacre," calls for "aggressive" air strikes against Serbian positions and a lifting of the arms embargo that prevents Bosnians from effectively defending themselves.
"We cannot go on like this," she insists.
"It is evil."


Linear Thinking
What is a stripe anyway but a streak of color that adds zip to even the raciest-looking sportswear.


ART
Today "THINKING IS FORM: THE DRAWINGS OF JOSEPH BEUYS," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
As a sculptor, performance artist and teacher, Joseph Beuys tried to redefine art, but on paper his spidery drifting line can be positively Old Masterish.
Arranged rather pointlessly around an enormous installation piece involving blackboard drawings, this exhibition spans more than three decades of works that especially in the early years ar often exquisite.
Through May 4.
Also at the Modern: "MAX ERNST: DADA AND THE DAWN OF SURREALISM." An in-depth loook at the early development (1912 to 1927) of an artist of implicitly Surrealist sensibility, who also seems to presage post-modernism in his avoidance of a signature style and his use of existing images.
Included are wonderful little Expressionistic paintings, startlingly seamless collages and the paintings of the early 20's, which are often memorable for their glowing colors as much as for their haunting scenes and juxtapositions.
Through May 2.
Also at the Modern: "JOHN HEARTFIELD: PHOTO-MONTAGES." A Berlin Dadaist who understood the threat of Nazism from the first instance, John Heartfield (1891-1968) helped invent photomontage and used it to fight for Germany's consciousness and soul.
His bitterly satirical, passionately clear-sighted and brilliantlycomposed images, which appeared on book covers and left-wing magazines, are poltical art.
This exhibition is the first full-scale surveyof Heartfield's achievement in the United States.
Through July 6.
Hours: Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Fridays through Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Wednesdays.
Admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
"SPLENDID LEGACY: THE HAVEMEYER COLLETION," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Call it an inhouse blockbuster, a museum-within-a-museum or full disclosure.
This show presents the cornucopia of paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints and decorative objects that the American sugar baron H.O.
Havemeyer and his prescient wife, Louisine, gave the Metropolitan in the decades around the turn of the century.
From Rembrandt and El Greco to numerous works by Courbet, Degas, Cezanne and the Impressionists, form Japanese screens and Chinese vases to Islamic ceramics, it is a staggering exhibition.
It tells a tale of esthetic passion, opulent living and tremendous public spirit, while also outlining much of the history of art in fine style.
Through June 20.
Also at the Met: "THE GREEK MIRACLE: CLASSICAL SCULPTURE FROM THE DAWN OF DEMOCRACY, THE FIFTH CENTURY B.C." Despite its overblown title and flimsy thesis, this exhibition offers a rare chance to see some of the most esteemed masterpieces of Classical Greek sculpture on American soil, and under exceptionally good viewing conditions: in the natural light of the Lehman Wing.
The idealized male nude known as "Kritios Boy" is here, as are "Nike (Victory) Unbinding Her Sandal" and a section of the Partheon frieze.
They probably won't be passing this way again.
Through May 23.
Also at the Met: "DAUMIER DRAWINGS." Daumier's skills as a caricaturist, with which he supported himself, are widelyappreciated, but the full extent of his drawing talent, his knowledge of art history, and his command of the human face and form can now be more thoroughlyappreciated, thanks to this survey (the first in the United States) of 100 works on paper, punctuated by several paintings, prints and bronzes.
Through May 2.
Also at the Met: "THE WAKING DREAM: PHOTOGRAPHY'S FIRST CENTURY." The invention of photography enabled the world to know itself in a new way, and that new knowledge illuminates this astounding exhibition.
With 253 often rare, usually breathtaking images from the Gilman Paper Company Collection, the show begins with some of the first photographs ever made, from England and France in the early 1840's, and ends with photography's artistic coming of age in the first decades of the 20th century.
It is a compelling in hand with the will to document and the desire to create.
Through July 4.
Hours: Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, days 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $6; $3 for the elderly and students.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
"PICASSO AND THE AGE OF IRON," Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
Through May 16.
Hours: daily except Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under age 7.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"1993 BIENNIAL EXHIBITION," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
With a heavy emphasis on preachy, often language-laden political art, this exhibition sticks its neck out by having a much more distinct point of view than its predecessors.
The rsult is less a picture of the art of our time than of the times themselves, with genuine visual communication kept to a minimum; some of the best moments come in the show's unusuallygood film and video sections.
Lobby,second floor and film program, through June 13.
Third and fourth floors and video program, through June 20.Hours: Thursdays, 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $6 ($4 for the elderly and students).
Information: (212) 570-3676.
"CZECH CUBISM: ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN," Cooper-Hewitt National Musdeum of Design, 2 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
The invention of Cubism set off artistic aftershocks all over Europe, most fantastically in Czechoslovakia, where its effects were strongest in the applied arts, not the fine arts.
This exhibition of more than 100 drawings and objects created between 1910 and 1925 examines the flourishing of what might be called a Cubism of everday life; it includes furniture, ceramics and metalwork as well as architectural renderings of the Cubist buildings of Prague.
Through July 25.
Hours: Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1.50 students and the elderly; free onTuesdays after 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 860-6898.
"PHOTOGRAPHY IN CONTEMPORARY GERMAN ART: 1960 TO THE PRESENT," Guggenheim SoHo, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
The blossoming of German art over the last three decades is inseparable from the multifarious malleability of the photograph.
Including painters like Gerhard Richter and Sigmar Polke among its 19 artists, this exhibition elucidates the way artists inother media have made photography an essential part of their enterprise.
It alsogives equal time to relatively straightforward photographers, like Bernd and Hilla Becher, who have refused to see their metier as a second-class medium.
Through May 9.
Hours: Sundays, Mondays and Wednesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 10 P.M.; closed Tuesdays.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly; free for children under age 12.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"A GREAT LEGACY: MORGAN COLLECTIONS, 1913-1943," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
In the 30 years between J.P.
MorganSr.'s death and his own, J.P.
Morgan Jr. continued to add to the collection that his famous father had so grandly begun, making important acquisitions and opening the library to the public in 1924.
This exhibition of more than 300 works features illuminated manuscripts, rare printed books and autographed manuscripts; it is the first comprehensive display of the younger Morgan's collecting achievement.
Through Aug. 15.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested contribution: $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 685-0008.
"SECRECY: AFRICAN ART THAT CONCEALS AND REVEALS," Museum for African Art. 593 Broadway, near Pince Street, SoHo.
The inaugural exhibition of this renamed and relocated museum, formerly at 54 East 68th Street.
Includes nearly 100 extraordinary artworks from sub-Saharan Africa: masks, figures, textiles, architectural fragments and reliquary objects.
It takes visual power for granted to examine social power, placing innovative emphasis on the objects ritual uses and meanings and on the sacred secret knowledge often encoded in their patterns and forms.
Through Aug. 15.
Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 966-1313.
"BOB BISHOP: A LIFE IN AMERICAN FOLK ART," Museum of American Folk Art, 2 Lincoln Square, at 65th Street, Manhattan.
A tribute to Rboert Bishop, whodied last year after serving as director of the museum from 1977-1991, this exhibition commemorates both his impact on the museum's collection and on the definition of folk art itself.
Ranging from portraits by the 19th century artist Ammi Philips to Shaker seed boxes and including contemporary folk art, it offers something for every taste, purist and otherwise.
Through Sept. 12.
Hours: daily except Mondays, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Suggested donation: $2.
Information: (212)977-7298.
"LATIN AMERICA ARTISTS OF THE 20TH CENTURY," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
The largest survey of modern Latin American art ever assembled, this exibition begins with such early modernists as Diego Rivera and Joaquin Torres-Garcia and continues right up to the present with 300 works by more than 90 artists.
Through Sept. 7 Hours: Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Fridays through Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Wednesdays.
Admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Information: (212) 708-9480 June 13 "ELIJAH PIERCE: WOODCARVER," the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street.
On the centenary of Pierce's birth, a celebration of the 60-year career of one of America's premier self-taught artist, who specialized in carved and painted wood reliefs.
Through Aug. 22.
Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 1 to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission $5 for adults; $3 for students and the elderly; free under age 16.
Information: (212) 864-4500 RE-OPENING OF THE JEWISH MUSEUM, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, Manhattan.
After a two-and-a-half-year hiatus, during which the facade of its landmark Warburg Mansion was ingeniously cloned, the Jewish Museum will open in expanded and renovated quarterson upper Fifth Avenue.
The three-tiered inauguration will include the museum's largest-ever display of art antiquities and ceremonial objects from its permanent collection; a show of 100 recent aquisitions and promised gifts, frrom Bauhaus metalwork and paintings by Marc Chagall and Chaim Soutine to contemporary works by Ron Jones, R.M.
Fischer and Deborah Kass; and an international exibit titled "Inside Out: Eight Contemporary Artists," featuring works by Eleanor Antin, Christian Boltanski, Ilya Kabakov and nancy Spero.
Hours: Sundays, Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Closed Fridays and Saturdays.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.


Sanitation Cutbacks Hit Poorer Districts Hardest
The sharp cuts in New York City's sanitation budget during the fiscal crises of 1990-91 have hit poor, minority residents far harder than wealthier ones, scarring once-orderly blocks in neighborhoods like Harlem, Bedford-Stuyvesant and the South Bronx.
With garbage collection, sweeping and enforcement steadily scaled back, the number of the city's 59 sanitation districts rated dirty by the Mayor's Office has jumped from 1 to 12 since 1987.
The dirty districts are all economically depressed areas with mostly black and Hispanic populations.


Vichy France's Complicity With Nazis Has Long Been Known
To the Editor:
The assertions by Kurt Schaechter (front page, April 7) that he discovered documents about the internment camps under Vichy France and French Government complicity in the deportations of Jews and non-Jews do not correspond with the facts.


Q and A
Rent-Controlled Increase Question: My mother-in-law, age 85, lives in a large rent-controlled apartment in Manhattan.
A few months ago she arranged for a 17-year-old music student from Bulgaria to move in with her so she would not be alone at night.
The student, however, pays her no money.


Stiffed Again
Release that puff of smoke from the college of lexicographers; we have a new political verb.
At that rarity of rarities, a Presidential news conference, Thomas L. Friedman of The New York Times asked whether aid to Russia would be withdrawn if Boris Yeltsin was removed.


APRIL 11-17: New Taxes?; Clinton Tests the Winds Before Making a Tough Call
As trial balloons go, it was overinflated and unwieldy, but the Clinton Administration's revelation last week that it was considering an indirect national sales tax to pay for its health care program nevertheless served a purpose.
The White House, which has long known that its goal of providing health insurance for every citizen will require new taxes, actually welcomed a debate over taxes.
Still, officials would have preferred that the discussion, kicked onto center stage by Health Secretary Donna Shalala and Alice Rivlin, the deputy budget director, did not fall during the week of April 15, when taxes come due.


Playoff Atmosphere Feels Right To Islanders
Last season, Vladimir Malakhov represented the former Soviet Union in the Olympic Games and in the world championship tournament.
So the Islanders' 24-year-old rookie is familiar with important competition under pressure.
Beginning tonight, he will add a new version of it to his resume when the Islanders open the Stanley Cup playoffs at Washington in the first game of a four-of-seven-game series in the Patrick Division semifinals.


Categorizing Killers
To the Editor:
In Julian Symons's review of three new books focusing on the crimes of Andrei Chikatilo in Russia (March 14), much was made of the "softening" of attitudes as evidenced by describing such people as "serial killers" rather than "mass murderers." The term "serial killer," however, is accurate.


A Prison Unit's Break With Tradition
LIKE many women who have served time at the Connecticut Correctional Institution in Niantic, Marilyn Baker was a drug addict.
The product of a tumultuous home life, she began experimenting with drugs as a teen-ager, which led to a succession of arrests and prison terms.
She was finally forced to give up her children to foster care.
But each time she left the institution, those who knew her said she was determined to change.
In 1986, she started nursing school and completed training as a drug abuse counselor.
Two years later Ms.
Baker was hired as a counselor at the women's prison and began to pioneer several programs.
But by then she had become ill with an aggressive form of cancer, gradually forcing her to come to work on crutches and later in a wheelchair.
Despite the obstacles, Ms.
Baker, who died in 1991 at the age of 51, worked tirelessly with inmates to help them break the cycle of drugs and crime.


Cairo Pro and Con
To the Travel Editor: As one who recently "took a chance on Cairo" and cruised up the Nile, in October 1992, I can also recommend that a trip to Egypt is worth taking and, I might add, at small risk.
As a medium-sized group of American lawyers and judges and their companions, we were able to interact on a personal basis with a number of Egyptian citizens, tourist personnel, lawyers, judges, storekeepers and families.
The Egyptian people were enthusiastic about having American tourists visiting their cities and appreciating their culture.
While strolling through the parks and walking on the streets of Cairo in the evening, I felt much safer than attempting the same in any of our large metropolitan cities.


Helping Students Through Mediation
As indicated by "Students Help Students Through Conflicts"  [ March 28 ]  about Freeport High School, these are tough times for those of us who serve our community as educators.
Whatever techniques teachers and personnel can employ to teach our children to talk out their problems serves us well for the future.
We need all the strategies we can get our hands on!


13 Unsolved Deaths Feed Indian Mistrust of F.B.I.
A few days after last Christmas, an Indian woman was killed and her body was dumped in the snow just outside this rough-edged village on the dry side of the Cascade Mountains.
It took the Federal authorities who have jurisdiction on the Yakima Indian Reservation four hours to send an agent from the city of Yakima, 30 miles northeast of here.


Profile; Soros's Alter Ego: Low Profile, Very High Returns
WHEN the Tokyo stock market began rallying last month, a big buyer was the Quantum Group, the investment funds run by George Soros.
Indeed, once word got around that Mr.
Soros had bet big and fast on a range of Japanese securities, the rush into the market accelerated.
Yet Mr.
Soros could not have been farther from the action.
He was in Eastern Europe and Russia, tending to his numerous philanthropic projects.
The Soros lieutenant who masterminded the Japan investment was Stanley F. Druckenmiller.


Honoring A Legacy, In Harlem
The Black Fashion Museum's annual spring party, April 12.


Struggle in the Balkans; Cease-Fire in Battered Muslim Town Seals a Key Victory for Serb Forces
United Nations officials said tonight that the commander of the Bosnian Government Army had agreed to a cease-fire around the besieged city of Srebrenica and other steps intended to turn the town into a "safe area" to avert a battle to the finish with the town's Serbian attackers.
Though the accord was reached in response to a demand by the United Nations Security Council on Friday, it involves the disarming of the devastated city's Muslim defenders and allows for an exodus, goals long sought by Serbian nationalist forces.


Ornate Silver From a Golden Age Goes on the Block
Paul de Lamerie dazzled 18th-century London with his rococo silver -- status symbols aswirl with leopards, lizards and lions.
Appointed goldsmith to King George I in 1716, Lamerie worked mostly for affluent patrons, many of whose hefty soup tureens, covered cups, sauce boats and candlesticks survive in American museums and private collections.
Several prize vessels are among 25 pieces by Lamerie that will be up for sale at Christie's in New York on Thursday, the largest selection of his work to be auctioned in 30 years.
Most pieces were collected after 1955 by two businessmen -- Sir George Dowty, a British industrialist-inventor who died in 1975, and Karl Hobitzelle, a Texan who owned motion-picture theaters and who died in 1967.


Duly Noted
To the Sports Editor:
The letter stating that Clair Bee started a majority of blacks in 1950-51 (Mailbox, April 11) is false.
Bee started two blacks: Sherman White and Leroy Smith.
A black reserve was Ray Felix.


Business Diary/April 11-15
INTERNATIONAL Helping Russia: What's in It for the Rest of Us?


Beauty; The Shining
'Smooth finish." "High gloss shine." "Polished veneer." If the modern hair vocabulary sounds like the menu from a car wash, there's a reason: the fast track to shine on your hair -- or your car -- is slick with silicon.
Like so many high-tech beauty breakthroughs, silicon -- derived from silica, or sand -- was first developed in the laboratories of American industry and found to have such glamorous applications as car polish, glue, caulking -- and, of course, breast implants.
Silicon is a naturally shiny, inert, nonreactive substance, considered so nontoxic that silicon gel is a principal ingredient in Mylanta.


SERVICE JOBS FALL AS BUSINESS GAINS
Scores of New York City employers -- from New York Telephone and Arthur Andersen to Merrill Lynch and Grey Advertising -- are making quantum leaps in learning how to produce ever more work with ever fewer people, according to economic data and a large amount of anecdotal evidence.
Ultimately, this remarkable innovation could help rejuvenate New York's ailing economy, by increasing its competitiveness in the intensifying battle for global markets.


Lemieux: Man and Superman
He is squeamish about the birth of his first child.
Mario Lemieux took the Lamaze classes.
He knows the routine.
Breathe in, breathe out.
Puff.
Puff.
Puff.
He could be the coach.
He practiced for it.
He will wait in the hall.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
*4*N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Mar. 93
Feb. 93
Mar. 92
Rents
184.1
+0.9
+1.1
Homeowner's costs
181.8
+0.3
+2.5
Fuel and utilities
108.7
+0.2
+4.0
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.69
7.74
9.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.85
4.86
6.20
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.54
7.58
8.85
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.70
4.66
5.98
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.58
7.61
8.93
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.48
4.49
6.16
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.80
7.86
9.10
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.40
5.43
6.59
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.31
3.32
4.25
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.28
7.28
8.15
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Hospitals Plan Strategies To Counter Competition
New York City's hospitals are scrambling to prepare for a new era of competition -- not even defined yet, but almost surely on its way.
New York Hospital has taken control of nearly a dozen other hospitals, clinics and nursing homes, so it will eventually have beds available in every borough.
About a dozen other major hospitals are spending $5 million to create their own health maintenance organization.


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
Regarding "When Daughters Invade the Office" (April 4), if it is good when a major corporation develops a good family leave policy, it should be equally worthy of celebration when individual women develop coherent and satisfying approaches to the dual challenges of a profession and family responsibilities.


FIGHTING IN SUDAN HALTS FOOD RELIEF
Increased factional fighting in the southern Sudan and an attack against a Western relief worker have led the United Nations to suspend food deliveries to the area hardest hit by famine, where tens of thousands of people relied on daily food handouts, United Nations officials say.
The fighting between rebel groups has long been fostered by the Sudanese Government as part of its tactic of divide and rule, and diplomats and relief workers are now concerned that the Government will mount a military offensive in the south.
The Kenyan authorities have informed relief officials that Sudanese Government troops moving across the border in Ethiopia are planning an attack in other areas controlled by rebels in the southern Sudan, United Nations officials said.


'The Police Are Against Young People and Young People
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q We're going to talk about cops -- police and young people.


Kuwait's Hero Pays a Visit


Lisa G. Hewitt, William Cassara
Lisa Gabrielle Hewitt, a daughter of Don Hewitt of New York and Frankie Hewitt of Kensington, Md., was married yesterday to William Louis Cassara, the son of Jeanine and Louis Cassara of Whitestone, Queens.
Justice Alfred D. Lerner of State Supreme Court in Queens performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Mrs.
Cassara graduated from Boston University.
She was until recently the coordinating producer of the syndicated television show "A Current Affair" in New York.
Her husband is a cameraman on the show.
Her father is the creator and executive producer of the CBS News program "60 Minutes" in New York.
Her mother is the producing director at Ford's Theater, a nonprofit theater in Washington.
The bride's stepmother, Marilyn Berger Hewitt, is a freelance journalist in New York.


Randolph Calhoune, Sandra J. Bell
Sandra Jean Bell, an investigator at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in Boston, was married yesterday to Randolph P. Calhoune, an electrical engineer at the Federal Aviation Administration in Burlington, Mass.
Msgr.
Thomas Finnegan performed the ceremony at St.
Elizabeth Church in Milton, Mass.
Mrs.
Calhoune, 26, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Bell of Milton.
Her father is a health-science specialist at the Boston Veterans Administration Medical Center.
Her mother, Dr.
Anne Bell, is a psychiatrist at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Brockton, Mass.
She also has a private practice in Milton.


ON THE STREET
Here is a sampling of fairs, festivals and parades that are planned in New York City through the spring.
Information was supplied by the Community Assistance Unit of the Office of the Mayor.
Many dates and times are tentative, since these are events that, in some cases, require permits from the Mayor's office.
Today RIVERSIDE PARK SHAD FESTIVAL, 74th Street playground, at the Hudson River.
Environmental displays, music, dance, parade of small boats.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Sponsored by the Riverside Park Fund, the Hudson River Foundation, the New York City Deparment of Parks and Recreation, Resident Publications and Citarella FIsh Company.
Information: (212) 870-3070.
CHURCH AVENUE FESTIVAL, Church Avenue between McDonald Avenue and East Fifth Street, Borough Avenue, Brooklyn. 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Emunah Women.
EARTH DAY CELEBRATIONS, Bryant Park, Avenue of the Americas between 40th and 42d Street.
Ceremonies in celebration of the United Nations Year of Indiginous People, with environmental exhibits, dancing, storytelling and music.
Performances of Aboriginal, Caribbean and Andean music and a jazz concert with performers Dave Valentine, Kirk Whalum and Dave Samuels.
Sponsored by Earth Day New York. 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
April 24 SIKH PARADE, Broadway between 38th Street and Union Square Park, Manhattan.
Beginning at 1 P.M.
Sponsored by the Sikh Cultural Society.
ST.
LUKE'S SCHOOL STREET FESTIVAL, Eighth Avenue, Bleeker and 14th Streets, Greenwich Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by ST.
Luke's School UPPER BROADWAY SPRING FESTIVAL, Broadway, between 106th and 110th.
Sponsored by Concered Citizens for Community Action. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
May 1 BROADWAY MALL STREET FAIR, Broadway (East side of street only) between 110th and 177 Streets, Morningside Heights. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Broadway Mall Association.
GREENWICH AVENUE SPRING FESTIVAL, Greenwich Avenue between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by Friends of Jackson Square Park.
SIDEWALK SALE/FENCE ART SHOW, Grand Avenue between 63d and 74th Streets and 69th Street between Grand Avenue and 54th Streets, Queens. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sponsored by the Maspeth Chamber of Commerce.
May 2 CUBAN INDEPENDENCE PARADE, Madison Avenue from 37th to 56th Street.
Beginning at 1 P.M.
Sponsored by La Gran Parada Cubana.
LA GUARDIA PLACE FESTIVAL, La Guardia Place between West Fourth and Houston Street, Greenwich Village. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by Women's American ORT, Manhattan Chapter.
ENVIRONMENTAL FAIR, VanCortlandt Park, Visitors' Center, reachable from the entrance on Broadway, north of West 242d Street,Bronx.
A celebration of Arbor and Earth Day, with walks, planting workshops and exhibitions.
Sponsored by the Urban park Rangers.
Noon to 4 P.M.
May 8  B.A.C.A.
SPRING ANNUAL CRAFTS SHOW, Brooklyn Promenade, Columbia Heights between Montague and Clark Streets, Brooklyn Heights.
Through May 9, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sponsored by Brooklyn Arts Cultural Association.
COLUMBUS AVENUE FAIR, Columbus Avenue between 66th and 72d Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Committee for Environment Sound Development.
ASIAN/PACIFIC AMERICAN HERITAGE FESTIVAL, Union Square Park, 14th Street and Broadway. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Coalition of Asian Pacific American Associates.
May 9
SALUTE TO ISRAEL DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue from 57th Street to 79th Street and Third Avenue.
Beginning at noon.
Sponsored by the American Zionist Youth Fund.
May 15
NINTH AVENUE FOOD FESTIVAL, Ninth Avenue between 37th and 57th Streets, Manhattan.
Also May 16. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Ninth Avenue Association of New York.
TURKISH PARADE, Madison Avenue from East 55th Street to 47th Street and Dag Hammarskjold Park.
Beginning at 2 P.M.
Sponsored by the Federation of Turkish American Associations.
May 16
AMSTERDAM AVENUE FESTIVAL, Amsterdam Avenue, between 77th and 96th Streets, Manhattan, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the West Side Chamber of Commerce.
BROOKLYN FIFTH AVENUE FAIR, Fifth Avenue between Degraw and 18th Streets, Park Slope. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Fifth Avenue Committee.
THE REV.
DR.
MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.
PARADE, Fifth Avenue from 44th Street to 86th Street and Third Avenue.
Beginning at 1 P.M.
Sponsored by the Veteran Association of New York, 369th Regiment.
ONE WORLD/ONE HEART FESTIVAL, the Great Lawn, Central Park. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M..
Sponsored by Ben &amp; Jerry's and the Parks Department.
May 20
ST.
ANTHONY FEAST, Mott Street, between Grand and Canal Streets, Little Italy.
Through May 31. 11:30 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
Sponsored by Devotees of St.
Anthony.
May 22
COOPER VILLAGE SIDEWALK FAIR, on the sidewalks of 20th and 23d Streets from First Avenue to Avenue C; First Avenue and Avenue C between 20th and 23d Streets.
Also May 23. 9 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Sponsored by Peter Cooper Village.
NEIGHBORS HELPING NEIGHBORS FAIR, Prospect Park West between Bartel Pritchard Square and 18th Street, Park Slope. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Neighbors Helping Neighbors.
PLANTATHON STREET FESTIVAL, Broadway, between 72d and 86th Streets. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Federation of West Side Block Associations.
WAVERLY PLACE STREET FESTIVAL, Waverly Place between Macdougal and Christopher Streets, Greenwich Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Waverly Block Association.
YOU GOTTA HAVE PARK, Central Park.
Also May 23.
Beginning at noon.
Sponsored by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
May 23
GROSVENOR HOUSE AMSTERDAM FAIR, Amsterdam Avenue between 96th and 106th Streets, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Grosvenor Neighborhood House Inc.
May 29
ACT-UP WAVERLY PLACE FESTIVAL, Waverly Place between Broadway and University Place, Greenwich Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by Act-Up.
LIVABLE WEST SIDE STREET FESTIVAL, Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Coalition for a Livable West Side.
WASHINGTON SQUARE ART EXHIBIT, sidewalk surrounding Washington Square Park, Greenwich Village.
Noon to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Washington Square Outdoor Art Exhibit.
May 30
EIGHTH AVENUE FESTIVAL, Eighth Avenue between 14th and 23d Streets, Chelsea. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by Chelsea Visiting Neighbors.
May 31
BROADWAY MERCHANTS FAIR, Broadway between Steinway Street and Crescent Street, Astoria, Queens. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Broadway Merchants and Professionals.
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Broadway from 72d Street to 86th Street to Riverside Drive to 90th Street.
Beginning at 10 A.M.
Sponsored by New York City County American Legion.
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Third Avenue and 80th Street to Fourth Avenue and 101st Street. 10 A.M.
June 3
DOMINICANA STREET FESTIVAL, East 162d Street, between Jerome and River Avenues, Highbridge, the Bronx.
Through June 6.
Noon to 11 P.M.
Sponsored by La Gran Parada Dominicana Bronx.
ST.
ANTHONY PADUA CHURCH FEAST, Sullivan Street, between Houston and Spring Streets, SoHo.
Through June 13.
Noon to 11:30 P.M.
Sponsored by St.
Anthony of Padua Church.
June 5
ST.
JOSEPH'S SCHOOL STREET FAIR, Washington Place between Macdougal and Grove Streets, Greenwich Village. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by St.
Joseph's School.
WESTSIDE CRIME PREVENTION FAIR, Columbus Avenue, between 86th and 96th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Westside Crime Prevention Program.
June 6
52D STREET FESTIVAL, 52d Street between Madison Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by The 52 Association for the Handicapped.
LINCOLN SQUARE STREET FESTIVAL, Amsterdam Avenue between 65th and 71st Streets, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Lincoln Square Neighborhood Center.
PHILIPPINES INDEPENDENCE DAY PARADE, Madison Avenue between 26th and 42d Streets.
Beginning at 11 A.M.
Sponsored by the Philippines Independence Day Committee.


After 120 Years, Konica Tries to Stay New
KONICA, one of the world's oldest camera companies, is celebrating its 120th year by upgrading a popular model, introducing new ones and marketing a film just for babies.
Other camera companies may still be committed to the single lens reflex 35-millimeter camera, but the Konica Corporation of Tokyo , which ranks 357 on the Fortune Global 500 list, believes the S.L.R. market has matured.
In 1992 it reintroduced rangefinder cameras, which lost popularity as S.L.R.'s and cameras with automatic focus and exposure took hold.


The Right Tree
When planting a tree, match the species to your site.
Test drainage by digging a hole and filling it with water.
If it drains less than an inch an hour, lighten the soil with compost and dig deeper to break up rubble or hardpan.
Also test for alkalinity and salt content.
Edmond O. Moulin, the director of horticulture at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, advises digging the hole at least two to three times wider than the root ball.
If you have to dig deeper to break up hardpan, firm the fill (the added soil and compost) to support the root system and prevent sinkage.
And don't make that soil too good, because the roots would be so happy that they wouldn't stretch into the surrounding area and form a good anchoring system.


No One Is Really Immune
A DANCING MATRIX
Voyages Along the Viral Frontier.
By Robin Marantz Henig.
Illustrated. 269 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Audi Redesigns and Presses On
FOR Audi, the good news is that we haven't heard about the company in a while.
The bad news is that we haven't heard about the company in a while.
Audi's sales have spiraled downward ever since 1986, when we heard quite a lot.
Audis were said to leap ahead and mow down anything in their way, and parking garages started posting signs forbidding entry to anyone driving one of the cars.
The problem was called "unintended acceleration," and the reports were everywhere.


POSTINGS: A Glimpse of the Past; A Tour of Flatbush Houses
In "Guadalcanal Diary" William Bendix played a marine.
As his ship approached the Japanese-held island, his thoughts were elsewhere.
"Ebbets Field -- that's for me," he said.
"Watching them beautiful Bums." He was the loveable lug from Flatbush.
Flatbush is a lot of things to a lot of people -- the Vitagraph Studio apartments where Mary Pickford, Fatty Arbuckle and Douglas Fairbanks lived and Erasmus Hall High School, which Barbara Stanwyck and Barbra Streisand attended.


POSTINGS: Management Education Center; For N.Y.U., a Dedication
New York University will dedicate its newest building, the Management Education Center, on Friday in the heart of its Washington Square campus in Greenwich Village.
The center, which opened last September, was designed for the school's re-emphasis on teaching, as opposed to research, and a belief that corporations will need managers with training that integrates various disciplines.


THE GUIDE
WATERWAYS CLEANUP
A cleanup of the Croton Watershed, containing waterways and reservoirs that supply drinking water to Westchester and New York City, is scheduled Saturday from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. on the Muscoot and Saw Mill Rivers, the Croton River and its East Branch and Amawalk Stream and at the Cross River-Katonah Reservoirs and the Amawalk Reservoir.


FILM
May
"MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING." Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson play Benedick and Beatrice -- one of the greatest battling, made-for-each-other couples of all time -- in this version of Shakespeare's comedy.
Mr.
Branagh also directs an intriguing cast, which includes Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves, Robert Sean Leonard and Michael Keaton.
Opens May 7.
"POSSE." "Unforgiven" may make intelligent westerns chic.
In this one, Mario Van Peebles (the director of "New Jack City") directs and stars as a cowboy who avenges his father's death and saves an all-black town called Freemanville from destruction.
Opens May 14.
"HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX." Charlie Sheen as the ace pilot Topper Harley, Lloyd Bridges and Valeria Golino return in this sequel to the hilarious movie spoof "Hot Shots!" (the film that will never let you watch "Top Gun" with a straight face again).
Opens May 21.
"SLIVER." The return of Sharon Stone in an erotic murder mystery (deja vu) written by Joe Eszterhas ("Basic Instinct") from Ira Levin's novel.
She plays a woman stalked by a voyeur.
The obvious question: Does she mind?
Directed by Phillip Noyce ("Patriot Games").
Opens May 21.
"CLIFFHANGER." Sylvester Stallone comes out of the ring and out of Vietnam to become a mountain-climber in this action-adventure directed by Renny Harlin ("Die Hard 2").
His character has been traumatized by a climbing accident, but it couldn't have been more traumatic than the precipitous decline in the former Rocky's career.
Opens May 28.
"SUPER MARIO BROTHERS." Bob Hoskins plays Mario Mario and John Leguizamo is his brother, Luigi, in this feature inspired by the Nintendo video game.
Dennis Hopper is their archenemy, Koopa.
There's probably plenty of action here, but not much room for Method acting.
Opens May 28.
"DAVE." Kevin Kline plays a regular guy who happens to be a dead ringer for the President of the United States.
When the President dies, Dave takes over, much to the surprise of the First Lady (Sigourney Weaver) in this political satire directed by Ivan Reitman ("Ghostbusters").
Opens May 7.
"MADE IN AMERICA." Whoopi Goldberg and Ted Danson star in the movie that launched 1,000 tabloid headlines.
Ms.
Goldberg, as the owner of a black bookstore, is the victim of a mix-up at the sperm bank.
The father of her grown daughter is an obnoxious used-car salesman played by Mr.
Danson.
Opens May 28.
June
"JURASSIC PARK." Dinosaurs run amok in the season's most anticipated and publicized movie: Steven Spielberg's version of Michael Crichton's best seller (with the novel's grislier scenes reportedly tamed down).
Genetically engineered to be theme-park pets, the dinosaurs break loose in a frenzy of bad temper, special effects and marketing tie-ins.
Sam Neil, Laura Dern, Jeff Goldblum and Richard Attenborough are the human stars.
Opens June 11.
"ORLANDO." Sally Potter's stylized and stylish adaptation of Virginia Woolf's novel about a man who lives for 400 youthful years and, halfway through, wakes up as a woman, giving new meaning to the term midlife crisis.
This film was the hit of the Sundance and New Directors/New Films festivals.
Opens June 11.


Erika Goldberg, Samuel Murray
Brenda Lewis of Newton Highlands, Mass., and Edward R. Goldberg of Waban, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Erika Bennett Goldberg, to Samuel James Murray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Murray of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goldberg, 24, is the promotion coordinator for the Maury Povich Show, the syndicated television program, in New York.
She graduated from Colby College.


Martha Berkman, David Winfield
Martha Lynn Berkman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall Berkman of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to David Gareth Winfield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Winfield of Derbyshire, England.
Rabbi Leonard Helman performed the ceremony at the Duquesne Club.
Mrs.
Winfield is a media planner for the J. Walter Thompson Company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Ampco-Pittsburgh Corporation, a manufacturer of engineered metal products.
Her mother, Deborah Berkman, is a vice president of the investment banking company of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in Pittsburgh.


Corrections
A front-page contents listing in the Travel section today gives an incorrect page number in some copies for an article about hotels in Portland, Ore.
It appears on page 22.


The Anchor as Sex Symbol
NBC News seems to be producing a string of on-air heartthrobs.
First, there was Arthur Kent.
Then Stone Phillips.
Now there's Matt Lauer.
Mr.
Lauer, the co-host, with Jane Hanson, of WNBC's 6 A.M. newscast, "Today in New York," recently substituted for Bryant Gumbel on the "Today" show for three days.


Error Compounded By Foreign Politics
THE recent confusion in Aintree, England, where the Grand National steeplechase was declared void when officials were unable to check the horses after a false start, has a bridge parallel.
In the 1976 World Team Championships in Monte Carlo, Monaco, official confusion at the start of a match led to a cancellation because the players were wrongly seated.
Brazil played the North-South cards in both rooms, and the Italians were twice East-West.
The scores could not count as a match, but the analysts looked at the results in an attempt to determine which team had played better.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the What's Doing column on April 4 misstated the telephone numbers for two guest houses in San Juan.
The number for the San Juan Gallery Inn is (809) 722-1808and for the Hosteria del Mar, (809) 727-3302.


'Foxfire,' Tale of Love and Life in the Mountains
"FOXFIRE" is more interesting in origin than in outcome.
It all started as a teacher's masterstroke in 1966.
To keep his 9th and 10th graders from tearing up the Rabun Gap-Nacoochie School in the Appalachians, Eliot Wigginton, got them to tear into a creative project: interviewing elderly relatives to get an oral history of a heritage.
Better than plodding through dry textbooks, they all agreed.
A magazine resulted, with students involved in all phases of publication and distribution.
Frustrated teachers with a creative bent, pay attention.
Out of one issue, a series grew.
And then came the "Foxfire" books.
That's the end of the interesting part.


Nancy S. Bryan, John Ketterer 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. S. Bryan of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Spaight Bryan to John George Ketterer 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John G. Ketterer Jr. of Lyme, N.H.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Bryan, 31, teaches at the Town School in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received an M.A. in early childhood development from Bank Street College.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
Her mother, Betty Q. Bryan, is an interior designer.


Cy Young? No, Just Jim Abbott, A Pitcher
Jim Abbott had a storybook beginning at Yankee Stadium six days ago.
The fans adored him, he pitched splendidly and the image of him raising his arms toward the sky after an impressive victory was memorable.
But the second chapter of his baseball story in the Bronx took a nasty turn yesterday.
It was not pretty for Abbott.
Pretty ugly is more apt.
The game started innocently enough, and for a few innings it seemed as if Abbott might match Kevin Brown in artistry, keep the score low and keep the fans edging off their seats.
But the innocence was broken as Abbott struggled with his control, had trouble taming the lightweights in the Texas lineup and then headed for the shampoo and soap in the sixth inning as the Rangers raged on to a 9-0 victory.


Audit Faults Market for Ills of Blue Cross
A long-awaited independent audit of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield concludes that the management of New York State's largest health-insurance company has been slow to react to accelerating changes in the insurance marketplace.
Among other findings, the audit maintains that Empire trailed the rest of the industry in expanding its managed-care programs and in developing modern computer systems, both of which contributed to heavy losses in recent years.
But the executive summary of a draft of the report, based on an audit ordered by the State Legislature last year and performed by Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, maintains that Empire's poor financial performance has resulted primarily from economic forces beyond the control of management.


Finding a Devil Within to Portray Roy Cohn
LARGER-THAN-LIFE CHARACTERS DO not always start out on the stage.
Sometimes they dominate real lives first.
As Roy Cohn did.
Then come the dramatic portraits.
Since his death in 1986, the controversial New York lawyer has been the subject of several biographies, plays and a recent HBO movie.
Cohn, who first came to public notice in the early 1950's as chief counsel to Joseph McCarthy's Senate investigations into Communist influence in American life, was a study in contrasts.
A secret homosexual, he was vehemently antigay in public.
He moved among the influential and powerful, yet he was disbarred just weeks before his death from AIDS at the age of 59.
How does an actor portray such a figure?
In a recent conversation, Ron Leibman and Ron Vawter, two performers who are playing Cohn onstage, talked about how they "do Roy."


Miss Mooney, Gregory Nullet
Mrs.
Alan P. Mooney of Healdsburg, Calif., has announced the engagement of her daughter Alexandra Milburn Mooney to Gregory John Nullet, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Nullet of Kettle Falls, Wash.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Mooney, 34, graduated from San Francisco State University and is a candidate for an associate's degree in computer sciences and accounting at Santa Monica College.
Her late father was the senior vice president and general manager in San Francisco for Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the advertising agency.
Her mother, Jean Mooney, is a painter.


From the Library: Don't Tread on Us
To the Editor:
Regarding "When Daughters Invade the Office" (At Work, April 4), anyone who considers librarianship a "genteel" occupation should spend more time in a contemporary library.
City libraries serve some of the most difficult segments of the population, ranging from rowdy teen-agers to the mentally ill.
Many function as the sole cultural institution in decayed neighborhoods and young people's only alternative to the streets.


Scores of Girls in Egypt Faint in Classrooms
The khamaseen, the blustery sandstorms that arrive every spring, have brought with them not only the usual clouds of grit and dust but also what the authorities describe as collective hysteria.
Hundreds of teen-age girls have been fainting en masse in classrooms, breaking out in sobs and complaining of unpleasant smells and nausea.
Draped over the shoulders of teachers, they are being carted off in groups to hospitals, where doctors run batteries of tests that yield no physical evidence to explain their symptoms.


Noga Joins Redskins
The Washington Redskins, rebuffed in their efforts to sign REGGIE WHITE and WAYNE MARTIN, finally landed a free agent defensive lineman when they signed AL NOGA, the former Minnesota Viking, for a reported $5.4 million over four years.


THE BABIES OF BEDFORD
I have never been a great fan of Jean Harris's.
So it was with a good deal of cynicism that I approached her article "The Babies of Bedford" (March 28).
However, in describing the efforts of the innovative Parenting Center at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility to encourage bonding between mothers and infants, Harris melts even the hardest hearts.


Verdict in Los Angeles; Calm Relief Where Rage Once Ruled
After two years of convulsions, racial turmoil and fear, a great cloud of gloom lifted from Los Angeles today.
The battered city seemed to open and brighten just after 7 A.M., when it was announced that two of four white officers had been found guilty of violating Rodney G. King's civil rights.
Shopkeepers who had boarded up their stores opened for business.
Children went to Saturday arts classes.
Traffic moved smoothly amid a general feeling that the split verdict had brought at least a measure of justice, if not a solution to all this city's social ills.


Making a Difference; Simplicity's Siren Call
LOUIS MORRIS took a big chance in 1990.
Childhood in Scarsdale, degrees from the University of Rochester and the Columbia Business School and 10 months at Continental Can had yielded to 19 years at Springs Industries.
There, he had worked his way up to president of retail and specialty-fabrics operations.
Then came the siren call of an executive recruiter.
The new job: head of the faltering Simplicity Pattern Company.
"This was an opportunity to turn around a household name," said Mr.
Morris, 47.
Simplicity, with a fat cash horde, had been irresistible to the last decade's corporate raiders -- six made runs at it -- and when they were done, Simplicity was weighted with new debt.
To make matters worse, Mr.
Morris said, the company had lost its retailing focus and was not sure who its main customers were.
The traditional sewing housewife had up and joined the work force.


A Lifetime of Lies
AFTER SILENCE
By Jonathan Carroll. 227 pp. New York: Doubleday. $21.


No Headline
It's like I've got cotton under my feet.
Everybody can go home -- nothing will happen now.
JIMMY SIMON of South-Central Los Angeles, after two officers were convicted in the beating of Rodney King.  [ 1:5. ] It's justice, not a circus.
Stacey Koon is not some sacrificial animal to be cast aside for peace in Los Angeles.
IRA M. SALZMAN, the lawyer who defended one of the convicted men.  [ 1:6. ]


Corrections
A picture caption on April 4 with an article about the American chestnut tree misidentified a county parks official.
He is Carl H. Specht, manager of the Lasdon Park and Arboretum.


At Work; Worthy Child-Care Pay Scales
IF wages are any indication of the esteem in which a person's labor is held, consider the following fact, culled from the pages of the Federal Government's Occupational Outlook Handbook: People who take care of zoo animals make on average nearly $2,500 a year more than most of the people who take care of human animals in child-care centers.
Should it gall a child-care worker that a python is thought to require more skillful handling than a toddler?
No?
Then try on these figures from an about-to-be-released survey and see how they fit your budget: In 1988, the lowest-paid workers in child care, assistant teachers in preschool centers, made $5.16 an hour; in 1992, they made $5.08, a figure that works out to about $8,890 a year.
The highest-paid teachers at the centers, most of whom have college-level training in early childhood education, were doing slightly better: in 1992 they made $8.85 an hour, up from $8.19 in 1988, for an annual salary of $15,488.
That's about twice as much as the burgermeisters at McDonald's make.
The bad news is that, even as the number of centers has grown to accommodate the demands of working parents since the mid-1970's, salaries in real dollars are off by 20 percent.
About a fifth of the 10 million American children in child care are in certified, regulated centers.


Sinuous Lines in Silver, Rocky Imagery in Fiber
TWO exhibitions at the Newark Museum belie Marshall McLuhan's famous maxim, "The medium is the message." In one, the sinuous fluidity of Art Nouveau-style plants and flowers is expressed by rigid silver bonded to glass and ceramic vessels.
Close by, Lore Lindenfeld uses soft and flexible netting, Pellon and threads to delineate the rocky landscapes of her "Remembered Images."
Although they are in nearby galleries, the works are miles apart in concept and approach.
Nearly a century separates their dates of origin.
The 63 decanters, vases, compotes and a tea service in "Sumptuous Surrounds" are all embellished with ornate silver overlay.
They were lent from the Warren Gilson collection at the Milwaukee Art Museum, except for five examples that belong to the Newark Museum.


Beth Powell, Albert Moras
A July wedding is planned for Beth Anne Powell, a national sales manager for Four Seasons Hotels Inc., and Albert Patrick Moras, the vice president of sales and marketing for QV Trading Systems, which develops and provides trading software to Wall Street firms.
Ms.
Powell, 34, is a graduate of the University of California.
Her father, Dr.
Malcolm R. Powell of Belvedere, Calif., , is an endocrinologist and specialist in nuclear medicine in San Francisco.
Her mother, Constance Powell of Washington, is a supervisory financial analyst there for the Federal Reserve Board.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Dr.
Andrea S. Blum of Belvedere.


Mighty HoJo Has Flied Out
The anger over the ejection of two Mets was on hold.
Bret Saberhagen's surrendering of a 2-0 lead, difficult to figure and hard to take, was done.
There was, then, one bit of unfinished theater left to the April afternoon in Riverfront Stadium: Howard Johnson vs.
Rob Dibble.
The showdown couldn't have been more elemental.
Johnson, whatever his troubles at the plate over the last year, has retained his appetite for fastballs.
And two home runs, one Friday night, one to lead off the fifth today, had demonstrated a rediscovered ability to devour them.
Dibble, of course, is the closer who owns the National League's unmatched fastball.


In Ceremony of Remembrance, Reminders of Human Courage
Thousands of Holocaust survivors and their families, many of them sobbing audibly, observed the 50th anniversary of the Warsaw ghetto uprising yesterday with a memorial service at Madison Square Garden that also honored the memory of the six million Jews who perished in the Nazi concentration camps.
Joined by Vice President Gore, Mayor David N. Dinkins, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and others, the 6,000 participants filled the purple seats of the Garden's Paramount Theater, recalling an excruciating chapter in history with prayers, songs, vivid recollections and, finally, a moment of silence.


RESULTS PLUS
GYMNASTICS  Just Call It the Miller-Shcherbo Show  The American teen-ager Shannon Miller and Vitaly Shcherbo of Belarus were confirmed as the world's best gymnasts yesterday when they wound up with three titles each at the world championships in Birmingham, England.
Shcherbo, who won six gold medals at the Barcelona Olympics, added the vault and parallel bars titles to the all-around championship he had won Thursday.
Miller, a 16-year-old high school student from Edmond, Okla, floundered on the beam, one of her strongest events, and finished last.
But the American won a gold in the floor exercises to add to the all-round and uneven bars titles she had already won.
The American women's team wound up with three golds, all won by Miller, and two silver medals won by Dominique Dawes. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Is King Kong of Hong Kong  Pete Sampras, the world's top-ranked player, won a showdown with second-ranked Jim Courier yesterday, beating the former No. 1 player, 6-3, 6-7 (1-7), 7-6 (7-2), to win the Salem Open in Hong Kong.
Sampras, who took over Courier's top ranking last week when he won the Japan Open, won the first set with a service break in the sixth game.
Courier squandered two break points in the sixth game of the second set.
Both Americans held their serves, with Courier winning the tie breaker, 7-1.
Courier saved a match point in the 12th game of the third set to force another tie breaker, but this time it was the 21-year-old Sampras who won it with ease.
Sampras hit 15 aces in the final, which lasted nearly three hours.
He now has a 7-2 record in matches against Courier.  (AP) A Title for Goellner: Marc Goellner of Germany won his first career title by coming from behind to beat Ivan Lendl, 1-6, 6-4, 6-2, in the final of the Nice Open in France.
It was the first final on the ATP Tour for the 6-foot-6-inch Goellner, ranked 95th in the world.
He had never gotten past the quarterfinals of a pro event before Nice.
It was the 143d career final for Lendl, who has won 92 titles.
Goellner had to win three qualifying matches to get into the main draw.
He reached the final with a victory over top-seeded Stefan Edberg.
Yesterday, Lendl broke Goellner's serve three times in the first set.
But after that, Goellner did not lose another serve.
In the second set, the 23-year-old Goellner broke Lendl, 33, in the fifth game to take a 3-2 lead and hold it for the rest of the set to even the match. (AP) MARATHON  Martin Is the Man of the Hours  Eamonn Martin of Britain, running in his first marathon, broke free in a dramatic sprint over the last 100 yards to beat Isidro Rico of Mexico and win the London Marathon yesterday.
The women's race also went down to the wire with defending champion Katrin Dorre of Germany sprinting away from Lisa Ondieki of Australia over the last 1,000 yards for the victory.
The 34-year-old Martin ran shoulder-to-shoulder with Rico over the last four miles before showing the kick that had made him a Commonwealth champion.
The winning time was 2 hours 10 minutes 50 seconds.
Rico clocked 2:10.53 for second, while Gajdus Grzegorz of Poland was third in 2:11.07.
Dorre finished in 2:27.09.
Ondieki clocked 2:27.27 and the Briton Liz McColgan 2:29.37. (AP) SOCCER  Team Needs to Practice Celebrating  Steve Morrow scored the winning goal yesterday as Arsenal defeated Sheffield Wednesday, 2-1, to win England's League Cup.
But victory had a price, as Morrow ended up being carried from the field with an injury that was sustained when he was tossed in the air in celebration.
Morrow's winning goal came in the 68th minute and was his first for Arsenal.
But when his teammates tossed him into the air after the game, they failed to catch him.
And as they accepted the trophy, Morrow was carried off the field on a stretcher with an oxygen mask over his face.
It was later determined that he had broken an arm.
Sheffield Wednesday went ahead, 1-0, on a goal by the American John Harkes in the ninth minute.
But Arsenal got the equalizer in the 18th minute when Paul Merson volleyed home a curling 25-yard shot.
Harkes, of Kearny, N.J., became the first American to score a goal in a Wembley Stadium final.
Two years ago, he became the first American to play in a Wembley final.
The two teams will meet again in the final of the more prestigious FA Cup final at Wembley on May 15. (AP) Canada Stays Unbeaten: Canada, behind John Catliff's two second-half goals, beat Honduras, 3-1, yesterday to remain in first place in its qualifying group for the 1994 World Cup.
The victory, before a sellout crowd of 6,868 at Swangard Stadium, gave Canada a 2-0-1 record and 5 points in the group representing North and Central America and the Caribbean.
Mexico (2-1-0) has 4 points and will play Canada next Sunday in Mexico City.
Mexico defeated El Salvador, 3-1, yesterday before a capacity crowd of 120,000 in Azteca Stadium in Mexico City.
The group winner is assured a spot in the 24-nation finals in the United States. (AP)


VWR Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cheshire Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corruption at Fiat Is Admitted by Chairman
Facing accusations of his company's entanglement in Italy's vast kickback scandal, Gianni Agnelli, chairman of Fiat S.p.A., made his first public acknowledgment over the weekend of corporate corruption and urged investigators to speed up their inquiries to establish the depth of the problem.
Apparently seeking to avert deeper damage, Mr.
Agnelli was also reported by Italian state radio and television to have ordered Fiat's managing director, Cesare Romiti, to volunteer for questioning by magistrates in Milan this week about the auto giant's affairs.


Dance in Review
'Gravity Stretches Sound'  Thea Nerissa Barnes and Julie Ludwick  Thompson Hall  Columbia University
Thea Nerissa Barnes and Julie Ludwick are both compelling performers, and the six dances they presented on Saturday night were nicely complementary.
Ms.
Barnes, who has danced with Martha Graham and Alvin Ailey, is earthbound in the best sense.
Ms.
Ludwick, a ballet dancer turned trapezist, is a creature of the air.
And both are thoughtful, intelligent choreographers.


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BELGRADE FACING SEVERE ISOLATION UNDER U.N. MOVES
UNITED NATIONS, April 18
The draconian economic blockade approved by the Security Council threatens to plunge Serbia and sections of Bosnia into an isolation as deep as Iraq's unless Serbia's nationalist President, Slobodan Milosevic, persuades the leader of Bosnia's Serbs to make peace in the next eight days.
On Saturday, the United Nations Security Council dismissed a cease-fire agreement brokered for the besieged Bosnian town of Srebrenica as seriously flawed, called Russia's bluff when it threatened a veto and voted to slap stiff new economic sanctions against Yugoslavia on April 26 unless the Serbs sign the international peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina by then.


U.S. Trust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nancy Drew: 30's Sleuth, 90's Role Model
For many young women, the age between braces and a retainer, before the freckles fade, is a moment when life's possibilities are illuminated in the darkness by a flashlight on a printed page.
Millions of those pages recount the detective adventures of Nancy Drew, the teen-age heroine of more than 100 books since 1930, who has shaped the imagination of generations of women.


Having a President to Battle With Gives Dole a New Spirit and Verve
In this power-focused capital, an ultimate insider is finding new satisfaction in a seemingly diminished role, the minority leadership of a party suddenly thrust from power.
After eight years of trying to serve the competing interests of two Republican Presidents and a few dozen Republican senators as the party's leader in the Senate, Bob Dole is having the time of his life.
He is now in a role that really suits his personality better, the scrappy underdog challenging a popular President.


Dana Sopher, Jay Marcus
Dana Sopher was married yesterday to Jay Marcus.
She is the northeast regional sales representative for the Halsey Pharmaceutical Company in Brooklyn.
He is the company's president and chief executive.
Rabbi Andre Ungar officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Marcus graduated from Syracuse University.
She is the daughter of Myra and Ira Quint of Closter, N.J.


Parametric Technology Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Computer Horizons Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gander Mountain Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Millicom Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Abroad at Home; Waiting for Clinton
Fifty years after the Nazis, will a European state led by a murderous demagogue be allowed to slaughter and expel another people because of their religion?
The question has faced Europe and the United States since Serbian aggression began in the former Yugoslavia 18 months ago.
And no matter how hard European leaders and President Clinton wish, it will not go away.


Hanoi Offers Documents on P.O.W.'s
Vietnam provided American investigators with documents today that it says prove the fraudulence of a report found in Russia which suggests that hundreds of American prisoners of war were never freed.
John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general who is President Clinton's envoy to Vietnam, said it was too early to assess the Vietnamese documents.
But at a meeting with Hanoi officials, he warned that the report, a Russian translation of a 1972 Vietnamese document, appeared to be authentic and had "created very serious questions" about the fate of missing Americans.


Xplor Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Dividend Meetings


Vermont Financial Services Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** Vermont Financial Services Corp. (NMS)
Qtr to March 31
1993
1992
Net inc
1,121,000
290,000
Per share
.33
.09
Shares outst
3,408,000
3,397,000


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Israel's Aged Survivors, A Day of Particular Anguish
A woman phoned today in tears, saying she had survived the Warsaw ghetto and then the Auschwitz and Bergen-Belsen camps.
It was not the first time that she had talked about the horrors of her youth, she said, but the approach of the 50th anniversary of the ghetto uprising filled her with special dread.
There was a call from another survivor of the Holocaust, a 62-year-old woman who said she had always considered herself an independent sort, but who felt suddenly vulnerable today and in need of help, maybe because her son had died.
One man who had survived the camps and later fought in the Israeli Army phoned in a rage, saying he wanted to take revenge, especially against Arabs who attack Jews.


He Can't See Players but He Can Detail the Plays
FROM the time he was a little boy, sitting at home in Metuchen, N.J., listening to baseball games on the radio, Don Wardlow has had a dream.
"There is no greater thrill," he said, "than the crack of the bat, the ball popping into the mitt and the roar of the crowd." Pursuing his dream of being a professional baseball broadcaster in the major leagues, Mr.
Wardlow is undeterred by the fact that he cannot see what is making those sounds.
He is a blind professional baseball announcer.
Mr.
Wardlow was at the microphone Friday night with his partner, Jim Lucas, at his side and "Gizmo the Radio Dog" behind him as the New Britain Red Sox, the Class AA minor league affiliate of the Boston Red Sox, had their home opener.
At 6:55 P.M., Mr.
Wardlow took a deep breath and boomed: "Live from Beehive Field, New Britain, Conn.! New Britain Red Sox baseball is on the air!"


Watch Hussein Run for Hills
Ibrahim Hussein says that the hilly Boston Marathon course was made for him -- and vice versa.
"If I was the other runners, I'd be watching what I was doing," Hussein said.
"I would be thinking that this man knows what he is doing and that I'd better be following him."


ABC Takes 2d Place, Behind CBS
The official 1992-93 televison season ended last night, and ABC was the only network to gain ground, moving into second place behind CBS.
The final results will be tabulated tomorrow and will show that CBS was the highest-rated network for the second year in a row, while NBC suffered the biggest losses and slid deeply into third place.


President of Pakistan Dismisses Premier and Dissolves Parliament
After months of political turmoil, Pakistan's President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, dismissed Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif tonight, accusing him of corruption and mismanagement, and dissolved Parliament.
It was the second time Mr.
Ishaq Khan had used his sweeping powers to control Pakistani politics, and the third time in five years that a Prime Minister had been dismissed.
In 1990, Mr.
Ishaq Khan dismissed Benazir Bhutto as Prime Minister, citing corruption as the reason.


Weis Markets reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Balls Just Out of Reach Have Owen Out of Sorts
Buck Showalter would not question Spike Owen's contribution to the team.
And Wade Boggs had a brusque suggestion for anyone else who might be loading up for the Yankees' shortstop: "get off the guy's back."
Truth is, though, no one is more frustrated with what has happened to Spike Owen in his maiden season as the Yankee shortstop than Spike Owen.
And yesterday, no one was picking apart Spike Owen's game more than the veteran himself.


Radio Station Consolidation Threatens Small Operators
In the seven months since the Federal Communications Commission eased regulations to allow a single owner to buy up to four radio stations in one metropolitan area, 730 stations, or nearly 7 percent of the industry, have signed deals that will lead to ownership changes.
The consolidation set off by relaxing the ownership rules is likely to reduce the number of owners among the nation's 9,700 stations by 25 percent or more by 1994, industry experts estimate.


Intercontinental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trial of Armand D'Amato May Focus on His Brother
Armand P. D'Amato goes on trial here on Monday on Federal fraud charges stemming from a $120,500 payment that the Government says he received for lobbying his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, on behalf of the Unisys Corporation, a defense contractor.
The case, which many people initially thought would be a significant issue in last November's Senate election, received little attention after the trial was delayed.
But it has the potential to once again bring a spotlight on ethical questions that have plagued Senator D'Amato, who narrowly won re-election.


New Move At Tandy's Flagship
John V. Roach, the chairman and chief executive of the Tandy Corporation, is tightening his grasp on operations at the company's flagship, the nationwide chain of Radio Shack consumer electronics stores.
The company disclosed Friday that Bernard S. Appel, a Tandy senior vice president and chairman of Radio Shack for the last year, would retire June 30 and become a consultant to the company.


Dance in Review
Sari Eckler Performance Project
Dia Center for the Arts  155 Mercer Street  SoHo
The Sari Eckler Performance Project presented two pieces by Miss Eckler on Thursday night.
Mark Haim, whose work has also been seen in the Joffrey Ballet, was represented as a guest choreographer in a premiere, "May I Please Take Him With Me?"


Chemfix Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


School Board Election Debates on TV Begin Monday, April 26
To the Editor:
We applaud your efforts to alert New Yorkers to the coming school board elections in "School Challenge From the Right" (editorial, April 6).


Lydall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bethlehem Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Africa Sees Angola as a Test of U.S. Sincerity; Unita Favors Talks
To the Editor:
"Angolan Rebels Rebound, Within Reach of a Victory" (front page, April 13) is replete with errors and skews the Angolan politico-military reality.
The contention that "the rebel leader who lost the vote has resumed the civil war and scored such enormous advances that there is talk he might engineer an outright military victory" is patently untrue.


Analysts International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fear Subsides With Verdict, But Residents Remain Wary
For the first time in a year, residents of Los Angeles awoke today free of the shadow of possible riots.
But this moment of relief left the city facing the same urban problems and racial frictions that erupted into violence last April.
Church services today celebrated the peaceful atmosphere in the aftermath of the convictions on Saturday of two police officers in the beating of Rodney G. King.


Town &amp; Country Bids for Relevance
Struggling to survive at a time when life styles of the rich and social are viewed as increasingly irrelevant, Town &amp; Country has appointed one of the most respected editors in the industry to shore up the faltering magazine.
Next month Pamela Fiori, a longtime executive at the American Express Publishing Corporation, will become editor in chief of Town &amp; Country, which has been chronicling American society since 1846.
Ms.
Fiori will be the third editor to head the 147-year-old magazine in 18 months -- a tumultuous period during which advertising pages have plummeted, newsstand sales have fallen and internal squabblings at its parent Hearst Magazines have been publicly reported.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes
FORTY years after the little box became omnipresent in America, newspapers are still worried about "Competing With Television," which is the title of a new report by the Future of Newspapers Committee of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
More or less its message about the medium is, if you can't beat 'em, join 'em.
The report urges newspapers to, finally, reflect in their pages the impact of television on newspaper readers.


Corporate Vows to Aid Poor Produce Little in Los Angeles
Almost daily a group of well-dressed business executives announces with great fanfare a financial commitment to revitalize this city's poor neighborhoods in the aftermath of last year's riots.
At last tally, 200 corporations had pledged more than $500 million in aid.
But these pledges have so far done little to change the bleak economic conditions of the inner city.
Most of the corporate money will come in the form of donated equipment, buildings and services and support for educational and job training programs -- not for the factories, distribution centers, outlets and other operations that would create jobs in low-income areas.


River Forest Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Edgemark Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hampton Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


With an Accent, All-Star Repertory Theater
Often neglected, or at least not fully appreciated, is the role of television as the equivalent of an all-star repertory theater.
The point is vividly illustrated this week on Bravo's "Texaco Performing-Arts Showcase," which is offering playwrights of substance interpreted by the kinds of stellar casts Broadway would pant for.
Tonight at 10, there's Harold Pinter's "Old Times" with John Malkovich, Kate Nelligan and Miranda Richardson.
On Saturday at 7 P.M., Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson star in John Osborne's "Look Back in Anger."
In this country these days, television adaptations of stage plays are generally left to public television.
Coming up soon on "American Playhouse" is "Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn and Other Identities," the Anna Deavere Smith play, which was widely acclaimed last year at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in the East Village.
But unending struggles with financing put severe limits on public-television productivity.


Market Place
AFTER Apple Computer Inc. announced a decline in earnings for its second fiscal quarter, analysts rushed to revise their estimates for the year.
Some revised them downward, as one might expect, but some raised their estimates and others even issued new buy recommendations.
Apple shares closed up 87.5 cents, at $48.125, when trading ended on Friday.
Analysts at Bear, Stearns; S. G. Warburg; Salomon and Sanford C. Bernstein upgraded their investment ratings.
Lehman Brothers and First Boston maintained buy ratings, while analysts at Hambrecht &amp; Quist; Merrill Lynch and Goldman, Sachs were negative.


Intermetrics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Jets Drafting for Offense? Doubting Thomases Cringe
The Jets have the No. 3 pick in the first round of the National Football League's college draft next Sunday, and a slew of intriguing options come with it.
They will be based upon the actions of New England, which has the No. 1 pick, and Seattle, at No. 2.
New England and Seattle each needs a quarterback and there are two good prospects available: Drew Bledsoe, a 6-foot-5-inch junior at Washington State, who is giving up his final year of college eligibility to enter the draft and Rick Mirer, a 6-2, 213-pound Notre Dame senior.


First Colony Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Healing Wounds and Seeking Understanding; Police and Gay Residents of 115th Precinct Work Together to Find Common Ground
In an experiment being closely watched at Police Headquarters, efforts are under way to ease long-standing tensions between homosexuals and the police in Jackson Heights, Queens, the neighborhood with the largest number of gay and lesbian residents outside Manhattan.
It has been almost three years since the killing of a gay man in the neighborhood, a crime that brought gay groups together in anger after the police initially refused to classify it as a bias crime.


Ousted Teamster: A Brash Mistake
Barry Feinstein was ultimately undone as the last of the union leaders from New York City's fiscal-crisis era by the very same assets that had made him labor's loudest voice.
He headed a tiny union that virtually ran itself, which gave him the time and latitude to plunge into the politics of organized labor and government.
But his base was Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters -- and since the international union was the target of Federal prosecutors and regulators, his survival depended on being beyond reproach.
Mr.
Feinstein apparently wasn't, and he was ousted last week in the wake of charges that he misused $500,000 of the local's money to maintain a luxurious personal life style.


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fourth Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Silicon Valley Group Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Steel Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Privatization To Reshape Peru Market
In Latin America's most radical privatization program, Peru has embarked on a plan to auction off virtually all its state-owned companies over the next two years -- including oil, electric, telephone, and mining companies and the railroad that takes tourists to the Incan ruins at Machu Picchu.
With investors already poring over company prospectuses, the privatizations are expected to reshape Peru's economy in a free-market mold, tripling foreign investment and dismantling a socialist legacy left by a leftwing military Government of the 1970's.


MAF Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SPS Transaction Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World Economies


Confronting Urban Ills, 2 Senators Face Reality
THERE he goes again.
This time, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan did not single out blacks.
But the searing lecture he delivered last week on the social consequences of family disintegration managed to offend, among others, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Representative Charles B. Rangel by waxing nostalgic about the good old days when more families may have been intact, but neglecting to mention that the old days were not so good for blacks still subject to legal segregation.


Greentree Software reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Essay; The Case for 'Compellance'
"Damn the torpedoes," barked David Farragut at Mobile Bay in 1864, "full speed ahead!" The Confederate mines, then called torpedoes, proved defective, and the Union admiral sailed to victory.
I am reminded of this gutsy leadership as I look out my window at The Times's Washington bureau on Farragut Square, with a statue of the naval hero looking sternly toward the White House, a pigeon atop his head.


In Hometown, Little Enthusiasm for Yeltsin or Vote
A week before a crucial referendum on Boris N. Yeltsin's presidency, the Yeltsin Foundation, organized to marshal support for him here in his hometown, has total assets in hand of 80,000 rubles, or about $101.
Alya I. Tanachyova, a former Yeltsin aide and family friend who runs the foundation, rather apologetically displays a small pile of placards and leaflets urging support for Mr.
Yeltsin in the nationwide vote on April 25.
Mr.
Yeltsin has portrayed the vote as pitting the democratic future against the totalitarian past and says it will decide who will govern Russia: he or the conservative legislature, a holdover from the Communist era.


Gorman-Rupp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ever More Money for Intelligence
James Woolsey, the new Director of Central Intelligence, insists he'll keep President Clinton's promise to cut the intelligence budget by $7 billion over the next five years.
But he's starting off in the wrong direction by asking Congress for more money for the coming year.
It's a dangerous world out there, but the menaces don't match those of the past.
The intelligence community should be able to keep track of them with a lot less than $28 billion.


Cincinnati Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Shelby Williams Ind.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.N. Says Enclave Is 'Saved'; Bosnians Call It 'Surrender'
A contingent of 135 United Nations soldiers from Canada entered the Muslim enclave of Srebrenica today to set up a "safe area" under an accord signed before dawn by leaders of Bosnian Serbs and Muslims.
In addition to the "safe area," the accord included an immediate cease-fire and a 72-hour deadline for United Nations troops to disarm the Government garrison in the eastern Bosnian city.


U.S. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Henry (Jack) &amp; Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


This Time, Rivers Dodges the Bullet
Doc Rivers may wonder what will happen to him next, but he is probably afraid to ask.
During the last five weeks alone, Rivers has been suspended for two games for fighting; has chipped his two front teeth after taking an accidental elbow in the face, and has taken eight stitches in his chin after diving for a loose ball.


BB&amp;T Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Pastoral Pursuit in the Concrete Jungle


Hunter's Bull's-eyes Drop Islanders
The Washington Capitals beat the Islanders in the opening game of their playoff series tonight because Washington has Dale Hunter and the Islanders don't have anybody like him.
Few teams do.
Even before Hunter scored two goals to lead a 3-1 victory at the Capital Centre, he dominated the game by checking anyone in his way and by crashing the goal crease of Glenn Healy.
Hunter is a fire-breathing veteran, 32 years old, 13 years in the league, all snips and snails and tough as nails.


United Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hi/Lo Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Federal Capital Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Those Who Deliver, a Good Take
Five years ago, Lois O'Neill found herself at a dead end.
Her life had come down to a divorce, an unrewarding office job and three children to put through college.
So she took a small inheritance and bought a bread delivery route in Bergen County, N.J., for $18,000.
She began going to work at 1 A.M. seven days a week, wearing a sweat suit rather than the high heels to which she was accustomed.


Suspense Builds in the Drama of 'Late Night' Host
After considering several less famous comedians, NBC is now pursuing Garry Shandling to replace David Letterman as the star of "Late Night," its 12:35 A.M. comedy and talk show.
Television industry executives close to the negotiations said this weekend that Mr.
Shandling was now NBC's top choice.
They also said that Mr.
Shandling, who previously turned down an overture about the job, is now talking seriously with the network.


First Financial Caribbean reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economy Looks Up, at Least for Now
When a blizzard gripped the East Coast in March, it took a wicked slice out of the economy and raised questions about the durability of the expansion.
But as the weather has improved, consumers have been returning to stores -- and business executives and economists are breathing easier.
"Once the weather broke, they're flocking back into the stores," said Bernard Marcus, chairman and chief executive of Home Depot, the nation's largest home improvement retailer.


Driver Charged in Accident
A 23-year-old Brooklyn driver who has accumulated 46 driver's license suspensions was charged with 3 new violations after surrendering to the police following a hit-and-run accident in Flatbush that left a boy critically injured, the police said yesterday.
The driver, identified by the police as Mordecai Levy of 120 Ocean Parkway, was charged with leaving the scene of an accident, assault and driving with a suspended license after Friday's accident.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, said Mr.
Levy's car struck an 8-year-old boy at the corner of Argyle Road and Caton Avenue at 3:30 P.M.
Friday.
Sergeant McCluskey said Mr.
Levy turned himself in to the police Saturday.
The child was in critical condition last night at Kings County Medical Center.


Greater New York Savings Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sylvan Recital Canceled
The baritone Sanford Sylvan has canceled his Friday recital at Weill Hall.
Subscribers to the Great Singers series will receive an automatic refund, as will those who who bought their tickets through Carnegie Charge.
Other tickets may be returned to the box office or mailed to Sanford Sylvan Refund, Carnegie Hall Box Office, 154 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Gore Meets Resistance in Effort for Steps on Global Warming
As President Clinton prepares to commemorate Earth Day with a speech on the environment, a dispute has broken out in the Administration over efforts by Vice President Al Gore to persuade Mr.
Clinton to fulfill a campaign promise on specific steps to reduce the threat of global warming.
Mr.
Gore, say aides in the White House and in several Cabinet agencies, has urged the President to commit the United States to freezing at 1990 levels the amount of global-warming pollutants pouring from cars, trucks and factories, a standard that would be reached by the year 2000.


First Franklin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Joffrey Is to Perform At City Center Benefit
The Joffrey Ballet, Irene Worth and Barbara Cook are among those who are to appear at 7 P.M. on May 10 at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan, for a benefit gala in honor of the theater's 50th anniversary.
Joanne Woodward is to be the host.
Tickets go on sale today, with 2,000 seats available at regular box-office prices.
Other participants are to include the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, Kevin Kline, the Paul Taylor Dance Company, Kitty Carlisle Hart, Celeste Holm, Edward Villella, Bobby Short, Darren McGavin, the Martha Graham Dance Company and the Manhattan Theater Club.


Unique Mobility Inc. (ECM) reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Iomega Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


The House That Ben-Hur Built


As Health Plan Comes Together, Big Price Tag Comes Into Focus
Just one month before President Clinton is scheduled to send Congress an ambitious proposal to guarantee comprehensive health care for all Americans, Administration officials are beginning to realize that it may involve huge costs and tax increases bigger than any previously proposed.
The White House has spent 12 weeks developing ideas for guaranteeing all Americans a rich package of health benefits.
But only recently has the task force sorting through the ideas begun to focus on the costs.


Royal Bank of Pennsylvania reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Vermont Financial Services Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** Vermont Financial Services Corp. (NMS)
Qtr to March 31
1993
1992
Net inc
1,121,000
290,000
Per share
.33
.09
Shares outst
3,408,000
3,397,000


Bottom Line for Murray: The Bat Has No Eraser
Eddie Murray traced a line in the batter's box with his bat, and umpire Jeff Kellogg didn't waste a second throwing down the gauntlet in what appears to be a continuing war between the first baseman for the Mets and baseball's on-field authorities.
Murray, who had argued with Kellogg about the strike call on Tim Pugh's first pitch to him in the fourth inning of today's 3-2 loss to the Reds, was ejected as soon as he outlined for the umpire exactly how far inside he thought the second pitch was.
The dugout for the Mets detonated, and Manager Jeff Torborg was gone for the afternoon moments later, too.


Africa Sees Angola as a Test of U.S. Sincerity
To the Editor:
The credibility of the United States campaign for democracy in the third world is being tested by failing to recognize the elected government of Angola.
For 15 years, the United States, through the Central Intelligence Agency, has empowered and sustained Jonas Savimbi's Unita, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, with more than $1 billion, alongside support from South Africa.


Mego Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Aquarion Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


America West has its employees singing and dancing about its new theme: respect.
BEGINNING today, America West Airlines offers fliers a new twist on the old song and dance.
In its largest campaign since it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in June 1991, America West offers a promise: "America West. We haven't forgotten the meaning of respect."


School Board Election Debates on TV Begin Monday, April 26; No Qualifications
To the Editor:
As a New York City teacher, I am thankful that school board elections are finally being paid attention.
However, despite all the attention given to infiltration by the "Christian" right into the process, significant issues have been overlooked.


Bestop Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Media Vision Technology Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Walbro Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Penguins Are Off and Waddling
The two-time Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins are playing their best hockey of the season and hardly need an assist from their opponents.
But they got plenty of help from the Devils today in the opening round of their playoff series.
The Devils were most generous by turning the puck over in dangerous areas of the ice, and they strayed from their plan to avoid penalties -- incurring eight -- as the Penguins, led by Mario Lemieux's two goals and two assists, scored a 6-3 victory.
The Penguins, scoring three times on the power play, showed their championship form before a regional television audience as ABC became the first major network to televise a Stanley Cup playoff game since 1980. (ABC also televised the St. Louis-Chicago game in other parts of the country.)


Scallopers See a Livelihood Imperiled
Like the 19th-century whalers who lived and labored here before them, scallopers say they fear they may become the next fallen icons of New England, remembered only in museums, books and the tall barroom tales of fishermen.
Dwindling stocks of sea scallops, foreign competition and increased enforcement of Federal fishing regulations have turned their once-pleasant trade into an ordeal that threatens their way of life, say the men and women who work the seas.


Dance in Review
'Mating for Life'
Tamar Rogoff  Performance Space 122
Tamar Rogoff's "Mating for Life," seen on Friday night, takes a long, dreaming look at the bright and dark sides of a building relationship.
A series of slow-moving, often fragmentary episodes, "Mating for Life" begins and ends with Lissy Trachtenberg and Jan Vomacka close together and facing each other.
Lips touch in a first near-kiss exchanged between the kneeling man and woman.
At the end, both are standing, and the woman smiles, half-teasing and half-laughing at the man.
The passage of time has changed the way they see each other and themselves.


California Financial Holding Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Leader of Bosnia Serbs Remains Firmly Against Peace Plan, Despite U.N. Pressure
In a day that mixed the pageantry of Orthodox Easter celebrations with negotiations over plum brandy at a banquet, Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, stood firm today against signing the United Nations peace plan for Bosnia.
Talking with reporters after church in this mountain village, which is the capital of the self-styled Serbian republic carved out of Bosnia, Dr.
Karadzic suggested strongly that he would not cave in and sign the plan.


CHRONICLE
More than 23 years ago, Senator GAYLORD NELSON, a Wisconsin Democrat, decided on the need for a national discussion on the environment in schools and colleges around the country.
That first teach-in called Earth Day has mushroomed into an international event.
On Thurday, Earth Day, the founder of this grass-roots movement, former Senator Nelson will receive the first Earth Day Award for Environmental Leadership at a dinner, to be held at the National Arts Club in New York City.
The artist ROBERT RAUSCHENBERG will be given the first Earth Day Award for Environment and the Arts.
Mr.
Rauschenberg designed the first Earth Day poster in 1970 and the official painting for last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.


Prison Guards To File Suit On Bias Claim
Five black prison guards, claiming that an atmosphere of racial bias dominates a New Jersey State prison in Avenel, say that white officers and commanders in recent years placed a photograph of a Ku Klux Klan member on the prison bulletin board, scrawled "go back to Africa" signs on sentry boxes and uttered racist slurs.
The guards detail their charges in a suit that their lawyers said would be filed today in Federal District Court in Newark against the New Jersey Department of Corrections and 16 department officials and officers.
In the suit, the officers contend that their civil rights have been violated through "a continuing pattern and practice of race discrimination, racial harassment and retaliation against African-American corrections officers and their white supporters." A copy of the suit was given to The New York Times by lawyers for the officers.


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Patents
UNTIL the mid-1980's, well-meaning conservationists sought to save endangered sea turtles from predators and poachers by carefully digging eggs out from remote underground nests and moving them to styrofoam containers, where the young hatched.
These eggs produced primarily male turtles because in certain reptiles, it turns out, sex is determined by the temperature of the egg during incubation rather than being determined at conception, as it is in mammals.
Moving eggs from sunny beaches to a cooler spot indoors caused males rather than females to develop.


Why Some Boston Legends Plan to Cut a Few Corners
They are growing old, but the course is not getting any softer around the middle.
So New England's greatest long-distance running legends have made some concessions to the Boston Marathon, which today will be run for the 97th time.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the political situation in Nepal misstated the month elections were held there in 1991.
It was May, not June.


Star Banc Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





First Hawaiian Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Recalling the Warsaw Uprising on Its 50th Anniversary


Signet Banking Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Bancorp-Ohio (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jordan Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Dance in Review
'The Man Who Celebrates Being 60'
Jan Gero
Kampo Cultural Center  31 Bond Street  East Village
Jan Gero, who turned 60 on March 31, gave himself some choreographic birthday presents on Tuesday night.
"The Man Who Celebrates Being 60," a program of six works, included two solos choreographed and performed by Mr.
Gero, two works choreographed by Mr.
Gero for other dancers and two pieces created for Mr.
Gero by other choreographers.
Mr.
Gero and the two other performers danced with celebratory fervor.
Yet their energy could not disguise the weakness of much of the choreography.


Nets Use Small Players to Whittle Away Big Deficit
Nets Coach Chuck Daly called his team's 23-point fourth-quarter comeback, which snagged a playoff berth for New Jersey, a "very bizarre miracle." That miracle came at the expense of the Washington Bullets, 104-103, in Landover, Md., Saturday night.
"We've lost three at home the same way," Daly said yesterday.
"All of a sudden we get down big, I come back with a different team and we play with great passion, great passion. That was the difference, we got back into the game."


Provident Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Banyan Strategic Land Fund II reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nina Shapiro and Harold Dauerman
Dr.
Nina Lisbeth Shapiro, a resident in otolaryngology at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston, was married yesterday to Dr.
Harold Lee Dauerman, a resident in internal medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital there.
Rabbi Mordechai Waxman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 27, graduated cum laude from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received M.D. degrees from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Shapiro of Great Neck.
Her father is a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
Her mother, Dee Shapiro, is a painter in Great Neck.


When Bilingual Skills Can Get in the Way
To the Editor:
The unfinished discussion about the merits of bilingual education, continued by Susan Dicker in "Bilingual Education Yields Good Results" (letter, April 6), has focused on the basic education of children from Spanish-speaking families.


U.S. Says 2 of Its Planes Attacked Iraqi Radar That Imperiled Them
A United States warplane fired on and probably destroyed an Iraqi radar site outside the no-flight zone in northern Iraq when the radar threatened an Air Force monitoring patrol by electronically targeting it, the Pentagon said today.
Both F-4G Wild Weasel fighters involved in the incident returned safely to their base at Incirlik, Turkey, after firing a HARM anti-radiation missile at the tracking site, which then "ceased to illuminate," Lieut.
Comdr.
Brian Cullin, a spokesman, said.
Target Below 36th Parallel
Unlike a incident on April 9, when United States jets dropped cluster bombs on Iraqi antiaircraft batteries that had fired on them, today's target was 11 miles south of the 36th parallel.


Artisoft Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
March  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Durable Goods . . .
March


Atlanfed Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Tattoo and Sketch Only Clues to an Identity
She gazes out of the picture, her eyes a little bored, maybe a little hostile, waiting.
She seems to be real, and yet is not.
The face of the woman on homicide police bulletins being posted in truck stops and highway police barracks across the country is in fact a computer's best guess about the appearance of a young woman who was murdered, and her body dumped in a truck parking area off Interstate 80 here, 18 months ago.


San Luis Potosi Journal; Mexico's Reform Vote: In House Divided, 2 Stand
When opposition parties of the left and right joined behind a stubborn old ophthalmologist here two summers ago and nearly broke the governing party's hold on the statehouse, some Mexicans took it to be a watershed in their political history.
That Salvador Nava Martinez did not emerge the winner of the August 1991 election was almost secondary.
The protests he led charging fraud in the vote forced the new Governor from office, and the lesson was that if the country's traditionally fractious opposition could unite, it might challenge even a reinvigorated ruling party.


Rhona C. Graff, Lucius J. Riccio
Lucius Joseph Riccio, the Commissioner of Transportation for the City of New York, was married yesterday to Rhona Cheryl Graff, an executive assistant to Donald J. Trump, the developer.
Mayor David N. Dinkins performed the ceremony at the Plaza Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Graff Riccio is also a contributing writer to Inside Tennis magazine.
She graduated from Queens College, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Graff of Fresh Meadows, Queens.


CHRONICLE
Marking a quarter of a century since he led the anti-Vietnam War movement in the Democratic Presidential primaries, EUGENE J. MCCARTHY said in an interview last month, "Somebody said something about holding an anniversary celebration, but I told them I'd rather hold a rally."


Wolohan Lumber (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Israeli Stabbed to Death in Gaza; Curbs on Palestinians Maintained
Palestinian assailants stabbed an Israeli lawyer to death in the Gaza Strip today, the first slaying of an Israeli by Arabs since the Government sealed off the occupied territories nearly three weeks ago to stop a surge of Arab attacks.
The Cabinet decided at its weekly meeting today to maintain the closing, which was imposed after 15 Israelis were killed last month.
Twenty-six Palestinians and other Arabs also died in March, in street violence or in clashes with security forces.


Vicor Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; For Joe Montana, It's Future or Flop
FOR an aging quarterback, the most difficult move is not avoiding the rush.
It's the move to another team.
Joe Montana, who will be 37 years old in June, may decide to finish his classic career with the Kansas City Chiefs after all those Super Bowl seasons with the San Francisco 49ers.


Man Is Accused of Killing Mother and a Half-Sister
A man who was apparently feuding with his family over money walked up to his mother and half-sister in the cafeteria of a Queens nursing home yesterday morning and shot them to death without uttering a word, the police said.
About 15 elderly residents were enjoying a leisurely Sunday morning, chatting with visitors, reading newspapers and drinking coffee, when the man, whom the police identified as Harold Green, 45, entered the ground-floor cafeteria at the Highland Care Center at 91-31 175th Street in South Jamaica about 10:40 A.M.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumers are flocking back to the nation's stores as the weather improves, and business executives and economists are breathing easier.
Early April cars sales werealso up, and mortgage applications remain at a high level.  [ Page D1. ]
Business pledges to help revitalize poor neighborhoods in Los Angeles have so far done little to change the bleak economic conditions of the inner city.  [ A1. ]


ADT Security Picks BBDO New York
ADT Security Systems Inc. of Parsippany, N.J., a supplier of commercial and residential security services, has selected BBDO New York to handle its account, which Poppe Tyson in New York handled for four years.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.


World Acceptance (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NUCLEAR DUMP SITE REPORTED IN TIBET
A Tibetan organization today accused China of conducting nuclear-weapons research on the Tibetan plateau and dumping radioactive waste there.
At least 50 Tibetans living near research sites and uranium mines have died, said the report, written by the Washington-based International Campaign for Tibet.


Edmund Horman, 87, Is Dead; His Hunt for Son Inspired Movie
Edmund C. Horman, whose crusade in investigating his son's disappearance and death in a Chilean coup was portrayed in the film "Missing," died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


HORSE RACING: KENTUCKY DERBY '93 -- In the Running; Some Are Running From the Roses
Rockamundo? Next, they'll be asking for volunteers for the Kentucky Derby.
With less than two weeks to go to the 119th Run for the Roses, the road to Louisville was plunged into total confusion over the weekend when the Loblolly Stable's cavalry was badly depleted.
The stable, recently the envy of the racing world because of its array of Derby colts, ran two entries in two states Saturday in one more move to rate its stars and decide which two or three would go on to the Derby.
Instead, disaster.


ERO Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NVF Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northern Trust Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stryker Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pond's Skin Care To Ogilvy &amp; Mather
Chesebrough-Pond's U.S.A. in Greenwich, Conn., has transferred its Pond's skin-care account from McCann-Erickson New York to Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, effective immediately.
The shift, which also includes assigning direct- marketing responsibilities to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, is part of an effort by Unilever, the parent company of Chesebrough-Pond's, to realign its Pond's advertising worldwide; various Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide offices handle the Pond's line in 38 other countries.


Young Jews in Warsaw Rebuild Their Heritage
In the pale spring sunlight, several stooped, white-haired men in dark suits and hats shuffle across the stone courtyard in front of the city's only synagogue, a stark reminder that in Europe's once-flourishing center of Judaism, few elderly Jews remain.
In a shabby building nearby, a group of university students gather around their computer to plan the next issue of their Jewish newspaper.
Downstairs, white paint is hastily slapped on walls for the opening of a Jewish youth sports club.


Talks Continuing at Ohio Prison
The takeover of part of the maximum-security prison here by about 450 inmates entered its seventh day today with more negotiations for the release of five guards being held hostage.
But there was no indication of a break in the tense situation in which at least six inmates and a guard have been killed.
As part of the negotiations, officials of the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility tried today, as they had tried Saturday, to arrange for a live television broadcast.
A television satellite truck was ready to enter the grounds, but by evening there had been no broadcast, and officials would not comment on what was causing the delay.


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tax Balloons and Common Sense
President Clinton's agents have once again floated the notion of a national value-added tax to pay for universal health care.
Until he broaches the health plan, though, it is idle to speculate about how he would finance it and senseless to let the financing divert everyone's attention.
As a seasoned politician, Mr.
Clinton surely knows the risk of coupling two major controversies -- over health care
and
a new system of taxation.
Indeed, the talk of a valued-added tax may be nothing more than the White House signaling that the health plan's cost will be formidable.


Central Mortgage Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suntrust Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Oklahoma, Anita Hill's Story Is Open Wound
More than a year and a half after Prof.
Anita F. Hill's accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas gripped the nation, the state and law school where she teaches remain trapped in a painful argument over whether she was a courageous law professor or a perjurer who should leave Oklahoma.
Hardly a week goes by without a protest on the campus and at the State Capitol over a plan to honor her with an endowed chair to research sexual harassment and women's rights issues.


ACM Managed Income Fund reports earnings for As of Feb 28


Bananas to Have an Environmental Seal
To the Editor:
"A Forbidden Fruit in Europe: Latin Bananas Face Hurdles" (front page, April 5) highlights the crisis caused by the European Community's plan to raise quotas and tariffs on Latin American bananas dramatically.
This comes amid growing worldwide concern about the adverse environmental effects of banana farming.


By Popular Demand: Montana Reconsiders
The burden is now on Joe Montana to choose between San Francisco and Kansas City.
In a dramatic turnabout yesterday, the 49ers named Montana their "designated" starting quarterback ahead of the league's reigning most valuable player, Steve Young -- an attempt to induce Montana to remain with the team.
Montana, the three-time Super Bowl m.v.p. who will turn 37 in June, had reached a contractual agreement on Saturday to join the Chiefs, and it was considered a formality that the 49ers would honor the quarterback's request and trade him to Kansas City.
But Montana spent the weekend at the Youngstown, Ohio, home of the San Francisco owner, Edward DeBartolo Jr., who asked Montana to reconsider his decision and then dangled an unexpected carrot -- the starting job.


Albara Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Cinderella Story: Club Pro Wins Title
Life has never been easy for Tom Wargo.
It wasn't easy as a farmer, as an iron worker, as a commercial fisherman in Alaska, or on an automobile assembly line in Flint, Mich.
Nor has it been easy in the 17 years he has tried to make a living playing golf.


Unitrin Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Theater; Irish Teen-Agers Indict the World
Perhaps the most disturbing thought about "Seconds Out," a powerful new play being staged by the Irish Repertory Theater, is that its stark and desperate view of modern society was written by a group of eight teen-agers.
It is a sobering indictment of the world they are about to inherit.
The play centers on James Hennessy, an 18-year-old Irish youth who is sentenced to prison for a variety of misdemeanors.
Hennessy, whose only interest in life seems to be his loft full of pigeons, mostly mumbles incoherencies punctuated by crude Anglo-Saxonisms.
"He's not just monosyllabic, he's inarticulate," one court official explains.
Or, as the prison governor puts it, Hennessy "is not quite the full bob."


New Tool for Predicting Trends in Bond Yields
In financial markets, analysts are always looking for ways to spot trends ahead of time.
It is a way to make good forecasts and good money.
Technical analysts watch the pattern of price movements.
Economists look deeply into the details of monthly reports, picking out their favorite barometer of the future.
When the employment report is released, for example, it may be the index of hourly earnings that is taken as the key signal that month, rather than the rate of the change of jobs.


Memories Live of Warsaw Ghetto Battle
Lillian Lazar is a small woman, and it is hard to imagine her even smaller, shrunk from starvation to 70 pounds, reaching for a pair of fabric shears to attack a German soldier as the Jewish ghetto in Warsaw burned to extinction 50 years ago.
She knew her attack was useless.
But the shears in the German uniform factory where she worked were all she had.
"That's what I grabbed," she said quietly yesterday.
"I was ready to fight. This was my ammunition." Tattooed Reminders
Mrs.
Lazar was 16 years old on April 19, 1943, the day several hundred Jews in Warsaw's dying ghetto rose in organized resistance to the Nazi extermination.
Yesterday, she awoke at 5 A.M. in her home in Yonkers, picked up 12 dozen plain bagels, six cartons of cream cheese and pulled up to Madison Square Garden at 6:45 A.M., the first of scores of Holocaust survivors to arrive for a solemn service in memory of the uprising.


Keystone Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Versus Technology reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Italians Vote: Can They Start a Political Revival?
Elisabetta di Luca sandwiched her tryst with Italy's destiny between late-morning Mass and Sunday lunch today, voting yes to political change in a referendum that represented a verdict on her land and its leaders -- even, some say, a turning point.
Just in case anyone had doubts, the priest who led the Mass had made clear what the Vatican thought she and the rest of the flock should be doing.
"He told us, 'It's your duty to go to vote for a change in Italy,' " the 38-year-old health worker said as she emerged from the polling booth into the sunlight that seeped into the Roman spring today.


Sending a Message, Louis Farrakhan Plays Mendelssohn
In the green hills of North Carolina on Saturday night, the lion lay down with the lamb.
A reputed sower of discord communed with a maker of harmony.
The man who called Judaism a "dirty religion" expounded on one of Jewry's most benign creators.
Louis Farrakhan, meet Felix Mendelssohn.
Mr.
Farrakhan, spiritual leader to the Nation of Islam, came to this quiet city bearing not a cudgel but a violin.
Before an audience of about 300 at Reynolds Auditorium and under the watchful eyes of at least 50 young bodyguards, a vocal militant in this American black Muslim movement ended an orchestral concert conducted by Michael Morgan by walking on stage and playing the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto.


Apartment Owners as Both Tenant and Landlord
It is a bizarre New York City game, a real-estate version of musical chairs.
To participate one only needs to own a co-op or condominium that cannot be sold and have a need or desire to live somewhere else.
While there are no hard figures on how many people have been thrust into this sometimes costly game, where apartment owners are landlords and tenants at the same time, anecdotal information suggests that the number of co-op owners who are subletting their apartments while they rent other places is growing.


Hibernia Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tennant Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


It's Double Jeopardy In the King Case
To the Editor:
I am not a member of the American Civil Liberties Union.
But one need not be a civil libertarian to take issue with "It's Not Double Jeopardy in L.A." (editorial, April 8), your attack on the A.C.L.U. position that the second trial of the Rodney King defendants violates the constitutional guarantee of double jeopardy.


Aspect Telecommunications Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Cinematic Suspension of Disbelief: Make Portland Look Like New York
Here in the Rose City, police officers ride mountain bikes through downtown and say things like, "double-tall nonfat latte, please," when they go for a coffee break.
Understandably, they are being kept out of camera range as Portland tries to re-create itself as New York City for a television movie about the World Trade Center explosion.
Portland has been many things to many people, but nobody has ever accused it of trying to mimic the gritty swagger of the Big Apple.
If New York is a city that never sleeps, Portland is well rested and perky at an early hour.


Treasury Activity Confined To Regular Auction of Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.82 percent, and on the six-month bill, 2.95 percent.


Equity Offerings Expected for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
ACM Muni Securities Income Fund, New York, an initial public offering of 6 million shares.
Prudential Securities.
Action Performance Cos., Tempe, Ariz., 1 million units, each consisting of 1 share and 1 warrant.
Paulson Investment Co.


CHRONICLE
This year's winners of the Goldman Environmental Prize, which has been called the Nobel Prize of the Environment, will be honored today at a ceremony at Herbst Hall in San Francisco.
Seven environmentalists from around the world will receive awards totaling $360,000 from the Goldman Environmental Foundation.
On Wednesday, they they will be in New York City at a reception where the host will be ROBERT F. KENNEDY JR.
"We hope these awards will encourage more people at the grass-roots level to become active in support of the environment," said RICHARD GOLDMAN, Chief of Protocol of San Francisco.
Mr.
Goldman, chairman of an independent insurance brokerage firm, and his wife, RHODA, established the awards in 1989.


Egypt Replaces the Minister Combating Muslim Militants
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, whose Government has been unable to curb a surge of Muslim militant violence, removed his Interior Minister today.
He named as the new minister Maj.
Gen.
Hassan al-Alfy, the Governor of Assyut province, replacing Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa.


Liberty National Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Older Isn't Healthier
To the Editor:
Your April 7 front-page report that a drop in old-age disability is challenging the idea of fading health is not borne out.
The article concerns the decrease in elderly disability rates and does not treat fading health at all.
Joints are being replaced and cataracts removed, but that does not make for a healthy individual.


STRUGGLE IN THE BALKANS: U.N. Says Enclave Is 'Saved'; Bosnians Call It 'Surrender'; Croats and Muslims Battle
As many as 200 people have died in heavy fighting over the last three days between Croatian militiamen and Bosnian Army forces here and in other central Bosnian towns, United Nations officials said today.
The clashes, the worst in months between the well-armed Croatian Defense Council and the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army, halted all overland deliveries of aid from Croatia's Adriatic seaports to central Bosnia.


Banyan Hotel Investment Fund reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Opera; Machinery and Magic in a Completed 'Ring'
Watching the collapse of the Gibichung castle at the end of the current Metropolitan Opera production of "Gotterdammerung" is a little like watching Peter Pan fly in a summer-stock production: you can't miss the strings and the machinery.
Huge boulders act like mounds of Styrofoam, being tilted and lowered on all-too-visible ropes.
But then, a moment later, the Met's production redeems itself, taking on another character.
The giant castle gradually sinks until it seems to become part of an underwater world; rocks rise with the Rhinemaidens playfully grasping the magic Ring that has finally been tossed to them.
As the music swirls, that rock too lowers, the lighting shifts slightly and in the rear Valhalla can be discerned, engulfed in flames.
It is an intelligent and compact solution to Wagner's attempts to show all three regions of his universe in the score's final pages.
The performance of the Met's first "Ring" cycle this season, which ended on Saturday afternoon after three previous Saturday matinees, seemed to combine that final scene's mixture of clunky artifice and supple grandeur throughout its 17 hours.
Much of the grandeur was heard in James Levine's conducting, which could, at its best moments, be both subtle and sweeping, aware of the score's ambiguous shifts in expression as well as its more blunt invocation of motifs.
But there was much else to take pleasure in as well, and there will be two other opportunities to do so: this Otto Schenk production of the "Ring" will begin again tonight with "Das Rheingold," with all four works to be seen within the week, as Wagner originally wished; they will repeat again next week.


No Headline
"The whole idea was not to go willingly. We thought that if there was an uprising, some shooting back, somebody would wake up. But nobody did. No help came." -- MICHAEL KISHEL, 72, of Queens, recalling the Warsaw Ghetto uprising.  [ B6:4. ]


Dance in Review
Dancenoise
Whitney Museum at Philip Morris
120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street
Dancenoise took over the small stage and poured out its customary thick stew of zany performance art on Wednesday night.
It was part of the Whitney's "Say What?: The 1993 Biennial Performance/Theater Project." This time around, the piece is called "Dancenoise" as well, and the performers' play with props initiates scene changes a little more obviously than in their other work.
But it was otherwise business as usual for the irrepressible duo of Anne Iobst and Lucy Sexton.


Hospital Staffing Services reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; A Nigerian in His American Debut
Twelve percussionists become an orchestra in the music of Adewale Ayuba, the Nigerian singer and band leader who made a magnificent United States debut on Friday night at Tramps.
Mr.
Ayuba, who is 28 and has been making albums since he was 17, was named artist of the year in the most recent Nigerian Music Awards.
His style, called fuji, is the music of choice among a generation of Nigerian Yorubas who have embraced Islam.
With only percussion and voices, fuji's ingredients might seem austere.
But the two-hour early set by Mr.
Ayuba and his Bonsue Fuji Creation Band was a cornucopia of melodies, rhythms and textures, from airy pattering to bruising, locomotive momentum.
Fuji arose in the 1970's in Nigeria, bringing together elements of various traditional percussion ensembles with some of the fusions already created by juju music.
As with the juju of King Sunny Ade, Mr.
Ayuba's fuji was, in concert, a nonstop succession of songs, chants, percussion interludes and strutting, hip-swinging dances by band members.
Although the band uses nothing but percussion, it has plenty of variety; it includes small hand drums, a booming talking drum, pressure drums, gourd shakers, a rack of cowbells and a Western kit of trap drums, including an electronic drum for a touch of hip-hop.
Without juju's cushion of Western guitars, fuji sounds rawer, fiercer, less assimilated and more exuberant, bristling with the details of numberless precise impacts.


State Street Boston Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Appointee Is Planning to Leave Board of Education
Dr.
Westina L. Matthews, one of Mayor David N. Dinkins's two appointees on the Board of Education, has resigned, adding another hitch to an already bumpy ride this year for New York City's public schools.
Dr.
Matthews, a Merrill Lynch executive and former schoolteacher in Ohio who has served on the seven-member board since 1990, announced her intent in a letter to the Mayor dated March 29.
The move, reported in yesterday's Daily News, is effective May 7.
It was spurred by "compelling personal reasons," she wrote.


Firstbank of Illinois (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Farrakhan's Overture
The black militant says he seeks to mend fences with Jews by his performance of the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto.
Page C11.
Turmoil in Pakistan
Pakistan's President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, dismissed Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, citing corruption, and dissolved Parliament.
Page A3.
Real-Estate Musical Chairs
Hurt by a depressed market, many New York co-op and condominium owners are renting their units rather than trying to sell them.
Page B1.
Goalies on the Spot
As the National Hockey League playoffs get under way, the goaltender's difficult task becomes even more difficult.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Hundreds Join Protests Against Proliferation of Sex Shops
In coordinated protests throughout New York City yesterday, hundreds of residents in several neighborhoods rallied against what they called the proliferation of adult video stores, topless bars and nude cabarets in residential areas.
The protesters descended on adult entertainment spots in the Murray Hill, Chelsea and Turtle Bay neighborhoods of Manhattan as well as Marine Park, Brooklyn, calling for city zoning regulations that would bar such businesses from residential communities.


Vermont Financial Services Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
One of the most famous deals in the literature of the game concerns the play of the diagramed layout in six spades.
It is usually shown with the North hand as declarer, but it is hard to imagine any bidding that would make South the dummy in a spade contract.
Consider what the result should be with various leads from West.
Obviously a club lead, conceding a ruff and sluff, would make South's task easy.
A little experimenting will show that the defense will prevail after a diamond lead.
But a heart lead is interesting.


Transcontinental Realty Investors Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Laserscope (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Flying Rubber Disks and Men in Masks
Back in hockey's Middle Ages, which lasted until the Big Bang of Expansion in 1967, the stereotype was consistent: Goalies were portrayed in caricature, like left-handed pitchers in baseball and place-kickers in football.
Some got sick before games.
Others drank too much after games.
Many were thought to be superstitious loners, standing bare-faced, scarred if not scared, with noses broken and skin stitched, wearing 50 pounds of equipment, stopping hard, flying rubber soaring at them.


Casual Justice in the Iraq Case
Who omitted the word "military" from documents the Commerce Department gave Congress listing high-technology equipment sold to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war?
And who ordered 68 alterations in the report that concealed the fact that much of the equipment had a military use?
The Justice Department under President Bush didn't want to find out, which was understandable: the prewar appeasement of Saddam Hussein could tarnish the glory of Desert Storm.
But surely the Justice Department under President Clinton would get to the bottom of this?


In Los Angeles Parish, Care for Convicted Officer
At Our Lady of Perpetual Help Church here today there were no grateful sermons about riots avoided and reconciliation begun as there were elsewhere in Los Angeles County on the morning after two guilty verdicts in the beating trial of four police officers.
This is the home parish of the convicted police sergeant, Stacy C. Koon, his wife and five children.
Members of the congregation and the clergy at this thriving Roman Catholic church said today that they grieved for the family that has already suffered terrible emotional and financial strain.


Queens Florist Is Fatally Shot in Robbery
A 62-year-old florist in Middle Village, Queens, was fatally wounded during a robbery yesterday, but the two gunmen were chased down and captured by off-duty police officers, the police said.
The victim, Joseph DeSantis, was shot twice in front of St.
John's Flower Shop at 66-52 80th Street about 5 P.M. and died later at Jamaica Hospital.


2 Robbers Set Fire To Store in Harlem
Two men robbed and set fire to a grocery store in Harlem early today in a building where what appeared to be a crack factory was discovered on an upper floor, Fire Department officials reported.
Lieut.
William Bush, a department spokesman, said the robbery took place shortly after midnight at 1985 Amsterdam Avenue near West 158th Street.
Lieutenant Bush said the manager, Gizelle Cazanova, told investigating officers that two men walked into her store, put a gun to her head and announced a robbery.
After she had turned over what money she had available, they spread gasoline on the floor and ran.


Too Much of That No. 66 Deep-Sixes the Devils
After a 4-point game that looked easy, if not effortless, Mario Lemieux said that yes, he was feeling "pretty good right now," six weeks after completing treatment for Hodgkins' disease and resuming his spectacular hockey career.
"I feel a lot better than I did a couple of weeks ago," he said.
"My strength is coming back. I'm not as sore after games. I'm pretty close to 100 percent."


Minnesota Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Crabtree &amp; Evelyn, Woodstock, Conn., to Angotti, Thomas, Hedge Inc., New York, for an undisclosed assignment.
Billings were not disclosed.


Review/Theater; Mike Todd's Broadway In the Grand Old Days
As a showman, Mike Todd was a self-generating dynamo, a con artist who transformed himself into a promotional genius.
Just as he gave his name to a wide-screen movie process, he lived his entire life in Todd-AO.
Originality, which Todd had in abundance, is a key ingredient missing in "Ain't Broadway Grand." The musical, which opened last night at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, is smaller than Todd's life.
A more appropriate title would have been "Ain't Broadway Bland."
During the few moments that evoke the flashy Todd style, the show strikes entertaining notes, especially when Gerry Vichi is cavorting onstage pretending to be the producer's favorite comedian, Bobby Clark.
But when the authors, Thomas Meehan and Lee Adams, try to invent a story thread about Todd's life, the result is substandard Broadway biography.
Were this an actual 1940's show being revived at the Goodspeed Opera House rather than a period pastiche, the book would have been rewritten.


Helian Health Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Carolina First Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-14  SERBIA FACES TOUGH ACTION  The draconian economic blockade approved by the United Nations Security Council threatens to plunge Serbia into an isolation as deep as Iraq's unless its President convinces the leader of Bosnia's Serbs to make peace.
A1  PEACEKEEPERS ENTER SREBRENICA  A contingent of United Nations soldiers from Canada entered the Muslim enclave of Srebrenica to create a United Nations-monitored "safe area," one of the points in an accord signed before dawn by leaders of Muslim and Bosnian Serbs.
A14


Ajay Sports reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


TCF Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Having a President to Battle With Gives Dole a New Spirit and Verve
In this power-focused capital, an ultimate insider is finding new satisfaction in a seemingly diminished role, the minority leadership of a party suddenly thrust from power.
After eight years of trying to serve the competing interests of two Republican Presidents and a few dozen Republican senators as the party's leader in the Senate, Bob Dole is having the time of his life.
He is now in a role that really suits his personality better, the scrappy underdog challenging a popular President.


Leo H. Arnstein; Lawyer, 86
Leo H. Arnstein, a Chicago trial lawyer and partner in the law firm of Arnstein &amp; Lehr, died on April 15 at his home in Glencoe, Ill.
Mr.
Arnstein was 86 years old.
He died in his sleep, a spokeswoman for the law firm said.


Hoffenberg Still a Collector
Irrepressible is certainly the word for Steven Hoffenberg, chairman of the Towers Financial Corporation in New York, who recently attracted attention with his effort to buy The New York Post.
Towers Financial, a bill-collecting and financing company, has filed for bankruptcy court protection.
The company and Mr.
Hoffenberg face civil fraud charges from the Securities and Exchange Commission and a host of suits by investors, all arising from the sale of $415 million worth of Towers promissory notes.
Many witnesses in the S.E.C. case say they are being questioned about Towers by Federal prosecutors.


Review/Music; Peering Into the Influence Of Dvorak's Legacy
Sometimes it takes a foreigner to prod Americans into thinking about what kind of music they should have for themselves.
Dvorak was one.
He arrived in the United States 100 years ago to begin a three-year tenure as teacher and composer.
His presence and his residual influence were remembered on Thursday night at the City University of New York Graduate Center in a concert called "Dvorak's American Legacy" and presided over by the conductor Maurice Peress.
The Meridian String Quartet, the Aaron Copland School of Music Jazz Ensemble under Mr.
Peress and various singers and players were offering a kind of educational genealogy.
It began with two Dvorak pupils, Reuben Goldmark and Will Marion Cook; proceeded to their pupils, Duke Ellington, Aaron Copland and George Gershwin, and then ended with the finale of Dvorak's "American" String Quartet.


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SyQuest Technology Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
A TALE OF SURVIVAL AND DEFIANCE
Lillian Lazar was 16 years old when she reached for a pair of fabric shears to attack a German soldier on April 19, 1943, the day Jews in Warsaw's fetid and dying ghetto rose in the first organized resistance to the Nazi extermination.
Yesterday, she awoke at 5 A.M. in her home in Yonkers, picked up 12 dozen plain bagels and 6 cartons of cream cheese and pulled up to Madison Square Garden at 7:45 A.M., the first to arrive of dozens of Holocaust survivors for a solemn memorial to the uprising.
A1.
Although the Warsaw uprising was crushed, its enduring lessons lie in the courage of its participants, many of the speakers stressed at the memorial service.
B6.
PORTLAND, ORE., WEARS A NEW YORK MASK
Portland, Ore., has been many things to many people, but nobody has ever accused it of trying to mimic the gritty swagger of the Big Apple.
If New York is a city that never sleeps, Portland is well rested and perky at an early hour.
Nevertheless, Portland has tried to re-create itself as New York City for a television movie about the World Trade Center explosion.
The makers of NBC's "Terror in the Towers" have had to import smoke, snow, garbage, noise and even a few shady-looking types as they try to re-enact in this gentle city on the Willamette River the Feb. 26 blast that rocked lower Manhattan.
A16.
NEW YORK CITY  2 SHOT TO DEATH IN NURSING HOME
A man who was apparently feuding with his family over money walked up to his mother and half-sister in the cafeteria of a Queens nursing home and shot them to death without uttering a word, the police said.
B3.
A BRASH STYLE AND A BIG MISTAKE
Barry Feinstein was ultimately undone as the last of the union leaders from New York City's fiscal-crisis era by the same assets that had made him labor's loudest voice.
His base was Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters -- and since the international union was the target of Federal prosecutors and regulators, his survival depended on being beyond reproach.
News analysis.
B3.
ADULT VIDEO STORES DRAW PROTESTS
Hundreds of residents in several neighborhoods rallied against what they called the proliferation of adult video stores, topless bars and nude cabarets in residential areas.
The protesters descended on adult entertainment spots in the Murray Hill, Chelsea and Sutton Place neighborhoods of Manhattan as well as Marine Park, Brooklyn, calling for city zoning regulations that would bar such businesses from residential communities.
B3.
DINKINS APPOINTEE LEAVES SCHOOL BOARD
Dr.
Westina L. Matthews, one of Mayor Dinkins's two appointees on the Board of Education, has resigned, adding another hitch to an already bumpy ride this year for New York City's public schools.
Her resignation comes at a tense time for Mr.
Dinkins, for whom education issues will be critical in the mayoral campaign.
B3.
REGION  SEEKING IDENTITY OF TIGER LADY
The face of the woman on homicide police bulletins being posted in truck stops and highway police barracks across the country is a computer's best guess about the appearance of Tiger Lady, a young woman whose body was dumped in a truck parking area off Interstate 80 in Warrington, N.J., 18 months ago.
B8.
D'AMATO'S BROTHER GOES ON TRIAL
Armand P. D'Amato goes on trial on Federal fraud charges in connection with $120,500 the government said he was paid to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, on behalf of a defense contractor, the Unisys Corporation.
B8.
DESCRIBING A GAME HE CANNOT SEE
Pursuing his dream of being a professional baseball broadcaster in the major leagues, Don Wardlow is undeterred by the fact that he cannot see.
For now, he is in the minors, providing color commentary for broadcasts of the games of the New Britain, Conn., Red Sox.
B8.
Metro Matters by Sam Roberts B2  Strictly Business by Douglas Martin B4  Chronicle B12


Chiat Wins the Most Art Director Awards
Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., was the leading winner at the 72d annual Art Directors Club Awards, presented on Friday night in New York.
Chiat/Day won three gold medals and one silver medal for national television commercials for TV Guide magazine, as well as another silver for the Eveready Battery Company's Energizer battery brand.
Streetsmart Advertising in New York followed with three golds for national television commercials for the Coalition for the Homeless.


Wicks Law Reform Can't Wait
Here's a simple question for New York State legislators: Do they answer to taxpayers, or to the powerful trade unions that contribute to their re-election campaigns?
That's the issue as debate renews in Albany over a relic known as the Wicks Law.
Enacted in 1921, the law bars local governments from awarding construction jobs by low bid to a single general contractor.
That's the system widely used in private industry, by the Federal Government and most states.
In New York, however, municipalities must hire at least four separate contractors: for general construction, plumbing, electrical, and heating and ventilation work.


MCorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Liberty Media in New Offer For Home Shopping Stock
The Liberty Media Corporation, sensing an opportunity to make money while bolstering its holdings in Home Shopping Network Inc., offered yesterday to buy up to 17 percent of the outstanding shares of the troubled television marketer at a price below its earlier offer.
Liberty, a cable televison company based in Denver, said it would pay $7 a share for up to 15 million of Home Shopping's class A common shares.
Last week, Liberty withdrew an offer to buy all of the outstanding shares for cash and stock valued at $8.50 to $9 a share.
Liberty currently owns 23 percent of Home Shopping's outstanding common shares.


Cable Cousins Help Networks on Hockey
The National Hockey League is such a stranger to network television that its resuscitation Sunday afternoon on ABC made one wonder how the network would handle a sport seen on its air less often than cliff diving.
But, thanks to ESPN's productions, ABC had reason enough to want to air more Sunday games.
The Pittsburgh Penguins' 6-3 dominance of the New Jersey Devils, the game shown in the New York area, was a high-level telecast with ESPN's Gary Thorne and Bill Clement presiding.
The production was filled with the high-tech toys and techniques that outlets like ESPN and the MSG Network are using to improve hockey coverage: overhead cameras, minicams in corners, quick cuts between close-ups and high-angle views, extra microphones and super slow-motion replays.


Whitaker-Chavez Set
PERNELL WHITAKER's defense of his World Boxing Council welterweight championship against undefeated JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ will be held on Sept. 10 in the Alamodome at San Antonio, according to an agreement announced yesterday by promoter DON KING.


Nanny Freed on Bail in Infant's Death
A nanny charged with the murder of the 10-month-old infant in her care was freed on bail today amid several new disclosures about the strengths and weaknesses of the case against her.
With her parents, three sisters and her brother seated solemnly in the courtroom, Ann Franklin stood stiffly through the half-hour hearing as Judge Emmett J. Murphy reduced her bail from $500,000 to $250,000.
At times, her lips quivered and her eyes blinked nervously.


Banc One Plans To Buy Omaha Bank
The Banc One Corporation, which has grown from a small Ohio bank to one of the nation's leading super-regional holding companies in a decade-long acquisition binge, today announced plans to acquire Firstier Financial Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $675 million based on today's closing stock prices.
Firstier, which is based in Omaha, fits the mold of banks that have attracted John B. McCoy, Banc One's iconoclastic chairman.
It is roughly the size of First National Bank of Nebraska, the state's other major bank, and meets Mr.
McCoy's preference to be first, second, or third in any market he enters.
And Firstier has long concentrated on consumers and small and medium-sized businesses, the areas of banking that Mr.
McCoy prizes for their stability and profit margins.


Mess-Free Aquarium
IZAAK WALTON said it best, speaking of a fisherman friend's devotion to angling: "It was an employment for his idle time, which was then not idly spent, a rest to his mind, a cheerer of his spirits, a diverter of sadness, a calmer of unquiet thoughts, a moderator of passions, a procurer of contentedness."
It is unlikely that Sir Izaak could grasp the extent to which idle time is devoured by Maxis Software's new program El-Fish, the Electronic Aquarium.
Transported more than three centuries forward into the personal computer age, Sir Izaak might have added, "a consumer of disk space, a devourer of processing power and a clever way to transform what used to be a $4,000 computer into a simulated $100 aquarium."


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  Eduardus Halim, Pianist 92d Street Y
Eduardus Halim is a pianist of highly unusual temperament, difficult to evaluate at first hearing.
He recalls a bygone age of eccentric, flamboyant pianism, the heyday of legends like Hofmann and Horowitz.
But his technique sometimes lags behind his chosen ideal.
In the Chopin Second Concerto on Saturday night, certain passages were poorly articulated and ill focused; the interpretation unfolded more as a succession of startling moments than as a coherent whole.
The Larghetto, however, left no doubt of Mr.
Halim's gift for evocation and emotive intensity.
The central problem was the disparity between the pianist's sumptuous delivery and the somewhat meager resources of the New York Chamber Symphony, under the direction of Gerard Schwarz.
Mr.
Halim, perched at the edge of the stage, was under unforgiving scrutiny from the hall's close acoustics, and the orchestra did not provide full support.
In the end, it's hard to deliver a firm judgment, although the pianist's approach certainly stands apart from the norm.


Mandela's Group Buries a Fallen Hero
South Africa, a country that has measured out its history in funerals, today turned the burial of an assassinated black Communist into the largest political rite since the celebration of Nelson Mandela's release from prison three years ago.
Before a crowd that overflowed an 80,000-seat soccer arena and a live audience on the Government-controlled television and radio, the African National Congress ushered Chris Hani into its pantheon of martyrs with a ceremony that was part military funeral, part campaign rally, part canonization.


Outbreak of Disease in Milwaukee Undercuts Confidence in Water
AN advisory to boil tap water like the one that was issued in Milwaukee after the outbreak of a waterborne parasite sickened tens of thousands of people this month is a drastic public health measure.
The Milwaukee experience rocked the nation's complacency about the safety of its public water supplies.
The cryptosporidia parasites that contaminated the drinking water in Milwaukee and 10 surrounding communities sickened at least 183,000 people with watery diarrhea and possibly as many as 281,000 from March 1 to April 10.
Those are the latest estimates from Dr.
Jeffrey P. Davis, the state epidemiologist, whose methods include a large random telephone survey of residents of the Milwaukee area.
Six deaths are being investigated as possibly caused by cryptosporidia.


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Physicists Celebrate Unintelligible Journal
IT may be the most impenetrable periodical in the English language, and yet hopeful authors sent it 39,475 manuscripts last year, and its 6,000-odd subscribers paid up to $1,000 each to read it.
It is The Physical Review, now celebrating its 100th anniversary.
At a national meeting of the American Physical Society here on April 13, a crowd of prominent physicists from around the world packed a banquet hall to hear "Songs of the Physical Revue," a collection of science parodies written during his student days at Harvard University by the mathematician-turned-satirist Tom Lehrer.


Classical Music in Review
National Council Winners Concert  Metropolitan Opera House
The National Council Winners Concert, the Met's annual showcase of young singers, regularly introduces voices who go on to make substantial contributions to the operatic scene.
This year's concert, held on Sunday afternoon, produced no instant stars, although many of the singers showed considerable promise.
Two voices in particular stood out for their commanding beauty: Emily Ann Pulley's crystalline soprano and Seung Won Choi's golden tenor.
Ms.
Pulley chose a lightweight pair of arias, Charpentier's "Depuis le jour" and Carlisle Floyd's "Ain't It a Pretty Night," but her singing was faultless and exquisite.
Mr.
Choi sent a thrill through the audience with his glowing, eloquent tone in Cilea's "Lamento di Federico," although he proved weak in the upper register during the climax of "Che gelida manina" from "La Boheme."


Electronics chain plays coy about identity of founder, who is pictured in splashy promotion.
FOR the last couple of weeks, consumers have been baffled and bemused by an advertising mystery that could be called the case of the unidentified founder.
In print advertisements and broadcast commercials throughout metropolitan New York, Nobody Beats the Wiz Inc., the consumer electronics retail chain, based in Carteret, N.J., has been promoting a "Founder's Day Salute." The campaign features sepia-toned photographs of an avuncular-looking man and paeans to the "foresight and dreams" that led him and his sons to open the first Wiz store on Fulton Street in Brooklyn in 1976.


Stocks Fall Broadly as Dow Drops 11.62
After establishing a record high on Friday, if only by a hair's breadth, the Dow Jones industrial average fell sharply yesterday, as did the rest of the stock market.
Price wars and competition were roiling automobile, airline and, above all, the semiconductor stocks of Intel and its rival Advanced Micro Devices.
With interest rates low, first-quarter earnings mixed and both bonds and stocks expensive, investors had to pick carefully through stock industry groups for places to invest.


Drug Concerns to Share AIDS Data
TO speed the development of new therapies for AIDS, 15 pharmaceutical companies have agreed to share drugs and information while drugs are undergoing early clinical testing.
The unusual collaboration was engineered by Dr.
Edward Scolnick, president of the Merck Research Laboratory in Rahway, N.J.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


KU Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Many Are Talented, Few Are Backed
Every season, new designers appear, filled with hope that they will be the next Calvin Klein or Donna Karan.
Most are stymied not so much by lack of talent as lack of financing.
Careers have foundered despite rave reviews and substantial store orders because there just wasn't enough money to buy fabrics, pay contractors and ship the goods.
During the week of fall shows held last month on Seventh Avenue, a slew of young designers earned respectable reviews.
Most started their businesses with a few thousand dollars of savings plus a few thousand more invested by family and friends.
But a successful collection can strain that kind of shoestring operation.


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Standard Inc. filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $650 million of subordinated debentures through BT Securities Corp. *
East Bay Municipal Utility District, Calif., is offering $84.98 million of tax-exempt waste-water system subordinated revenue refunding bonds initially priced to yield a maximum of 5.5 percent for a serial bond due in 2007.
Underwriters were led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The remaining serial bonds yield from 2.80 percent in 1994 to 5.40 percent in 2006, with all the bonds insured by Ambac Indemnity Corp. and rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Sherwin-Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CAPITAL CITIES/ABC INC. (N)
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that first-quarter earnings before extraordinary items jumped 69 percent, to $70.5 million, or $4.29 a share.
Revenues rose 8 percent, to $1.178 billion.
This year's quarter included a charge of $12.1 million, or 74 cents a share, for the redemption of two classes of debt, bringing net profit to $58.4 million, or $3.55 a share, generally in line with Wall Street's expectations.
In the first quarter of 1992, the company took a charge of $143.2 million for accounting changes, resulting in a net loss of $101.5 million.


World War II Camps Were Truly Liberated
To the Editor:
Contrary to Regine Winder Barshak of the Brookline Holocaust Witness Project in "U.S. Can't Feel Proud of Holocaust Role" (letter, April 10), Nazi concentration and extermination camps truly were liberated by Allied troops in World War II.
On Jan. 27, 1945, Soviet troops of the 100th and 107th Divisions, 60th Army of the First Ukrainian Front, moving westward against the retreating German Wehrmacht, liberated the concentration camp Auschwitz I-Stammlager, the extermination camp Auschwitz II-Birkenau and Auschwitz III-Monowitz (including subcamps IV, V, VI and VII).
The last comprised labor and prisoner-of-war camps for the I. G. Farben synthetic oil and rubber plant, which used prisoners from Birkenau.


Broadway Theater Robbed
The Booth Theater on Broadway's Shubert Alley was robbed yesterday morning by armed gunmen who fled with about $10,000 in cash, the police said.
No one was injured and there are no suspects, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti.
Two men with shotguns knocked on the door of the box office just before 10 A.M., the police said, and were admitted by a theater employee who mistook the men for fellow workers.
The robbers then handcuffed the employee to a radiator, emptied the box office safe and fled, the police said.
The theater, at 222 West 45th Street, is currently showing "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me."


How to Make an Art Form of Sweeping
To the Editor:
The truth of "Drop the Mop, Bless the Mess: The Decline of Housekeeping" (front page, April 11) found evidence under my kitchen sink.
I knew my standards had dropped years ago, when I attended one of those sell-soap-to-your-friends promotions and couldn't respond to the question "How long does it take you to clean your oven?" I had stopped before self-cleaning ovens were invented.
But I have come full circle and now make time for choice chores as I have missed the cleansing of the soul that housecleaning provides.


Review/Music; A Band That's Rocking to Color the Earth Green
In a perfect match of performer to event, Midnight Oil -- an Australian band its leader, Peter Garrett, called "desperate greenie activists" -- performed on Sunday night at the Ritz in honor of Earth Day.
"We do not contemplate or accept in any way people damaging the world that we live in," he said from the stage.
The show, one of three rock events (in Los Angeles, New York and Washington) presented by the nonprofit group Concerts for the Environment, raised money for educational materials that promote environmental awareness and activity.
These "action kits" were available on the way into the Ritz, along with tree-planting kits, bumper stickers and buttons.


Accounts
*
Spa Monopole N.V., Greenwich, Conn., to Milton Samuels Advertising Agency Inc., New York, to handle the Spa spring water and fruit drinks account, most recently unassigned.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Monsieur Henri Wines Ltd., White Plains, to Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell, New York, to handle the introduction in test markets of Strummer's Fruited Rum.
Calet, Hirsch already handles Monsieur Henri brands like Stolichnaya vodka.
Billings were not disclosed.


Chemical Bank Enlists Tom Seaver
Tom Seaver is back in New York -- this time for a bank, not for a baseball team.
The former New York Mets pitcher will begin appearing this week in a radio, print and direct marketing campaign for Chemical Bank's middle market group, which serves small and midsized companies.
The campaign was created by Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York.


Books of The Times; The Graduation Gifts of a Sentimental Education
Rameau's Niece  By Cathleen Schine  280 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


General Public Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


President Quitting Advertisers Group
DeWitt F. Helm Jr., president of the Association of National Advertisers in New York for 10 years, said yesterday that he would leave the trade organization, effective Nov. 30, "to consider other challenges and opportunities." Other association executives described Mr.
Helm's announcement as a surprise.
Mr.
Helm, who will be 60 on Saturday, said he told the association's board of his decision at a meeting last Friday.
He added that his departure was his own idea, citing the advice "of that great philosopher Kenny Rogers, that you've got to know when it's time to hold 'em and when it's time to fold 'em."


'Know Where Your Group Is At'
The following remarks were taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-
agers from the New York City region. Excerpts appear with each article.
Q Has it been the immigration experience, from your perspective, that different groups don't mix?
EMMA KRAMER-WHEELER, 16, Brooklyn (Edward R. Murrow High School): It's the language barrier for the most part.
JUAN RIVERA, 18, Brooklyn (Bushwick High School): Yeah, it's, like, in Bushwick.
You walk inside the lunchroom, you know, any period, and as soon as you walk in, the biggest group here is, you know, Dominicans, as I said.
And you have Puerto Rican people over here.
And you have Jamaicans over there.
And then you have the mixed group over here. . . .
And it's just like that's it.
You know where your group is at.
Q Is there resentment of immigrants? For instance, resentment of their jobs?
BERNARDO VASQUEZ, 17, Manhattan (A. Philip Randolph High School): That's the problem with immigration nativism over here.
Why should that person come over here and take my job?
I'm American, right?
But, no.
I get on the job first.
Why should they come?
I don't care if they're more qualified.
I have citizenship.
WUBNESH HYLTON, 19, Brooklyn (Hunter College): I know a lot of people who really don't care about -- you know, that fear for immigrants coming and taking jobs is just not there, because there was never no jobs there in the first place.
So, they're not really concerned about, "Oh, he's going to take my job," because I didn't have one.
Q When I say that word "assimilation," what do you think of?
WUBNESH Well, conformity.
Giving up your own identity, melting into another culture to get ahead.
I know some of my Asian friends, I think, like, Asians have a hard time in society, because they're always stereotyped.
It's completely different from anything that we know here.
And they're always stereotyped as the model minority.
And, so, they feel the need to assimilate.
And one of my Asian friends was telling me she only dates white men.
And another one of my Asian friends, she only dates black men.
So, it's, like: "My culture no longer means anything."
Q Do you ever have a sense of loss being here?
BERNARDO As a Dominican, I relate so much to the second motherland, which is the Dominican Republic.
But over here, I guess all immigrants . . . have to identify with something that is not America.
Because America is no culture.
America is a mixture of -- it is like the melting pot.
So, we have to identify with something that is
our culture.
ZAIRE GRAHAM, 17, Bronx (High School of Fashion Industries): Being that in my family I have so much of everything, I don't know what nationality I am.
Because I have ancestors that was raped, you know, so I have a little white.
I have a little Creole.
I have a little Cherokee Indian.
The majority of it is black, true.
But I have my grandfather's this, my mother has half of that.
So I don't know what nationality I am.
So when you ask were we robbed when we came to America of some of our culture, I believe I was robbed totally.


Bernie Wayne; Composer, 74
Bernie Wayne, the composer of "There She Is, Miss America," the beauty-contest theme song, died on Sunday at his home in Marina del Rey, Calif.
He was 74.
The cause of death was heart failure, said Ervin Drake, a friend.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Talk of Hollywood; Gambit by Universal: Push 'Jurassic Park' And Skimp the Rest
Every major movie studio moves in cycles, good years and poor ones.
And every so often a studio will pin its hopes on a single film to rescue it from the wounding financial and even psychological doldrums of a slate of unsuccessful films.
This spring that studio is Universal, which is banking just about everything on Steven Spielberg's "Jurassic Park."
Based on Michael Crichton's best-seller about dinosaurs genetically recreated for the ultimate theme park, the movie opens on June 11.
That can't be soon enough for Universal, whose senior executives haven't even seen the movie yet but are plainly edgy about the success of the venture.


British Urge a New Job For Balkans Be Set Up
Britain has proposed appointing a new high-level official to take charge of enforcing the economic embargo against the Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro, after the Security Council's decision over the weekend to tighten these sanctions drastically.
The idea is to give this post to a prominent figure such as a former foreign minister or a former defense minister who has the authority to make Yugoslavia's neighbors comply with the trade ban.


Thwarted Hopes
With the computer business rushing from expensive mainframes to cheaper personal computers linked by networks, companies like Microtest Inc., which diagnose such networks, ought to prosper.
But faced with increasing competition, Microtest has seen its shares drop for months, although they rose slightly yesterday.
Graph tracks daily closes for Microtest. (Source: Bloomberg Financial Markets)


Vietnam Report on Prisoners A Fake, Reputed Author Says
A Vietnamese general denied today that he had written in 1972 that Hanoi held more than twice as many American prisoners as it ultimately released.
Any such report attributed to Hanoi is a forgery, he declared.
And a special envoy, sent by President Clinton to tell the Vietnamese that relations could not improve until the matter was cleared up, said he saw no reason to disbelieve the Vietnamese denial.


Gene Therapy Begins For Fatal Lung Disease
FULFILLING hopes that had gathered locomotive force in the past several months, a 23-year-old man this weekend became the first patient to receive human gene therapy against cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disorder in the nation.
On Saturday, sequestered in a room at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., the man was given a dose of the radical new therapy through his nasal passages, inhaling a harmless cold virus that had been genetically altered to enclose a healthy copy of the cystic fibrosis gene the patient lacked.


John Kluge Gives Columbia $60 Million to Aid Minorities
John W. Kluge, the chairman of the Metromedia Company and a 1937 graduate of Columbia University, presented his alma mater last night with $60 million for minority scholarships.
It is the largest gift the university has ever received.
In making his gift, Mr.
Kluge recalled what a hardship it was for him to afford his tuition -- only $500 a year at the time -- when he was earning $7 a week working in the school dining hall.
Fortunately for him, he said, Columbia helped by giving him a scholarship.


An Author Catapulted Into the Foreground
"Are you sitting down?" Robert Olen Butler asked his 19-year-old son, who had just called in from Prague.
"I need you to brace yourself. I just won the Pulitzer Prize. You're the last person in America to know."
The word on Wednesday that Mr.
Butler had won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction did indeed go out three days before his thoroughly nonplussed son, Joshua, heard about it.
But the more fundamental question remains not who won, but just who in the world is Robert Olen Butler?


Sharks Let Go Coach
The San Jose Sharks yesterday dismissed George Kingston, who coached the team to a 11-71-2 record this season.
The team had a first-year record of 17-58-5.
But this season's 71 losses were the most ever recorded in the National Hockey League.


COMPANY NEWS
CROWN CORK AND SEAL CO., Philadelphia, signed a letter of intent to form a joint venture in Santiago, Chile, to make two-piece aluminum beer and other beverage cans and plastic closures.
Crown will own a 50 percent interest in the $32 million venture.
PERMA-FIX ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES INC., Atlanta, has signed a letter of intent to acquire American Resource Recovery Inc. of Memphis.
Terms were not disclosed.


Classical Music in Review
Annea Lockwood  St. Peter's Church
Annea Lockwood's "Thousand Year Dreaming" on Wednesday night seemed to be asking, in its indirect way, whether music's connection is primarily to the mind or to the body.
Ms.
Lockwood's 10-person ensemble, playing conch shells, didjeridus, conventional winds and exotic percussion, had at any rate the effect of a physical massage, a systematic stroking of nerve endings that calmed the urban listener's sense of haste and reorganized the passage of time.
This music, in other words, was not so much an organization of thematic elements as a succession of languid aural impressions, one trailing after the next.
One listened as if lying face up, watching cloud formations drift by.
So great was Ms.
Lockwood's wish to penetrate her audience's physical world that toward the end of "Thousand Year Dreaming," four players were sent out to wander the aisles.
Each blew a didjeridu (pronounced DIHD-jer-uh-doo), a wind instrument from aboriginal Australia featuring a calm, deep-bass moaning and undulating monotones.


Study Suggests Head Start Helps Beyond School
With the effectiveness of Head Start under attack, a widely followed long-term study suggests that the Federal program for poor children and others like it can make a difference beyond the children's school years.
The survey, by the High/Scope Educational Research Foundation of Ypsilanti, Mich., has tracked 62 people since the late 1960's, when the participants were 3- and 4-year-olds and enrolled in the Perry Preschool Program in Ypsilanti.
Sixty-one students in a control group not enrolled in a preschool program were also tracked.
Both groups of children were monitored from ages 3 to 11 and again when they were 14, 15 and 19 years old.
The Perry program, though not part of the Head Start program, was patterned after it.


Dredging Stays Mired In a Debate Over Dioxin
Dioxin is the most virulent industrial poison to date, or maybe it's not.
It can destroy entire marine species, infect humans, make the Atlantic Coast unfit for swimming and destroy the fishing and tourism industries, or maybe it can't.
But even in small quantities -- 10 parts per trillion -- it has embroiled a half-dozen state and Federal agencies, a variety of environmental groups, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and a divided Congressional delegation from New Jersey in a debate that shows no signs of ending.


UNISYS CORP. (N)
The Unisys Corporation reported higher first-quarter earnings despite a decline in sales.
The Blue Bell, Pa., computer company said that its earnings, before an extraordinary gain, increased to $56.8 million, or 16 cents a share, compared with $48.3 million, or 11 cents a share, in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
Including a gain from income-tax accounting changes, the company's net income was $260.6 million, or $1.39 a share.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a Republican town meeting in New Hampshire misstated the purpose of a political fund-raising event last October.
It raised money for Representative Bill Zeliff of New Hampshire, not Senator Phil Gramm of Texas.


Washington Talk; Money Without Strings Entangles Political Rivals
Evanston, Ill., wants a basketball court.
Birmingham, Ala., wants pool repairs.
And it is now widely known that Manchester, Conn., wants what Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, derides as "that infamous ice skating warming hut."
In the view of Mr.
Dole and his Republican colleagues, proposals like these illustrate the wastefulness of President Clinton's plan to stimulate the economy, part of which would finance local wish lists.
But to the Democrats, the assortment of proposals embodies something else: the principles of Republican social policy.


Charges Link Trash Industry To the Mafia
The man who prosecutors say has long controlled New York City's private trash-hauling industry for the Mafia was indicted yesterday on Federal racketeering charges.
Federal officials described the indictment as the second blow in a week to the mob's stranglehold on the industry in the New York region.
The accused man, 74-year-old James Failla, has long been the head of the Association of Trade Waste Removers of Greater New York, the largest trash industry trade group in the city.
The Government contends that Mr.
Failla is a captain in the Gambino crime family and has used force and threats of violence to divide up collection routes in a way that has given New York City the highest commercial trash-hauling rates in the nation.


U.S. Carriers In New Bout Of Fare Cuts
The nation's airlines said yesterday that they would lower fares on routes where they compete with Northwest Airlines, which on Sunday announced fare reductions of up to 35 percent on its domestic routes and selected trans-Atlantic markets.
The announcement of lower fares produced a selloff in airline stocks yesterday, but the carriers insisted that the reductions would not lead to another financial fiasco like last year's half-price sale on domestic flights.
That discounting generated record traffic, but contributed heavily to the overall industry loss of almost $2 billion last year.


Leyritz Batting Over .500, So Why So Blue?
Jim Leyritz, like all Yankees, is delighted to have new teammates by the name of Jim Abbott and Jimmy Key.
But his bat may not be: Because Abbott and Key, two of the premier left-handers in the American League, are now Yankees, the small number of opportunities for a New York player who platoons against left-handed pitchers has grown even smaller.
So it is that Leyritz, a right-handed hitter with no one position to call his own, has embarked on a road trip with the Yankees prepared to grab a piece of pine this week.


NO NEW INFLATION SEEN BY FED CHIEF
Vowing that he would remain vigilant in fighting inflation, the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, told the financial markets last night not to expect inflationary pressures to re-emerge soon.
In a speech to the Economic Club of New York, Mr.
Greenspan said it was "difficult to imagine inflationary pressures intensifying" when the banking system remained weak and bank lending remained "exceptionally subdued."


The Rev. Joseph A. Sellinger, 72, President of Loyola of Baltimore
The Rev.
Joseph A. Sellinger, who as president of Loyola College transformed a small commuters' school into one of the nation's leading Jesuit universities, died yesterday in the President's House on the campus at Baltimore.
He was 72.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said Mark Kelly, a spokesman for the university.


Schneider Tribute
A musical tribute to the violinist and conductor Alexander Schneider is to be held at noon on Friday at Carnegie Hall.
Mr.
Schneider died on Feb. 2 at the age of 84.
The program will consist of chamber works performed by some close friends and colleagues.
The tribute is free and open to the public.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Crash Kills George S. Mickelson; South Dakota's Governor Was 52
Gov.
George S. Mickelson of South Dakota, who followed his father's career path from a rural law practice to the state's highest office, died in a plane crash in Iowa yesterday, a spokesman for his office said.
He was 52.
Governor Mickelson was one of eight people killed in the crash about 15 miles southwest of Dubuque as they were returning from a trip to Cincinnati to promote economic development in the state, the spokesman said.


For Yoo-Hoo and Yogi, It's Deja Vu All Over Again
Integrity -- and the best cocoa -- mean a lot to Yogi Berra.
His vow not to enter Yankee Stadium until George Steinbrenner leaves is intact, dating to when he was dismissed as the Yankees manager early in the 1985 season.


DeNiro Spent Months On Northwest Accent
To the Editor:
Your April 9 review of "This Boy's Life" describes Robert DeNiro's "curious accent that sounds as if it had a lot of unexplained Irish in it."
I was Robert DeNiro's dialect coach for this movie -- I also taught him his Appalachian accent for "Cape Fear" -- and it may be of interest that he and I spent two months reviewing approximately 100 audiotapes of men about 40 years old who have lived exclusively in the Concrete, Wash., area to analyze how to change Mr.
DeNiro's New York accent into Dwight's speech pattern.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.84
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.82
2.82
3.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.95
3.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.48
5.50
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.72
6.75
8.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.67
7.70
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.91
5.93
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


HCA-Hospital Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooklyn Philharmonic Adopts Theme Programs
The Brooklyn Philharmonic plans to alter its programming next season and present five weekendlong thematic festivals instead of a conventional concert schedule.
The performances are to be augmented by lectures, panel discussions, slide presentations, drama and dance on such themes as the music of Duke Ellington and the influence of Russian folk music on works by Stravinsky.
Among the other planned events are a look at the Sturm und Drang period in late-18th-century German music and an examination of the influences of American folk music on Dvorak's "New World" Symphony.
The season is to open on Nov. 5 with a program that includes the New York premiere of Arvo Part's Third Symphony.
The orchestra is projecting a budget of $2.25 million for next season, up from this year's $1.93.


Wal-Mart Rule Is Reversed
A Federal judge in New York ordered Wal-Mart Stores Inc. yesterday to include a shareholder proposal on equal employment opportunity and affirmative action in proxy materials for its 1993 annual meeting.
The decision by United States District Judge Kimba M. Wood in effect reversed a Securities and Exchange Commission administrative ruling earlier this year that Wal-Mart, the discounter based in Bentonville, Ark., did not have to include in its proxy materials a shareholder request for information on the numbers of women and minorities it employs or on affirmative action programs at the company.


Chase Marks $2 Billion of Bad Loans for Sale
In an attempt to put the excesses of the 1980's firmly behind it, the Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it had set aside $2 billion in troubled commercial real estate assets that would be sold over two and a half years.
By selling the loans and foreclosed properties in a depressed market, Chase expects to receive only 39 percent of the money it originally lent.
It took an $884 million charge against its first-quarter earnings to reflect the difference between the expected sale price and the book value of the assets.
Because of a gain from accounting changes, the company nevertheless managed to report an 8.5 percent increase in first-quarter profits.


Artists Know the Value of a Little Uncertainty
To the Editor:
The remark made by Monica Lumpkin, a medical student, to your reporter in "Future Doctors Unsettled by Health-Care Changes" (front page, April 9) would be a stunner to any young person embarking on a career in the arts.
If Ms.
Lumpkin feels as if she's in "limbo" because of uncertainty about which way medical care is heading, let her listen to any fledgling writer or visual artist talk about limbo in their field, which may stretch for a decade or more -- without any guarantee of critical or financial success.
A young artist's apprenticeship is generally unsupported and ignored; uncertainty in the arts is the name of the game.
Why should Ms.
Lumpkin and her peers in science assume that, just because they are smart and determined, things will turn out the way they planned from the moment they knew they wanted to be doctors?
It seems to me that uncertainty when you're still in school is far more salutary than knowing exactly what sort of desk and curtains will adorn your medical offices.
ANNE BERNAYS Cambridge, Mass., April 13, 1993 The writer, a novelist, is chairman of the Fine Arts Work Center in Provincetown, Mass.


Sherwin-Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ruling for Brown Women to Be Far-Reaching
A Federal appeals court has sent shockwaves through collegiate athletics with a decision upholding an order that requires Brown University to restore full financing for two women's varsity sports pending a trial on whether the university has discriminated against women in athletics.
The unanimous decision handed down Friday by a three-judge panel of the First Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston -- the first time a court of appeals has heard a Title IX case -- was being interpreted by both sides yesterday as pointing toward a widespread upheaval in collegiate athletics.


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Skulls Found in Spain Are Early Neanderthal
IN research on a poorly understood early period of human evolution in Europe, Spanish paleontologists have found evidence that archaic people were beginning to resemble Neanderthals as early as 300,000 years ago, long before the time they have been clearly recognized as a distinct people in the fossil record.
The findings, based on an analysis of three skulls and other bones discovered last July, could help scientists figure out the proper place for Neanderthals on the family tree.
These stocky people, often caricatured as club-wielding cave men, were widespread in Europe and parts of the Middle East from about 130,000 years ago until they vanished 30,000 years ago, soon after the appearance on the scene of modern Homo sapiens.


What Freud Meant by 'Infantile Amnesia'
To the Editor:
In "Studying the Secrets of Childhood Memory" (Science Times, April 6), it is erroneously asserted that new research "contradicts Freud's notion that 'infantile amnesia,' the inability of adults to remember events of early infancy -- is due to the later repression of perverse lusts and hatreds that seethe during the first years of life." The error is caused by a misunderstanding of the term "infantile amnesia."
The findings the article describes, that the development of language and cognitive skills lays the groundwork for enduring memories only after the second year of life, do not contradict Freud.
The confusion stems from the fact that in Freud's day the term "infant" was used to describe the entire period of childhood (as well as the earliest year or two of life, as it is most commonly used today).
By "infantile amnesia" Freud meant the absence, in adulthood, of conscious recollections of vast portions of childhood
after
the age of 2 and up to at least 6.
A better translation in modern English might be "early childhood amnesia."


William C. McNeil; Historian, 46
William C. McNeil, chairman of the history department at Barnard College and an associate professor, died on Sunday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco.
He was 46 and lived at Mohegan Lake, N.Y.
The cause was a heart attack, said the Westchester County Medical Examiner's office.


SCIENCE Q&amp;A
Rehabilitating Kudzu
Q.
Traveling through Georgia, I saw a vine called kudzu that seemed to be taking over everything.
What is it?
Will it invade the Northeast?
How do you get rid of it?
A.
Kudzu, often called the vine that ate the South, is a Chinese and Japanese fodder and cover crop with an edible root.


World War II Camps Were Truly Liberated; Others Perished Too
To the Editor:
In "U.S. Can't Feel Proud of Holocaust Role" (letter, April 10), Regina Winder Barshak laments the lack of effort by American and Russian armed forces on behalf of Jews during World War II.
This is an old complaint and ought to be put to rest once and for all.
Yes, allied soldiers did come upon the concentration camps "unintentionally." But why should they have had a plan to rescue Jews?
They had everything they could do to win the war, a war in which 365,000 American fighting men were killed, plus a million wounded, and in which as many as 10 million Russian civilians were murdered.
Given such losses, Jews the world over should honor, not diminish, their effort.


At Warsaw Ghetto, Poles and Jews Bound by Hope
At a solemn outdoor ceremony tonight at the place where several hundred poorly armed Jews battled the Nazis 50 years ago, the leaders of Poland and Israel hailed the valor of the uprising and called for a new beginning in the often difficult relationship between Jews and Poles.
As a chilly darkness enveloped the monument to the heroes of the Warsaw ghetto and candles flickered in windows around the plaza, President Lech Walesa obliquely referred to anti-Semitism in Poland as "acts not always worthy, actions not always meritorious." But, he said, "We believe we are wiser today because of experience."


GRUMMAN CORP. (N)
The Grumman Corporation, which has been consolidating its operations and reducing its work force, reportedyesterday that it earned $27.3 million in the first quarter, compared with a loss of $167.5 million a year earlier.
The 1992 deficit was a result of an accounting charge for retiree-health benefits.
Grumman's sales declined in the 1993 quarter because of the phase-out of aircraft programs.
But the Bethpage, L.I., contractor said sales and earnings increased in electronic systems, information and other services, and special purpose vehicles.
Results declined in the aerospace segment but operating margins increased to 7.1 percent from 6.1 percent.


A Healthier Jones Is Happy as Runner-Up
She had been there before, but second place never felt better to Kim Jones than it did today at the Boston Marathon.
After dropping out of the New York City Marathon last November, Jones suffered bouts of bronchitis and general ill health before isolating herself in a small apartment in Boulder, Colo., to battle her bugs.


Seles Is Still Out
Top-ranked MONICA SELES, who hasn't played in a tournament since Feb. 21, withdrew from another one yesterday because of a lingering virus.
She won't be competing in this week's La Familia Open in Barcelona, Spain. (AP)


Reuben Hecht, 83, Israeli Industrialist And Premiers' Aide
Reuben Hecht, an Israeli industrialist and confidant of Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir, died Wednesday in Carmel Hospital in Haifa.
He was 83.
He died after a heart attack, said Benjamin Robert Payn, a friend in New York.


Tax Being Considered to Help Border Areas Cope With Free Trade
Faced with rapidly climbing estimates of what the North American Free Trade Agreement would cost the Government, the Clinton Administration has opened two reviews of whether to impose a tax on trade across the nation's border with Mexico, Federal officials said today.
The Treasury Department and the Labor Department have begun separate studies into whether a small tax is needed.
The tax, which would probably be less than 1 percent, would replace the import tariffs of up to 25 percent that the free trade pact would eliminate over 15 years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
One of the biggest law firms -- Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue -- will pay the Government $51 million to settle charges that it aided Charles H. Keating Jr. in the fraud that brought on the costliest bankruptcy in the savings and loan debacle.  [ Page D1. ]
The Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, told the financial markets not to expect inflationary pressures to re-emerge soon because the banking system remains weak and lending is subdued.  [ A15. ]


Executive Changes
BRINKER INTERNATIONAL INC., Dallas, a restaurant operator, named Roger F. Thomson senior vice president, general counsel and corporate secretary.
CONAGRA FROZEN FOODS, Omaha, a unit of Conagra Inc., named James T. Smith president.
He was most recently president of Gerber Products Co.


Guess Who's Down At the Health Club?
Whoever said you can't teach an old dog new tricks never checked with Lawrence Taylor.
Today, the Giants' prototypical outside linebacker said he has healed unbelievably fast from a ruptured right Achilles' tendon because he expedited the recovery process himself.
He also said that after 12 National Football League seasons of sparse conditioning, he was working diligently almost daily to get into condition.


Torrey Takes Reins Of Florida Panthers
The National Hockey League's expansion team in Miami yesterday unveiled its nickname -- the Florida Panthers -- and its president, BILL TORREY, the longtime Islanders official.
Torrey, who helped build a hockey dynasty on Long Island, now has the job of helping to create respectability, and a fan following, in a new N.H.L. market.
He said the team, in an effort to draw on the area's Hispanic community, was considering broadcasting some games in Spanish.


Law Firm Settles S.&amp;L. Case
One of the nation's biggest law firms today agreed to pay the Government $51 million, settling charges that it had aided the financier Charles H. Keating Jr. in the fraud that brought on the costliest bankruptcy of a savings and loan association.
The settlement is the largest against a law firm in the savings and loan fiasco.


Philip Morris Executives Are Shuffled
With its recent announcement that Marlboro cigarettes would cost 20 percent less still reverberating on Wall Street, the Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it had made several executive changes designed to quell any further disturbance.
In the highest-level change, Geoffrey C. Bible was appointed executive vice president for worldwide tobacco.
He will report to R. William Murray, the president and chief operating officer of Philip Morris.


Corrections
An article by Reuters in some editions of Business Day on April 12, about the scheduling of a trial in connection with the deadly 1984 gas leak in Bhopal, India, erroneously included an executive and two companies among those ordered to stand trial.
The trial order issued by Judge Wajahat Ali Shah did not cover Warren Anderson, the former chairman of the Union Carbide Corporation; the company itself, or its Hong Kong subsidiary.
Last year, a different Indian court ordered Mr.
Anderson to stand trial, and it has asked the Indian Government to begin extradition proceedings against him.


Law Firm for S.&amp; L. Is Fined $51 Million
Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, one of the nation's biggest law firms, agreed to pay the Government $51 million to settle charges that it aided the financier Charles H. Keating Jr. in the fraud that brought on the costliest bankruptcy in the savings and loan debacle.
The agreement came as a trial was about to begin.


Foul Call, Say Mets, Protesting Ejection
The Mets yesterday registered a formal complaint with the National League over Eddie Murray's ejection from Sunday's game in Riverfront Stadium.
General Manager Al Harazin, while saying he did not want to turn the issue of Murray and the umpires into "World War III," said he asked that the league president, Bill White, initiate an official inquiry into the events of Sunday's fourth inning.
Murray, the veteran first baseman who has long talked privately of unfair treatment at the hands of umpires, was ejected in Cincinnati after he traced a line in the batter's box with his bat, sketching for all at Riverfront Stadium exactly how far inside he believed the called second strike was.
Jeff Kellogg, a rookie umpire who had engaged in an exchange with Murray after the first strike, banished Murray instantly.


Saints Sign Muster
Fullback BRAD MUSTER agreed to a $4.05 million contract with the New Orleans Saints yesterday in what turned out to be a free-agent flip-flop with the Chicago Bears.
The 28-year-old Muster will fill the hole left when CRAIG (IRONHEAD) HEYWARD left New Orleans to sign with Chicago.


TRANSAMERICA SAYS A SPINOFF IS WORTH $1 BILLION
The Transamerica Corporation said yesterday that the spinoff of its property and casualty insurance subsidiary, TIG Holdings Inc., would be accomplished through an initial public offering of 44.2 million shares at $22.63 a share.
At $1 billion, the deal is the largest initial public offering by a United States insurance or financial services company and the fifth-largest offering ever in the United States, Transamerica said.


Classical Music in Review
Jennifer Hayghe Pianist Alice Tully Hall
Jennifer Hayghe, the winner of the 1993 Juilliard William Petschek Piano Debut Award, does not lack courage.
She opened her recital on Thursday evening modestly, with a Haydn sonata (H. XVI:39), then tore into one bravura piece after another.
Indeed, the recital took on a sort of grand-operatic scale with Busoni's "Sonatina Super Carmen" and Liszt's rendering of Isolde's "Liebestod" from Wagner's "Tristan und Isolde."


Intel's Stock Pummeled by Ruling
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said today that it would immediately begin shipping clones of the Intel Corporation's 486-series computer chip in light of a Federal judge's decision to overturn a jury verdict that had blocked sales of the chips.
While the initial shipments by Advanced Micro will be small, the decision's long-term impact could include higher earnings for Advanced Micro, slimmer profit margins for Intel and still lower personal computer prices for consumers.
Intel shares plummeted $12.25 today, closing at $97.75 in Nasdaq trading, while Advanced Micro rose correspondingly to close at $28, up $3.875.


U.S.-Britain Airline Talks To Resume
The United States and Britain said today that they would begin negotiating a new agreement next month to give their airlines greater access to each other's markets.
Both sides said they were optimistic that a deal could be reached within a self-imposed deadline of a year.
Federico F. Pena, the United States Transportation Secretary, met here with John MacGregor, the British Transport Minister, and said afterward that he was encouraged by Britain's attitude toward resolving the impasses that led to the failure of similar negotiations during the Bush Administration.


New Country Is Like Prison to Asenhat, 18
Asenhat Gomez used to peer out the windows of her childhood home in the Dominican countryside and relish a landscape of willowy palm trees and verdant fields where her extended family would gather for daylong reunions.
In her new home in Brooklyn -- a cramped apartment on Williamsburg's South Side -- the windows frame a claustrophobic vista of brick walls, and the few relatives she has in this country are so preoccupied with making ends meet that family get-togethers seem as long gone as the father who died a dozen years ago.


It's Time for Playoffs, So Take a Number
Discounting a first-round, three-game sweep of the Knicks by Chicago two years ago, when the teams were on different physical and psychological planes, the home team has coughed up its home-court advantage in Game 1 of the teams' last two competitive playoff series.
On May 9, 1989 -- not a night Mark Jackson recalls fondly -- Michael Jordan and the Bulls rallied to beat Rick Pitino's Knicks, 120-109, in overtime, on the way to winning the second-round series in six games.
Last May 5, the Knicks won Game 1 in Chicago, 94-89, setting up their seven-game war.


Classical Music in Review
Philharmonia Virtuosi  Metropolitan Museum of Art
We remember Mozart and Schubert for their otherworldliness, but Beethoven's appeal lies in the human fallibility he worked so fiercely to overcome.
Richard Kapp's all-Beethoven program with the Philharmonia Virtuosi on Friday had the happy idea of beginning and ending with so-called problem pieces and filling the middle with the early B-flat Piano Concerto and one of the best (if not the best) of the symphonies: the Eighth.
Much of this music reminded us that for Beethoven composing was a living as well as a calling.
"The Ruins of Athens" Overture has that written-to-specification quality.
The concerto, played by William Wolfram, served his own ambitions as a young pianist-composer.
The Fantasy for Piano, Chorus and Orchestra shows how Beethoven's feel for the public pulse faded as his music became more original.
It has a crazed quality, especially in its overdrawn and overwritten piano part (also played by Mr. Wolfram).


Givenchy Classicism In a Modern Setting
Hubert de Givenchy arrived in New York yesterday, after a long weekend in Nassau, the Bahamas, with a collection of 20 pieces destined for the opening of Barneys new store on Madison Avenue next September.
Barneys?
The designer, who stands for cool classicism, was surprised himself.


Coors (Adolph) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 21


Equifax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Avrett, Free Reorganizes
Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York made changes in top-management positions yesterday reflecting an agency reorganization.
Frank Ginsberg, 49, who has been president and creative director, was promoted to co-chairman and chief executive, while continuing as chief creative officer.
In the new posts, he succeeds Jack Avrett, 64, who remains chairman.


Concert in the Park


ESPN Account Split by 2 Agencies
ESPN Inc., the sports cable television network based in Bristol, Conn., said yesterday that it had moved its account from Lois U.S.A. in New York to Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Philadelphia and BJK&amp;E Media in New York.
Billings were estimated at $16 million.


Rain-Making Made Easy


Transactions
Baseball  National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Placed Bret Barberie, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Claimed Steve Parris, pitcher, off waivers from the Philadelphia Phillies and assigned him to San Antonio of the Texas League.


Review/Cabaret; Gay Comedy in the Stand-Up Mainstream
Is there a place for gay humor in the traditionally macho world of stand-up comedy?
Funny Gay Males, a slick, fast-talking comedy trio that opened a two-week engagement at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea) last Tuesday evening would like to think so.
They have created an act that cautiously broaches gay themes with a snappy, wisecracking delivery smack dab in the mainstream of stand-up comic styles.
The members of the group -- Danny McWilliams, Bob Smith and Jaffe Cohen -- are more allies than collaborators.
Although they appear together briefly at the beginning and end of their act, the bulk of the show consists of solo sets.


Italians Support Political Reform By a Big Margin
After months of scandal, recession and Government paralysis, Italians voted overwhelmingly for political change in a referendum on Sunday and today that repudiated the country's leadership of the last 48 years, but that left the future uncertain.
Final computer projections late tonight, 10 hours after polls closed, showed 82 percent of voters endorsing a proposal to scrap the current system of pure proportional representation for most of the Senate and replace it with the majority voting used in other parts of Europe and the United States.


DEATH IN WACO: The Tear Gas; Chemical Isn't Meant to Cause Fire
The gas used by Federal agents in their attack on the Branch Davidian compound yesterday is not flammable and in the form it was reportedly used could not have ignited the fire that destroyed the compound.
Dr.
Jay Young, a chemical consultant in Silver Spring, Md., said that a mixture of the chemical, known as CS, and air could be ignited only if the ratio of the gas and the air was within a very narrow range, and that flames could not spread beyond the small area where such a ratio might exist.


Corrections
A news analysis article in Business Day on April 12, about the Government's request for a recall of 4.7 million full-size General Motors pickup trucks, misstated the position of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety on the trucks' safety.
The institute, a research group supported by insurance companies, contends that the incidence of fire in collisions of full-size G.M. pickup trucks provides enough basis for a Government investigation of defects.
But it has taken no position on whether the trucks pose a particular hazard and has not asserted that G.M. trucks may be safer than other models in accidents that do not involve fire.


ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP. (N)
Despite a downturn in Pentagon spending, the Rockwell International Corporation reported a 38.2 percent increase in its second-quarter earnings yesterday, with profits up sharply in its electronics and aerospace businesses.
Analysts said the results were slightly better than expected.
Earnings increased despite a 2.3 percent decline in sales.
Analysts attributed the earnings gain to tight fiscal management and cost-cutting.
But they said that such results were not sustainable and that future earnings would be flat or slightly down.


In Congress, Urgent Calls for Action Against Serbs
As pressure mounted today on Capitol Hill for the United States and its allies to take immediate military action in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Administration continued its debate on what it can do to stop Serbian aggression without getting Washington too deeply involved.
The Administration remains divided about whether to press its allies to lift the arms embargo against the Bosnian Muslims and carry out air strikes against Serbian positions.


Funeral for Guard Killed in Riot
More than 1,000 people attended funeral services here today for the corrections officer who was killed last week in the continuing inmate rebellion at the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility in nearby Lucasville.
The services took place as inmates at the maximum-security prison near the Kentucky border hung a banner indicating they were willing to end the standoff if they could see their lawyer, Niki Z. Schwartz.


It's Still the Same Game, but It's Not the Same Draft
Shortly after the settlement of the players' lawsuit against the National Football League ushered in unrestricted free agency for some players and altered the basic nature of the college draft, Ron Hughes, the Detroit Lions' director of player personnel, began thinking about strategies for the 1993 draft, which will be held on Sunday.
"There are so many variables," Hughes said.
"Which players are we going to lose, and which ones will we be able to keep next year? Because of the salary cap, will we be able to keep some of the free agents that we've already signed? Where will the depth of the free agency be? Will it be tackles, guards or wide receivers? Because defensive players are more ready to play in the N.F.L., should you draft defensive players? I've thought about this a lot."


People
*
Michael Shevack was named to the new position of executive vice president and executive creative director at Kallir, Philips, Ross Inc., New York.
He was previously senior vice president and group creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


Bosnia Fights New War Against Croats
In an explosion of fighting that appears to have further diminished the prospects of peace in Bosnia, two armies that have been linked in a nominal alliance against the Serbian nationalist forces have opened what amounts to a full-scale war.
The fighting between the Bosnian Government Army and the Croatian nationalist force known as the H.V.O. has engulfed a broad arc of territory north and west of Sarajevo, the capital, causing hundreds of casualties and featuring the kind of brutality often associated with the Serbian forces.


Editors' Note
An article on Sunday about plans for a gay march on Washington next Sunday described a White House meeting last Friday between President Clinton and leaders of gay and lesbian groups.
The article said the President pointed "to three gay and lesbian White House staff members" at the meeting, and it gave three names.
The description of Mr.
Clinton's action was not attributed in the article, and was based on a misunderstanding of a report by someone at the meeting.
Two of the three named staff members had publicly discussed their sexuality.
But the third, Alexis Herman, had not, and she said yesterday that she was not homosexual.


When Devils Go Cold, Brooks Gets Heated
When he sat down to discuss the status of the Devils today, the coach's face was as red as his team's logo.
To say that Herb Brooks was angry would be a gross understatement.
There was a sense of defeatism detected among the players as they talked about the superiority of the Penguins after Pittsburgh's 6-3 opening-game victory in their Patrick Division playoff series on Sunday.
But Brooks refused to admit -- at least publicly -- that his players felt that way.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  HANOI CHALLENGES P.O.W.
REPORT  The Vietnamese general who reportedly wrote in 1972 that Hanoi held more than twice as many American prisoners as it released denied he had made such a report.
A1  ITALY VOTES FOR CHANGE  After months of scandal, recession and Government paralysis, Italians voted overwhelmingly for political change.
But the vote left the future clouded.
A1


Biologists Fear Sustainable Yield Is Unsustainable Idea
THE concept of sustainability -- the idea that renewable natural resources like fisheries and forests should be exploited with restraint so that future generations can also benefit from them -- has become something of a mantra among environmentalists.
But if history is any guide, sustainability may be far more difficult to achieve than is commonly thought, three fisheries biologists argued in an article in the April 2 issue of the journal Science.


Robert Westall, 63, Art Teacher And Author of Children's Books
Robert Westall, the author of more than 30 books for children, died on Thursday in Warrington Hospital in Cheshire, England.
He was 63 and lived in Lymm, Cheshire.
The cause was respiratory failure brought on by pneumonia, said Wes Adams, his editor at Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fire Brings Memories Of Turmoil
EVERY now and then, it seems, fire returns to remind this usually placid town of the turmoil of the times.
Last month, two girls from the Little Flower Children's Services, a residence and school for abused and neglected children here on the East End of Long Island, ran away one night.
The girls, one 14 and the other 11, planned to walk 75 miles to the families that had abandoned them in New York City.
The older one also hoped to see her boyfriend.


On My Mind; A Day at City College
This is a letter of thanks, to about a dozen students, for bringing me together again with my college after a separation I felt within me but about which I preferred not to speak.
I write it publicly because City College is important to generations of New Yorkers.
It gave us the chance to grasp what we could never otherwise attain: life work that fulfilled our desires and our capacities.


Green, Of Course, But, Oh, So Fast
The signs were all here tonight, 60 feet 6 inches away from home plate.
The 96-mile-an-hour fastball, the golden left arm, the frequent flashes of brilliance, everything that has Yankee fans anticipating the pitcher's arrival someday in the Bronx was abundantly apparent.
And yet there were also the occasional reminders -- the three balks that led to four runs, the five walks -- that the 21-year-old millionaire from North Carolina has a lot to work on before he makes the jump from Class AA to the majors.


Mr. Clinton, Meet Mr. Gore
Bill Clinton's speech commemorating Earth Day later this week might answer some questions.
Does he really care about the environment or was that just something he told the voters?
And is he paying any attention at all to his Vice President?
Things have not been going Al Gore's way.
Months ago, he had every reason to believe that Bill Clinton would become the "environment President" George Bush pledged to be but wasn't.
And that he, as the President's political conscience and policy coordinator, would steer the onetime friend of polluters in the Arkansas chicken industry to new heights of global stewardship.


TIME WARNER INC. (N)
Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that first-quarter operating earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization rose by 12 percent, to $630 million.
Revenues rose to $3.3 billion, from $3 billion in the comparable period last year.
Still, the company had a net loss of $15 million, versus a profit of $3 million a year earlier.
Including preferred stock dividends, the company's loss was $124 million, compared with a $150 million loss in the first quarter of 1991.


LIZ CLAIBORNE INC. (N)
Nervous retailers placing smaller orders drove down Liz Claiborne Inc.'s sales and profits in the first quarter.
And the apparel manufacturer said it did not expect its performance to improve until the second half of this year.
The 32.1 percent decline in profits for the quarter that ended March 27 was in line with most analysts' expectations.
Sales in the period also declined.
Claiborne, which has received acclaim from retailers and Wall Street for its management, sales and marketing expertise, also incurred higher expenses with the acquisition last year of Russ Togs.
Russ, which produces the Russ, Crazy Horse and Villager lines of lower-priced clothing, was bought to give the company, whose customers are primarily department stores, entree to mass-mar ket store chains.


Barbara Stoler Miller; Professor, 52
Barbara Stoler Miller, chairwoman of the Asian and Middle Eastern Cultures Department at Barnard College, died at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center yesterday.
She was 52 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was cancer, said Beverly Solochek, spokeswoman for the college.


Rise in Rabies Seen as Threat In New York
Public health authorities say that rabies has become a significant threat in New York City as the animal equivalent of an epidemic has brought cases to every borough but Queens.
New York City has confirmed 50 cases in wild animals since the outbreak reached the metropolitan area 13 months ago, and 436 people have required rabies shots.
Before 1992, only about 25 people each year needed the vaccination, which is a series of five shots, said Steven J. Matthews, a spokesman for the city Health Department.


Does Water-Rate Freeze Halt Reservoir Plan?
To the Editor:
Does Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposed two-year freeze of New York City water rates, including sewage service (news article, April 9), mean he is putting on ice the watershed protection program he outlined last Oct. 8 in an address celebrating the 150th anniversary of the city's splendid water supply system?
The national and local League of Women Voters feel strongly about the importance of protecting drinking water, based on our study programs.
New York's enviable reputation for the best publicly supplied drinking water is an important attraction for commerce and residents alike.


Teamster Local Accepts Trustee to Replace Chief
A New York City teamster union local dropped its opposition yesterday to the appointment of a trustee to replace its ousted leader, Barry Feinstein, one of the city's most powerful union leaders.
In a sharp reversal, the governing body of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters agreed to accept as trustee Johnnie Brown, who was named last week by Ron Carey, national teamsters general president.


Test of a 'Hate Crime' Law Reaches Center Stage
One October night four years ago, Todd Mitchell and some friends, all of them black, returned from a viewing of "Mississippi Burning," incensed over a scene in the movie in which a Klansman had beaten a black boy as he prayed.
The group had gathered outside the Rambler apartments, near the defunct American Motors plant here, when they spotted Gregory Reddick, 14 years old and white, across the street.
"Do you all feel hyped up to move on some white people?" the 20-year old Mr.
Mitchell asked his friends, all younger than he.
"There goes a white boy!.; gGo get him!" He pointed at Gregory, then counted to three.
Nine of the young men crossed the street and beat the boy into unconsciousness.


Court Takes Death Penalty Challenge
The Supreme Court agreed today to rule on the constitutionality of state death penalty laws that can make it easier for prosecutors to obtain death sentences for those who kill in the course of committing other crimes.
The case is an appeal by the State of Tennessee, which, like most other states with capital punishment, makes such a crime subject to the death penalty.
The crime, felony murder, is a killing that takes place in the course of a robbery, kidnapping or other major crime.
Under the Tennessee law, the jury is permitted to consider the felony as a separate, aggravating factor in deciding whether a defendant should be sentenced to death.


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
One of the most coveted invitations in Washington is to the home of BEN BRADLEE and SALLY QUINN.
So how did an anonymous caller to a C-Span viewer call-in program end up with one?
Mr.
Bradlee, the former executive editor of The Washington Post, and Ms.
Quinn, a novelist and former reporter at the paper, were appearing on the program yesterday morning as part of a series on Washington power couples.


U.N. FLIERS REMOVE TRAPPED BOSNIANS
Bosnian Army commanders halted overland evacuations of thousands of Muslims from Srebrenica today, but for the second day running, British and French helicopters airlifted the wounded and sick from the eastern Bosnia enclave.
Women, children, the elderly and the wounded are being moved to Tuzla, which is still held by Muslims.
But its leaders, who have said for weeks that they had room to provide emergency housing for all of Srebrenica's refugees and residents, said today that they do not have enough room after all.
Supplies are low and health risks are rampant in eastern Bosnia, officials said.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Pierce Leads Sonics  Ricky Pierce scored 27 points as the SuperSonics beat San Antonio, 96-89, last night in Seattle, their first victory over the Spurs this season.
The Sonics also clinched third place in the Western Conference and are still in the race with Houston for the No. 2 playoff spot.
David Robinson kept the Spurs in the game with 12 points in the final quarter after being held to 3 in the first three quarters.
But Pierce had an 8-for-13 shooting night from the floor and was 11 for 12 from the free-throw line.
The Sonics also forced the Spurs into a season-high 27 turnovers. (AP)


3 Drug Giants Post Mediocre Results
Three large drug companies -- Merck, Warner-Lambert and Eli Lilly -- reported mediocre results yesterday for the first three months of 1993.
The drug makers have come under sharp criticism of their prices by President Clinton, but many have already abandoned past reliance on aggressively raising prices to improve profits.
The industry says price flexibility has also been squeezed by large buyers amid growing competition as drugs are copied.
Still, there were no surprises because previous company announcements had told investors what to expect.


Mahorn Seeks to Cook Knicks' Frontline Beef
The Nets' lineup has changed so much this season that it would be understandable if Coach Chuck Daly one day looked on the court and didn't recognize who was out there.
Now, knowing the Knicks' front line is one of the biggest in the National Basketball Association, he is considering the insertion of Rick Mahorn into the starting lineup.
Also, Daly will probably reinsert guard Drazen Petrovic, who seems back to his normal brilliant-shooting self after a long layoff because of a torn ligament, into the starting rotation when the Nets (43-36) play the Knicks on Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.
Petrovic has been coming off the bench since April 14.
It was only in the second half of the game against the Washington Bullets on Saturday night that his fluid shooting form returned.
A Lot of Beef
Daly doesn't want to get pushed around by the Knicks, who have beef brothers Charles Oakley and Charles Smith, not to mention Anthony Mason.
Mahorn, who has been tireless and has played as hard as anyone this season, would give the Nets a big body to bang around with the Knicks' big forwards.


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Artists Know the Value of a Little Uncertainty
To the Editor:
The remark made by Monica Lumpkin, a medical student, to your reporter in "Future Doctors Unsettled by Health-Care Changes" (front page, April 9) would be a stunner to any young person embarking on a career in the arts.
If Ms.
Lumpkin feels as if she's in "limbo" because of uncertainty about which way medical care is heading, let her listen to any fledgling writer or visual artist talk about limbo in their field, which may stretch for a decade or more -- without any guarantee of critical or financial success.
A young artist's apprenticeship is generally unsupported and ignored; uncertainty in the arts is the name of the game.
Why should Ms.
Lumpkin and her peers in science assume that, just because they are smart and determined, things will turn out the way they planned from the moment they knew they wanted to be doctors?
It seems to me that uncertainty when you're still in school is far more salutary than knowing exactly what sort of desk and curtains will adorn your medical offices.
ANNE BERNAYS Cambridge, Mass., April 13, 1993 The writer, a novelist, is chairman of the Fine Arts Work Center in Provincetown, Mass.


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Feathered Dinosaur Or Flightless Bird, New Find Stirs Dust
THREE bird watchers of an unusual kind, without binoculars or field guides by Roger Tory Peterson, leaned over the laboratory table and compared pieces of ancient evidence central to one of the most controversial issues in paleontology today: the history of avian evolution and early flight.
These paleontologists at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City have ruffled scholarly feathers with the announcement last week of their discovery of a strange new type of dinosaur in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia.
The 75-million-year-old fossil animal, about the size of a turkey, was actually a flightless bird, they contend, and it perched firmly on the evolutionary tree as a transitional figure between certain carnivorous dinosaurs and modern birds.


30-Year Bond Yield at 16-Year Low
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell again yesterday, closing at 6.72 percent, its 16-year low, but it could not dip below that level.
In what traders said was light trading, the price of the 30-year bond rose 14/32 , to 10506/32 in the seconday market.
It was the second time since last Thursday that the yield dropped to its recent low at the end of trading.
But on both occasions, traders and investors were apparently unwilling to buy enough to push the yield down to new lows.


A New Old Trade Policy
The Clinton Administration's combative pronouncements on trade have hit the Japanese Government like a series of earthquakes, leaving officials here fuming over the insistent demands that Japan reduce its yawning trade surplus quickly.
Some have charged that the Clinton Administration has reversed years of America's commitment to free trade.
But the real concern among some trade experts is not that the policy itself is new; it is the assertive new way President Clinton is using the old techniques of managed trade that were accepted when they were employed by the Bush and Reagan Administrations.
As one of its trade initiatives, the Clinton Administration has pushed for the devaluation of the dollar against the yen.
This is expected to reduce America's trade imbalance by making Japanese goods more expensive in the United States and American products cheaper here.
The dollar has already plummeted in value against the yen, hitting a post-World War II low in Tokyo trading today of 111 yen to the dollar.
That was the ninth new low for the dollar against the yen in the last 13 trading days.  [ Page D25. ]


Maradona Is Suspended
DIEGO MARADONA and four other members of the Sevilla club were suspended yesterday when they failed to attend a Spanish league hearing over the team's role in a brawl at Cadiz last month.
Also suspended were Coach CARLOS BILARDO, forward DIEGO SIMEONE, the assistant coach MIGUEL ANGEL LEMME and the club president, LUIS CUERVAS.


DEATH IN WACO: The Government's Plan; RENO SEES ERROR IN MOVE ON CULT
Attorney General Janet Reno conceded tonight that in hindsight the Government's plan to assault the heavily armed cult near Waco, Tex., had been a mistake.
"It was based on what we knew then," she said this evening on the "Larry King Live" program on CNN.
"Based on what we know now, it was obviously wrong."


Franco's Arm Passes Exam
John Franco, who has experienced repeated discomfort in his surgically repaired left elbow during the season's first two weeks, was examined yesterday by the Mets' team doctor and found to have no major problems.
"We had been told he'd have residue reactions because of the surgery," said Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets.
"I just wanted to get reassurance."


Handling Personal Data
IN computerspeak it is called a P.I.M.
It is a personal information manager, which, in the words of Allan Freedman's "Computer Glossary" (Amacom), is a "combination word processor, database and desktop accessory program that organizes a variety of information."
A P.I.M. is not to be confused with a contact manager, which is not called a COM.
Since none of the five computer dictionaries on a nearby bookshelf gives a definition for that term, here's mine: A contact manager is a database program specifically designed to organize a variety of information about clients, customers and suppliers.


J. M. Oesterreicher, Monsignor Who Wrote on Jews, Dies at 89
Msgr.
John Maria Oesterreicher, who spent a lifetime nurturing understanding between Roman Catholics and Jews, died on Sunday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 89 and lived near the campus of Seton Hall University in South Orange.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said the university, where he was Distinguished University Professor and Scholar in Residence.
He also was the director of Seton Hall's Institute of Judeo-Christian Studies, which he founded in 1953.


Victoria Journal; Such a Lovely City! Still, Seattle Holds Its Nose
This is a city that is "clean, green and safe," says the Greater Victoria Visitors and Convention Bureau.
The bureau does not say that this is the only major municipality in North America still dumping its raw waste in the sea.
Victoria's restored historic buildings, flowering lawns, parks, magnificent seascapes and alluring British influence, including dozens of tearooms and pubs, drew 3.2 million tourists in 1991, about two-thirds American.
The visitors pumped $725 million into the local economy, nearly double the outlay five years earlier.
When 1992 tallies are completed, numbers are likely to be even higher.


For a Break From Politics, Try Hockey


PRIMERICA CORP. (N)
The Primerica Corporation, a diversified financial-services company, yesterday reported a first-quarter profit of $190.3 million, or $1.09 a share, down from $192.1 million, or $1.13 a share, a year ago.
But excluding in both quarters the effects of accounting changes and gains on sales of various investments and subsidiaries, profits in the first quarter of this year were $179.34 million, up 17 percent from $153.3 million a year ago.


Plastics Plant Burns for Five Hours in New Jersey


Smart Steps on Peddling
He might have acted sooner.
But Mayor David Dinkins deserves credit for confronting one of New York City's thornier economic and political issues: the problem of unlicensed street vendors.
Some 10,000 of them now flood the sidewalks, hawking everything from T-shirts and socks to counterfeit designer watches in congested shopping areas.
They block pedestrian traffic and undercut legitimate taxpaying merchants in all five boroughs of the city.


Bridge
Nobody can be sure that Col.
Richard Fredey of East Quogue, L.I., and Jessie Scudder of Riverhead, L.I., are the world's oldest winning bridge partnership, but it seems likely.
He is 92, she is 94, and they learned to play more than 75 years ago when "bridge" meant the auction game, with contract in its finished form still a decade away.
They play several times each week, and one of their numerous victories came March 23 when they celebrated the colonel's birthday by winning the Shinnecock Club Championship, directed by Bette Rightor and Linda Ward.
A week ago, reports Kathleen McLauchlen of Water Mill, L.I., the colonel as South on the diagramed deal used the direct methods of bidding that were popular in the early days of the game.
When his partner opened one diamond he made an immediate response of six hearts.


Apocalypse in Waco
David Koresh claimed to be God and threatened an apocalypse if Federal agents stormed the compound near Waco where his Branch Davidian followers were encircled for 51 days.
But there was nothing divinely ordained by yesterday's catastrophe.
It followed a dawn assault by the F.B.I. meant to save lives by pumping non-lethal gas into the compound.
Scores of people were killed, hours later, in a suicidal pyre evidently ignited by the Branch Davidians.
The demented Mr.
Koresh achieved his martyrdom, but this was assuredly not what the F.B.I., the Justice Department or President Clinton wanted.
Of at least 17 children in the compound, none are known to have survived; as many as 70 adults are presumed dead.


By Design; Short, Soft and Sexy
The waif is the new darling of the fashion world: a fragile-looking model who makes last year's supermodels look positively overblown.
Part of her elfin charm is wispy hair cropped almost as short as a baby's.
Hair stylists, scissors sharpened, are already snipping away at fashion-conscious heads.
The new style, called the gamine, the waif, the urchin or the short shag, features short, uneven bangs and longer, wispy sides and back.


E. B. Henning Dies; Modern Art Curator And Writer Was 70
Edward Burk Henning, the retired chief curator of modern art at the Cleveland Museum of Art, died Sunday at his home in Cleveland Heights.
He was 70.
The museum said the cause of death was complications from a stroke.


American Cyanamid reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Holders of recently issued Intel warrants were the big losers.
AS rough as Intel's stockholders had it yesterday, the biggest losers were holders of the stock warrants issued just last month.
The stock fell 11.1 percent yesterday, the warrants 18.4 percent.
The stock now looks reasonable to several analysts, but the warrants might take much longer to prove their worth.
Intel managed to time its warrant sale, on March 8, about a week before the underlying stock peaked.
The shares had reached 119, having doubled in about six months.


INSIDE
Arrest in Capital Shootings
The police arrested a suspect in a series of shootings that had left three people dead and terrorized Washington since Feb. 23.
Page A12.
Slain South African Buried
South Africa turned the burial of a slain black Communist into the biggest political rite since Nelson Mandela's release from prison.
Page A8.
New Abortion-Rights Politics
Now that abortion-rights supporters finally have an ally in the White House, they face a new set of priorities and challenges.
Page A18.
Rustling Scholarly Feathers
Flightless bird or feathered dinosaur, a turkey-sized fossil from Mongolia has scientists debating the history of flying.
Science Times, page C1.


American Productions Win Awards in London
An American musical, "Crazy for You," and an American play, "Six Degrees of Separation," won the top prizes on Sunday in London at the Laurence Olivier Awards ceremony.
The award for best musical revival went to "Carousel," the American show first produced in 1945.
The awards, presented by the Society of West End Theaters, also honored the work of Susan Stroman in "Crazy for You" for best choreography.
In June, the musical won Tony Awards for best musical and best choreography on Broadway.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a series of shootings in Northwest Washington referred incorrectly to a visit to the Columbia Heights neighborhood by Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly.
Her appearance there on April 15 was her second, not her first.


For Now, Montana Is Kansas City 49er
In his living room today, Joe Montana again told 49ers officials he wanted to play in Kansas City, not San Francisco.
The 49ers' president, Carmen Policy, then spent several reluctant hours trying to trade the 36-year-old quarterback to the Chiefs, but he broke off negotiations tonight when the two sides haggled over a second-round draft choice.
"We are in a delicate situation in that we are exploring all -- and I underline all -- of our alternatives," Policy said at a packed news conference that was televised back to Kansas City.
"Because of the very special relationship with Joe, we will continue to attempt to take his wishes into consideration. But from this point in time, the underlying purpose of what we do will be in the best interest of the 49ers."


Trains and Buses, Then Airplanes
It sounds like one of those little secrets about New York that only someone with the right connections will ever hear about: a ride to Kennedy International Airport for $1.25.
True, a few inconveniences are built into that price.
Luggage space is spare, there is no guarantee of a seat, and the walk to a connecting bus is several hundred yards, a long way to tote a heavy bag.


DEATH IN WACO: A Fiery End; An Angry Telephone Call Signals the End of the World for Cult Members
The bizarre ministry of David Koresh ended today in a hellish vision of fire and smoke every bit as nightmarish as anything he might have prophesied to his followers.
For those inside the Branch Davidian compound, the beginning of the end came with a telephone call.


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about Robert L. Jennings, retired president of the United States Woolworth division of the F. W. Woolworth Company, who died on Thursday in Edgewater, N.J., misidentified a surviving daughter.
She is Margaret Mary South, of La Canada, Calif.


English Channel Tunnel Is Facing Another Delay
The British-French company that will operate the rail link beneath the English Channel said today that the tunnel's opening would almost certainly be delayed again, until next year, because of a long-running dispute with the project's contractors.
The company, Eurotunnel, said the opening date, which had previously been Christmas, would depend on how rapidly it could resolve its differences with the contractors over who is responsible for more than $1 billion in costs.
But Eurotunnel, in its annual report to shareholders, said that its banks were now working on the assumption that freight service would begin next February and passenger service next April.


Serbian Civilians Hang On in Part of Sarajevo
In the small Serbian section of divided Sarajevo, life is ordinary -- or what passes for ordinary.
Or at least a lot of people say so.
Yes, there is electricity only once every three days.
Water is scarce.
Food is hard to come by.
And people living in pock-marked apartment buildings with windows blasted out have perfected the awkward run, a zig-zag with the head down, to avoid getting shot by Muslim snipers 500 feet away.


Different Routes for Rookies
One of two New York Ranger rookies assigned to the team's minor league affiliate in Binghamton, N.Y., is expected to report there today, as demanded, and not join his national team at the world championships.
The other rookie is en route to Germany, where the world championships are being held, to become a member of his national team.
This two-front scenario unfolded yesterday, according to Jay Grossman, agent for Sergei Zubov, because the National Hockey League ruled that no player should be barred from representing his national team.
Grossman, speaking by telephone from Germany, said the ruling came too late for Zubov to join the Russian national team, but not too late for Peter Andersson to play for the Swedish team.


Man Held in Killing of Sister and Mother in Nursing Home
To many who knew him, Harold Green was a devoted son, a man who washed his mother's dirty linen by hand and delivered home-cooked meals to her at a nursing home in Jamaica, Queens.
But the police said he was also involved in an increasingly bitter family dispute over money, and at one point he was even barred by a court order from seeing his mother after he broke a window at the nursing home in a rage.


DEATH IN WACO: The Lost Cause; Texas Cult Membership: Many Lives, Shared Fate
The 30-minute inferno that consumed the Branch Davidian compound today also swept away the lives of people drawn to Waco from as far away as Israel, Britain, Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines.
The attraction: a man with a penchant for playing rock music, having an occasional beer and preaching Scripture with unwavering conviction.
That man, David Koresh, a 33-year-old high school dropout turned evangelist, apparently led those followers to their deaths today.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about tuition at Trenton State College misidentified one college in listing the New Jersey public system's eight other regional four-year campuses.
It is William Paterson College.


Waco, Tex., Prices $33 Million Issue
Waco, Tex., priced $33 million of general obligation bonds yesterday through underwriters led by the First Southwest Corporation of Dallas.
The underwriters, who had scheduled the financing months in advance, said the storming of David Koresh's headquarters outside Waco yesterday had no impact on the deal.
In fact, the deal went so well that underwriters were able to raise the price on most of the issues, thereby lowering yields by five basis points, or five-hundredths of a percentage point, as well as the cost of servicing the debt for the issuer.


Quick, Al, The Plug: Power Play Unlit
Coming into the playoffs, the Islanders' power play was sixth best in the National Hockey League, successful more than once every five times the team had a man advantage.
But it wasn't so good against the Washington Capitals in the regular season, succeeding just under 13 percent of the time over seven games.
After one post-season game, a 3-1 loss to the Capitals on Sunday night at the Capital Centre, the New York percentage is 00.0.
The power play went 0 for 5, with few good scoring chances or shots on goal in Game 1 of the teams' first-round Patrick Division playoff series, which will continue Tuesday night in Landover, Md.


For Racing Five, The Payoff Is Hall
Eddie Delahoussaye, who recently rode his 5,000th winner, and Tom Kelly, who has trained more than 60 stakes winners, were elected to the Racing Hall of Fame yesterday along with three star horses of the past.
The jockey and trainer will be inducted into the Hall of Fame at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., on Aug. 5 along with Alysheba, who won the Kentucky Derby in 1987 and was elected Horse of the Year in 1988; Personal Ensign, the filly who retired in 1988 undefeated in 13 races, and Cavalcade, winner of the 1934 Kentucky Derby.


Gottlieb Hammer, 82, Financial Consultant
Gottlieb Hammer, a financial consultant and active supporter of Jewish Palestine and of Israel, died yesterday at Miami Heart Institute.
He was 82 and lived in Bay Harbor Island, Fla.
He died of bone cancer, said a spokesman for the United Israel Appeal in New York.
Mr.
Hammer retired as executive vice chairman of the appeal in 1974.
The agency is the principal beneficiary of annual campaigns on behalf of Jewish causes around the world.


OTB Is Planning Layoffs To Avoid Red Ink for Year
Admitting that it is facing a financial crisis, the New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation yesterday said that it would soon begin laying off employees to avoid ending the year in the red.
Otherwise, the agency said, it could wind up losing $2.9 million in the current fiscal year that ends in June and having to reduce revenues that it could turn over to New York City.


1 of 5 in New Survey Express Some Doubt About the Holocaust
A poll released toyesterday found that 22 percent of adults and 20 percent of high school students who were surveyed said they thought it was possible that Nazi Germany's extermination of six million Jews, never happened.
In addition to the 22 percent of adult respondents to the survey by the Roper Organization who said it seemed possible that the Holocaust never happened, 12 percent more said they did not know if it was possible or impossible, according to the survey's sponsor, the American Jewish Committee.


Sports of The Times; Magic Deals With Youth And Reality
IN this depressed city where jobs are hard to come by but guns are not, and where Little Leagues have at times failed to field enough players because too many of the children couldn't afford to give up the time or money from selling drugs on the street, community leaders have tried desperately to give hope and inspiration to young people and send them on the right path.
The path, that is, that will not lead to jail or an early death.
The problems here are not unique; they reflect like concerns in cities and towns across the nation.


Chess
Seven players tied for first place in the New York Open at the Ramada Hotel in Manhattan April 7 to 11.
They were Alexander Goldin of Russia, Ferdinand Hellers of Sweden, Lev Alburt and Joel Benjamin of Manhattan, Jaan Ehlvest of Estonia and Utut Adianto of Indonesia, all grandmasters, along with Ilya Gurevich of Massachusetts, an international master.
Each won a $2,725 prize for his 7-2 score.
Jose Cuchi, the organizer of the event, which celebrated its 11th consecutive year, said, "I prefer a single winner, but this is the nature of a Swiss-system tourney." With 142 players competing, they could not all meet and thus could not knock one another out of the top-prize list.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW COUNTRY SEEMS LIKE A PRISON
Asenhat Gomez used to peer out the windows of her childhood home in the Dominican countryside and relish a landscape of willowy palm trees and verdant fields where her extended family would gather for daylong reunions.
In her new home -- a cramped apartment on Williamsburg's South Side -- the windows frame a claustrophobic vista of brick walls, and the few relatives she has in this country are so preoccupied with making ends meet that family get-togethers seem as long gone as the father who died a dozen years ago.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Drive-By Killing In Washington Brings an Arrest
After weeks of searching for the gunman whose late-night drive-by attacks have killed two and terrorized Northwest Washington, the police today arrested a man minutes after a third pedestrian was slain in broad daylight.
Investigators said the gunman had fired at two people and missed before killing a 61-year-old man walking alone on a quiet street about 1 P.M.


No Headline
"It was based on what we knew then. Based on what we know now, it was obviously wrong." -- JANET RENO, the Attorney General.  [ A1:6. ]


From Back of Pack, Kenyan Seizes Race
Cosmas N'Deti came from way back, from nowhere on your top-50 marathoning charts.
He was a postal clerk, a father running for his newborn son back home, and today this 23-year-old Kenyan knew that he had enough energy left in his 132-pound body to pass everybody in Boston and capture a 75-degree race that specialized in massive dehydration.
"You come to a race like you come to a war," he said after winning the 97th Boston Marathon in 2 hours 9 minutes 33 seconds.
"I had the bullets and the gun."


DEATH IN WACO: The Overview -- SCORES DIE AS CULT COMPOUND IS SET AFIRE AFTER F.B.I. SENDS IN TANKS WITH TEAR GAS; Apparent Mass Suicide Ends A 51-Day Standoff in Texas
Hours after Federal agents began battering holes in the walls of the Branch Davidian compound and spraying tear gas inside, David Koresh and more than 80 followers -- including at least 17 children -- apparently perished today when flames engulfed the sprawling wooden complex on the Texas prairie.
Officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said they believed that Mr.
Koresh, a self-described messiah who prophesied to his followers that they would meet their end in an apocalyptic confrontation with the law, gave the order to burn the compound down in the 51st day of a standoff with Federal agents.


Buy the Crackerjack While It Lasts
The rites of spring have only masked baseball's looming problems.
Excuse the interruption to an already interesting season, but business and labor matters still lurk behind the scenes and not even the Detroit Tigers' awesome offense, the Philadelphia Phillies' best start in 78 years and the emergence of Andres Galarraga as the best expansion-team hitter in the National League can make them go away.
Although these on-field developments could dissolve into early-season footnotes, the off-field elements -- titled "The Commissioner," "Revenue Sharing," "Salary Cap" and "Strike/Lockout" -- will continue to be chapter headings through the season and next winter.
Chapter I--The Commissioner
Despite official comments to the contrary, the identity of the 1993 World Series champion (if there is a 1993 World Series, but that's Chapter IV) almost certainly will be known before the identity of the next commissioner.
So will the identities of the managers who will be hired next winter to replace managers fired and maybe even the identities of next season's opening-day pitchers.


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patterns
Donna on the Spot
Donna Karan's designer-in-the-headlights expression when asked about selling stock in her company to the public on the Charlie Rose show Wednesday night was not delayed green-room jitters.
According to the Securities and Exchange Commission, from the time an organization's management decides to go public, the firm cannot seek publicity that can affect the value of the stock offering.
If trade reports can be believed, and if Ms.
Karan is planning an initial public offering, there is little publicity that could not, technically, be considered in violation of S.E.C. rules.
"From the time the board of directors has decided to make a public offering, she has to be careful," said Robert Anthony, a lawyer for the S.E.C.
"If she's spoken to a lawyer, she's been told to say nothing."


Lemmon Is Honored


Chrysler Posts an Operating Profit
The Chrysler Corporation, citing an enthusiastic public reception for its new car and truck models, today posted strong first-quarter operating earnings.
But the company had a net loss for the period because of a $4.68 billion one-time charge to cover the cost of retirees' health-care benefits.
Without the charge, the No. 3 American auto maker said it would have earned $530 million, or $1.57 a share.
Revenue rose 18.2 percent, to $10.9 billion.
With the charge against earnings, Chrysler lost $4.15 billion, compared with a loss of $13 million in the first quarter last year, when earnings were affected by two one-time gains and a one-time charge.


Political Memo; Success Spoils Unity of Abortion Rights Groups
After 12 years as embattled outsiders, supporters of abortion rights are trying to make the most of their new influence in the White House and on Capitol Hill.
But leaders of the movement are finding that success brings a different set of problems.
They have to decide how hard to push their new allies on issues like Federal financing of abortion and the proposed Freedom of Choice Act; already, there is dissension over how much to compromise, and when.


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Critic's Notebook; As Television, Waco Drama Had a Grim Inevitability
For the purposes of a television spectacular and, one imagines, for David Koresh, the blaze that engulfed his cult's headquarters in Waco, Tex., yesterday was a dramatic necessity.
The story that had begun seven weeks before had been languishing.
Those astonishing pictures of Federal agents being gunned down as they attempted a raid on the house that instantly became famous as the home or headquarters or compound of the Branch Davidians, whoever they were, were being replaced by incidentals.
A few stragglers emerged; tanks arrived; there were phone calls.
Would it all end in a whimper?
Once a grabber of a story, whether about Amy Fisher or Woody Allen, about a hurricane or an earthquake, makes it onto the tube, it loses some of its reality and assumes the aspect of soap opera or made-for-television drama.
This confrontation in Waco had audience-holding elements that could have shown up (and probably will show up) in a television special: a cult, fueled by religion or sex or drugs and run by a God-connected prophet or control freak, had for some reason brought down the wrath of Federal agents who evidently did not know what they were getting into.


A Quiet Campaign For Comptroller; Candidates Await Cue by Weprin
As the candidates for State Comptroller count noses in the State Legislature, only one certainty has emerged: Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin has the most votes.
Mr.
Weprin is not seeking the job, of course.
But as the Legislature nears a decision about who will fill the remaining term of Edward V. Regan, more lawmakers are awaiting a signal from Mr.
Weprin than are currently aligned with any of the three front-runners: Carol Bellamy, H. Carl McCall and Fernando Ferrer.


Los Angeles Election Is Quietly Momentous
It has been all but forgotten amid the tensions surrounding the trial and verdict in the Rodney G. King police beating case, but Los Angeles approaches a milestone Tuesday with a vote for a new mayor.
The election is the climax of two years of political and racial turmoil that have rent this sprawling city's social fabric.
For the first time in 64 years, the ballot lists no incumbent, and for the first time since 1965 the name of Tom Bradley, Mayor for the last 20 years, does not appear on the ballot.


Judge Critical of Dual Inquiries Into Allegations of Abuse by Allen
Expressing his displeasure that 7-year-old Dylan Farrow was subjected to the trauma of two simultaneous sex-abuse investigations, the judge in the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow custody trial suggested yesterday that New York investigators should have bowed out in favor of the Connecticut authorities.
"Why bother?" asked Acting Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court.
"Why put her through this when it was being done in Connecticut? Why would New York want to put a child through it again?"


Observer; Exploitation Piece
A bunch of the guys and an equal number of women were sitting around the Blackbird Saloon sipping white-wine spritzers and talking about how much they hated cigarette smokers when Butch piped up with, "How come we never talk about Amy Fisher like everybody else?"
We expected that kind of thing from Butch.
He was, well, you know what I'm trying to say -- not really out-of-it, you know, but, well -- weird.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Water Authority Sets Refunding
A $504.9 million refunding by the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority is offering a maximum yield of 5.93 percent for a bond due in 2017 through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
For investors in a 28 percent tax bracket, the taxable bond equivalent yield is about 8.24 percent.
For shorter-maturity serial bonds, the initial pricing produced yields ranging from 2.7 percent in 1994 to 4.6 percent in 1998, 5.3 percent in 2003 and 5.65 percent in 2007.
The taxable equivalent yields would be 3.76 percent in 1994, 6.39 percent in 1998, 7.36 percent in 2003 and 7.84 percent in 2007.


American Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Andreotti and Mafia: A Kiss Related
The most graphic description yet linking former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti with the Mafia emerged today with testimony by an informer that the politician exchanged an embrace and kiss with Salvatore (Toto) Riina, the reputed "boss of all bosses" of the Sicilian Mafia.
Mr. Andreotti issued a statement tonight calling the allegation "very serious slander."


Chemical Waste Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Greyhound Signs Accord With Union
Greyhound Lines Inc. and its drivers' union today announced a tentative settlement of a bitter, often violent three-year strike that at one time had plunged the interstate bus company into bankruptcy and eventually remolded Greyhound into a leaner, more efficient carrier.
The six-year agreement, signed in Washington, D.C., would recall 550 workers who went on strike in March 1990 and were replaced by the company.
It also provides for distribution of $22 million in back pay, amnesty and reinstatement of most of the 200 strikers dismissed amid accusations of misconduct, and annual wage increases that will raise drivers' pay nearly 20 percent over the life of the contract.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr 16
Apr 9
Apr 17
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.8
6.7
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
224.2
225.8
217.5
Distillate stocks
97.7
99.9
92.5
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.8
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.9
1.8
Crude stocks
345.1
355.2
349.4
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
88.9
86.5
86.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Dolphins Sign Heller
Rather than wait until the National Football League draft to acquire an offensive lineman, the Miami Dolphins signed free-agent tackle RON HELLER of the Philadelphia Eagles yesterday.
Heller, 30, became the Dolphins' best-paid offensive lineman when he accepted a three-year contract.
The amount of the deal wasn't disclosed, but the Dolphins had reportedly offered him $950,000 per year.
The nine-year veteran earned $600,000 last year.


EATING WELL  HEADLINE&gt;Spa Cuisine Is Triumphant In New York Endurance Test
SPA cuisine came of age Sunday evening in New York.
Seven spa chefs from the United States and France produced one of the more edible banquet dinners for 220 people and earned around $300,000 for Citymeals-on-Wheels, a program that feeds the home-bound elderly.
And there wasn't a stick of butter or a tablespoon of cream to be seen in the kitchen.
Well . . . just the smallest bit of butter.
Guests who paid $600 for the privilege of eating low on the hog consumed around 30 percent of those calories from fat, instead of who-knows-how-much at a more traditional banquet.


Beating Case Is Viewed As Almost Appeal-Proof
"There's good news and bad news," said a defense lawyer when asked about an appeal moments after his client, Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, had been convicted in the beating of Rodney G. King.
The good news, said the lawyer, Ira M. Salzman, was that the officers received a fair trial.
The bad news, he said, was that this left little room for appeal.


Great Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Caremark International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parker-Hannifin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Progress Made In Trade Talks
Negotiators for the United States and the European Community made progress today in trying to resolve a government-contracting dispute but were unable to strike a deal before the European officials had to fly back to Brussels.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, reaffirmed today his previous threats to impose trade sanctions on Thursday if the dispute is not resolved by then.
He said that he would try again to settle the matter in a telephone call on Wednesday to his European counterpart, Sir Leon Brittan, the community's Commissioner for External Economic Relations, who led the European negotiating team here today.


Two Overtimes Later, Islanders Even Series
The Islanders made things hard on themselves tonight, but they escaped the Capital Centre with a 5-4 victory over the Washington Capitals in double overtime, evening up their first-round playoff series at one game apiece.
Brian Mullen was credited with scoring the winner, at 14 minutes 50 seconds of the second extra session, although it appeared that Ray Ferraro may have actually knocked Mullen's rebound past goalie Rick Tabaracci.
In regulation, Pierre Turgeon scored twice for New York and Dale Hunter scored three times for Washington, including one with three seconds remaining to tie the game.
The four-of-seven-game series heads to Long Island for Games 3 and 4 on Thursday night and Saturday night.


Japan Threatens Action to Brake the Soaring Yen
A shellshocked Japanese Government threatened tough action Tuesday to brake the yen's soaring value against the dollar, while complaining that the currency's rise was jeopardizing the economy's nascent recovery from a recession.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa attempted to sound an aggressive note when he commented to reporters here today that "it's time to intervene" in the market, by having Japan's central bank sell yen and buy dollars.
He called the yen's rise "too rapid."


'Sham' Scheme Outlined In Armand D'Amato Trial
Federal prosecutors opened their case against Armand P. D'Amato today, charging that he was a willing and sophisticated participant in a "bogus, phony, sham" scheme to defraud a client, the Unisys Corporation.
Mr.
D'Amato's lawyers countered that he was a novice political consultant who was innocently following the orders of the Unisys executive who hired him.


Birmingham Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Belgrade: Hear the Warning
The world has cried wolf so many times about what will happen if Serbian forces continue to slaughter Bosnian civilians that Serbian leaders may have concluded that wolves are now extinct in their part of the forest.
That could prove a catastrophic mistake.
What Slobodan Milosevic and his Bosnian allies may not yet grasp is that American and international political opinion has shifted in just the past few days, spurred by brazen Serbian defiance of U.N. cease-fires and diplomacy and fresh outrages against civilians in Srebrenica.
The Clinton Administration and its European allies are being driven, almost despite themselves, to contemplate military action to save Bosnian lives.
This week could be Serbia's last chance to stay their hand.


The Pop Life; Aretha Franklin, Rocker and Writer
A lot of people are honoring Aretha Franklin these days, what with greatest-hits record releases, awards and other tributes to her musical triumphs.
This rush of retrospection might cause some performers to have the golden-oldies, has-been blues.
But Ms.
Franklin says she's "far too progressive and contemporary for that."
"I'm breaking new ground," this soul diva said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"I'm getting into another genre of music that I don't want to discuss at this time, not until I've made headway with it. It's a merging of styles. I can't wait to work it out.  You'll hear some of it on my new album."


CompuCom Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DEATH IN WACO: The Survivors
They gave him their daughters and wives, ate only popcorn and nuts for days on end and parted with him only as the flames consumed their home on the Texas prairie.
Little else is known about the nine surviving members of the Branch Davidian sect.
But there is enough to peer into the relationship between a band of followers and David Koresh, who they were certain was the Messiah.


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fremont General reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Arpil 4


Women's Group Recasts Religion in Its Own Image
In a crowded meeting room at the Convention Center here, the woman leading a "Catholic-rooted feminist liturgy" told several hundred worshipers, "Even though we have no bread and we have no wine, God will feed us."
From the next room came snatches of a black spiritual.
One floor up, about 120 people participated in an American Indian pipe ceremony.
They were nearly drowned out by the 70 women down the hall who were drumming in a frenzy, shaking plastic egg rattles and singing a prayer to the ancient Greek goddesses of the hunt and the hearth.


Will Starks Run Nets' Lane Safely?
The Nets may have been thinking about John Starks today, but Starks had a different priority: tonight's game against Miami.
The Knicks and the Nets will meet on Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden, their first meeting since Feb. 28, the day Kenny Anderson's season ended.
Anderson, the Nets' starting point guard, suffered a broken bone in his wrist after colliding with Starks in midair on a third-quarter drive to the basket.
Starks was called for a flagrant foul on the play, and the Nets were angry, insisting afterward that Starks should be suspended.


Theater in Review
Meeting Lillie  Nuyorican Poets Cafe 236 East Third Street East Village Through May 15  By Amiri Baraka; directed by Rome Neal; production manager, Michael Thomas Newton; stage manager, Mike Jones; sound by David D. Wright; lighting by Tom Barker; costumes by Marcel Christian; set by Chris Cumberbatch.
Presented by the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, Miguel Algarin, executive producer.
WITH: Shaun Adams, Angela D. Brown, Lynn Dandridge, Erika De Shazo, Guy Ellis, Lawrence James, Carmen Mathis, Cortez Nance Jr., Evan Dexter Parke, Heather Simms, G. Dewey Smalls, Tawnya Stansell and William Williams.
Amiri Baraka's small, intense new drama, "Meeting Lillie," runs barely 50 minutes.
But its exploration of the tensions within a black family in Newark in 1943 has a historical resonance that extends well beyond the play's carefully evoked World War II setting.


Martin Marietta reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Governor Moonlight
His official salary, paid by New York State taxpayers, is $130,000.
But his day job earns him less than half the $273,700 Gov.
Mario Cuomo took in last year in his second line of work: giving speeches for pay.
Newly released tax returns show that the much-in-demand Mr.
Cuomo received an average of nearly $20,000 for each of 14 speaking engagements in 1992, surpassing his 1989 record of $151,150 for honorariums.
The Governor's total income last year came to $424,644.


Manpower Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John Nuveen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


I.O.C. Pressured to Make Beijing a Forbidden City
Human Rights Watch, an organization that monitors human rights abuses worldwide, is lobbying International Olympic Committee members in an attempt to gain I.O.C. opposition to Beijing's bid to hold the 2000 Summer Olympic Games.
Robert Bernstein, chairman of Human Rights Watch, said his United States-based organization received "an unacceptable response" from the I.O.C. after his group had sent a letter to the I.O.C.'s president, Juan Antonio Samaranch, protesting the consideration of China as a host country.


Metropolitan Diary
THE time: Approaching midnight, middle of the week.
The scene: Outside Zarela's, a Mexican restaurant in the East 50's.


60-Minute Gourmet
THERE is much confusion about the terms creole and Cajun as they apply to cooking.
Many cooks consider them synonymous, which is far from the truth.
Cajun cuisine originated with the Acadians, the French who came to south central Louisiana by way of Nova Scotia in the mid-1700's.
It is a rugged, rustic style of cooking, based on heavily cooked (sometimes until dark brown) rouxs and strong spices.
Cajun food was meant to sustain men toiling in the fields and on fishing boats and oil rigs.
Creole cuisine, versions of which are also found in Africa and the Caribbean, is more refined, more urban.
It is an amalgam of the food of many cultures: the cooking of the French and Spanish who began settling in the New Orleans area in the early 1700's, the later Italian settlers and the local African population, which provided the cooks for many Louisiana households.


Gore Congratulates Poland on Its Democracy
In his first major speech abroad as Vice President, Al Gore congratulated members of the Polish Parliament today on the progress their country had made in moving from Communism to democracy and capitalism.
Poland, where more than half the workers are in private enterprises and smooth democratic elections have been held, was showing the best economic and political health of the Eastern European countries that ousted Communist rulers in 1989, he said.


Lakehead Pipe Line Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A New Italian Puzzle
With a referendum that ended yesterday in a huge vote for change, many Italians sense that they have shed the past in a manner that deserves the same chorus of bravos as a good night at the opera.
The only question is, what to do for an encore?


No Headline
"The fire was not started by us. There were no plans for a mass suicide." -- REMOS AVRRAM, a member of the cult in Waco, Tex.  [ A1:6. ] "There's no doubt in our minds. We have very specific evidence that occupants in the compound started multiple fires." -- JEFFREY JAMAR, the FBI special agent in charge of the scene.  [ A1:6. ]


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Philharmonic Plans Summer Concerts
The New York Philharmonic is to give its second series of summer concerts at Carnegie Hall from July 14 to 29, with Kurt Masur conducting the orchestra in six performances devoted to the music of Brahms and Schumann.
The format is similar to the Tchaikovsky series the orchestra presented at Carnegie Hall last year, with each concert prefaced by an extra event.
The opening program, on July 14 and 15, includes Schumann's "Genoveva" Overture and the Piano Concerto in A minor, and the Brahms First Symphony.
Richard Goode is the scheduled soloist in the concerto.


AES Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COLLEGE LACROSSE REPORT
Army
The game of the week will be played in Michie Stadium at West Point on Saturday between Hofstra (7-1), No. 6 in the Intercollegiate Lacrosse Associatiion poll, and Army (7-2), No. 12.
The outcome will weigh heavily upon the May 8 selections for the national tournament.
Because the Cadets have never lost to a Patriot League opponent, and are not likely to do so soon, the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament is what the players anticipate the most and qualification is the annual goal of Coach Jack Emmer.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.90
2.94
3.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.77
2.82
3.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.96
3.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.48
5.48
7.21
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.75
6.72
8.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.69
7.67
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.92
5.91
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


2 MANAGERS HELD IN BIDDING SCHEME AT SCHOOL AGENCY
The agency created four years ago to clean up graft in New York City school construction contracts faced its first corruption scandal yesterday.
Two of its own managers were arrested in connection with a bid-rigging scheme -- one of whom, it turns out, was hired despite a burglary conviction in 1989.
Law-enforcement officials charged that the two employees, both project officers for the School Construction Authority, had accepted about $140,000 in bribes from contractors and had agreed to take hundreds of thousands more.
Ten people connected with seven contractors also were arrested, with another expected to surrender soon.


Astec Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lawyer Says End to Prison Standoff Appears Near
A lawyer advising rebellious inmates holding five hostages at the Southern Ohio Correctional Facility here said tonight that after negotiating sessions this afternoon, he was optimistic that the nine-day siege at the prison could end as soon as Wednesday.
Niki Z. Schwartz, a Cleveland lawyer who was flown here by prison officials at the request of the inmates at the maximum security prison, told reporters: "I just talked to the lead inmate negotiators on the phone before coming over here and he indicated that he is optimistic that they will be in a position to reach some agreement if not tonight then tomorrow. I'm very optimistic that we are getting very close to an agreement."


In a Reversal, Conde Nast Closes HG
HG, a leading decorating magazine since its founding as House &amp; Garden in 1901, will cease publication after its July issue, Conde Nast Publications announced yesterday.
"They had a beautiful sensibility about interiors and they really were always right on target about what was happening," said Stephen Sills of Stephen Sills and Associates, a residential and commercial design firm.
"It's the end of an era." Deal With Knapp
HG was done in by its chief rival, Architectural Digest, which officially became part of the Conde Nast family yesterday.
In a deal announced last month, Conde Nast acquired Architectural Digest and Bon Appetit from Knapp Communications for $175 million, giving rise to speculation about whether Conde Nast could profitably publish both HG and Architectural Digest, two of the leading interior design magazines.


Bangor Hydro Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Gang Tied to Killing, Just Three Rare Friends
In the days after three teen-agers armed with a baseball bat, a billy club and a hunting knife burst into a high school classroom here and stabbed a 16-year-old freshman to death, people wondered if their seaside community had been invaded by gangs.
But the police say there are no gangs in the town.
The boys charged in the killing had no following, the police say, and few friends.
If anything bound them together, it was skateboarding and family troubles.


Goody Products Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Yanks' Bullpen Falls Short Again
A remarkable comeback against Dennis Eckersley, five runs that they scored in the ninth inning, and the immense feeling of accomplishment the Yankees felt vanished in minutes tonight because their bullpen could not protect a one-run lead in the ninth inning.
Again.
The game ended in stylish fashion in the 10th inning for the A's when Rickey Henderson slashed a two-run homer off John Habyan to carry them to a 9-7 victory at Oakland Coliseum.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


First Financial Management Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AT WORK WITH: Kerry Kennedy Cuomo; A Rights Advocate Who Knows Her Way Around Washington
KERRY KENNEDY CUOMO was in a cab heading for the cubbyhole office of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights -- one of the unglamorous stops during a marathon day of lobbying for improved human rights in the small African country of Malawi.
She was clearly in command of her professional role, so who could blame her for saying: "You know what's a relief? Ever since I got married, I've never met a reporter who didn't ask all about my husband."
She had spoken too soon, of course.
There was still plenty of time to ask about Andrew Cuomo, recently named Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
When she married him three years ago, she created one of the most attention-getting power names in politics -- Ms.
Kennedy Cuomo.


Macy Official's Resignation Leaves a Single Top Officer
Mark S. Handler, the affable merchant with the wry sense of humor, will resign as chairman and chief executive at R. H. Macy&amp; Company on Aug. 1.
Mr.
Handler, who has been sharing the posts, will focus on developing the company's private labels and other merchandising matters, the company said yesterday.
The announcement was not a surprise, although the timing was unexpected.
Many analysts and consultants had said Mr.
Handler was serving as a temporary bridge between the Macy of yore and the tough, cost-conscious retailer it must become to survive today's competitive retail environment.


SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY AND CORNING TEAM UP ON DISKS
Seagate Technology said yesterday that it had reached a multimillion dollar agreement with Corning Inc. in which Corning would manufacture disk substrates made of a new glass ceramic compound for use in Seagate's hard disk drives.
A recording disk's substrate is the core material over which the magnetic layer is deposited.
Shipments from Corning, of Corning, N.Y., to Seagate, based in Scotts Valley, Calif., began earlier this year.


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Bank Set Up to Help Eastern Europe Is Criticized for Helping Itself More


Self-Control Is Manly
To the Editor:
Re "The Good Guys," Anna Quindlen's April 11 call to hear from the good guys in response to her conclusion that testosterone does not have to be toxic.
If any of my two sons had ever behaved like one of the members of the Spur Posse in California or like one of the Glen Ridge, N.J., jocks, I would have reported them to the police, recommended psychotherapy or both.


Information America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Who's in Charge of Curbing Arms?
The Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, established more than three decades ago by President Kennedy in hopes of slowing the nuclear arms race, is now in jeopardy.
With the cold war over, the Clinton Administration is debating whether to abolish it.
Defenders say the agency is still needed to press for new arms agreements and monitor existing ones.
No other agency has the undiluted goal of arms control, they say, and none will pursue it so zealously.
But State Department officials say that with the completion of treaties to cut nuclear arms and ban chemical arms, there's no justification for a separate arms control agency.


2 Get Probation For Throwing Blocks Off Roof
A Yale Law School student and a former investment banker at Morgan Stanley avoided prison yesterday when they pleaded guilty to reduced charges for throwing cinder blocks from the roof of a 45-story apartment house on the Upper East Side of Manhattan after a night of drinking last September.
The two defendants, David Pardue and Jefferson Nutter, both 25 years old, were initially charged with attempted murder on Sept. 20 after some of the dozens of five-pound blocks they threw narrowly missed two police officers in front of the Waterford at 300 East 93d Street.


Clinton to Offer Plan for Change In U.S. Schools
The Clinton Administration today will unveil its plan for overhauling American schools, trading the Bush Administration's market-oriented approach for a national education policy guided more directly from Washington.
Revised after extensive negotiations between the Department of Education, Congressional Democrats and the nation's governors, the bill retains former President George Bush's plans for voluntary national curriculum standards and national testing but drops the vouchers that were the centerpiece of the Bush strategy.
Instead, the Clinton plan would reward states for following Washington's lead by revamping schools along broad Federal guidelines.


Results Plus
HOCKEY  Olczyk Scores Tying Goal for U.S.
The Rangers' Ed Olczyk tipped in a shot from the blue line by Erich Weinrich early in the third period yesterday to gain a 1-1 tie for the United States against Finland in the world championships in Dortmund, Germany.
The Finns took a 1-0 lead four minutes into the second period when Mike Richter, Olczyk's Ranger teammate, gave up an easy goal to Jarkko Varvio.
It was the second tie in the tournament for the Americans, who scored a late third-period goal to tie the Czech Republic 1-1 in Sunday's opening game.
The tie also left the United States in fourth place in Pool B with 2 points.
Germany also has 2 points but a better goal differential than the United States, while the Czech Republic and Finland each have 3 points.
The four top teams in each pool advance to the playoffs next week.
In a game played in Munich, Geoff Sanderson of the Hartford Whalers had two goals, including the go-ahead score on the first penalty shot of his career, to lead Team Canada to a 4-1 victory over defending champion Sweden.
With the score tied at 1-1, Canada was awarded the penalty shot after a Swedish defender covered the puck in front of his goal.
The Rangers' Mike Gartner scored his second goal of the tournament in the victory, and goaltender Bill Ranford of the Edmonton Oilers had another exceptional game, making 36 saves after posting a shutout on Monday.
Canada now has a 2-0 record in pool A. (AP) TENNIS  Another Clay Match, Another Becker Loss  Second-seeded Boris Becker made another early exit from a clay-court tournament yesterday, losing to Marc Rosset at the Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
Rosset beat Becker, playing in his first match, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, in the second round.
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg came from behind to beat Henri Leconte, 3-6, 7-5, 6-1.
Seventh-seeded Andrei Medvedev, who has already won two clay-court tournaments this year, advanced with a 6-4, 6-0 victory over Tom Nijssen.
Last week, Becker lost in the second round of the tournament in Nice, France.
Yesterday's loss was Becker's third in an opening match in Monte Carlo and the 10th in 36 clay-court tournaments in his career. (AP)


Corrections
An article last Wednesday about the trial of Robert A. Altman on charges of bribery and fraud, and a correction in this space on Thursday, misidentified the bank involved.
It is the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


Nino Caprioglio, 67, Fashion Illustrator With Elegant Touch
Nino Caprioglio, a fashion illustrator whose drawings appeared in major publications in the United States and Europe for more than 40 years, died on Monday at his home in Casale Monferrato near Turin in northern Italy.
He was 67.
The cause of death was pancreatic cancer, friends said.


No Headline


NATO General Is Reticent About Air Strikes in Bosnia
The top NATO commander told Congress today that while limited air strikes might be effective in reducing the Serbian shelling of Muslim towns and cities in Bosnia, it is unlikely that they would bring the Serbs to the negotiating table.
The assessment by Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili of the United States came as President Clinton and his top aides met today to discuss the fighting in Bosnia.
A senior Administration official said that no decisions were taken at the meeting.


Phillies Find Power In Their Horses
Dave Hollins calls them the horses of the team, that select group of players expected to lift a club not only to the top of its league but also to the very heights of its expectations as well.
Now someone hearing Hollins, the powerful third baseman of the Philadelphia Phillies, opine on such a group might leap to the conclusion that he was speaking of the Phillies' lineup that is one of the primary reasons the perennial also-ran of the National League East is riding high and mighty in this young 1993 season.


Janet Reno's Disaster, and Ours
The clumsiness and disarray demonstrated in the Government attack on a cultist compound in the heart of Texas cannot be papered over by Attorney General Janet Reno's willingness to take the blame.
She has worked the television shows to take "full responsibility," and yesterday President Clinton said that rather than trying to distance himself, he too took responsibility for the day of bad judgment on the Texas plains.
Stopping the buck is always commendable, yet it cannot be foisted on the public as a substitute for analysis, self-criticism and true accountability.
This appears to be a case where F.B.I. officials, reluctant to rotate a new force of agents and support staff to monitor a stalemate, decided to push it to a conclusion.
A very green Attorney General approved their plan.
So did President Clinton, after a 15-minute talk that, had it been conducted by Ronald Reagan, would have been criticized as disengaged.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Recalled Jeff Nelson, pitcher, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Dave Wainhouse, pitcher, to Calgary.
National League
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Signed Ken Dayley, pitcher, to a contract with Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.


INSIDE
Step Nearer for Abortion Pill
A licensing agreement has been signed by the French maker of an abortion pill and an American research group, making sales of the drug here more likely.
Page A18.
After Italy Cheers
Amid a huge vote for change, many Italians sense that they deserve a chorus of bravos.
The only question is what to do for an encore.
Page A3.
Giving Up on House &amp; Garden
HG, founded as House &amp; Garden in 1901, will close after its July issue.
Its owner, Conde Nast, will focus on Architectural Digest.
Page D1.


Healthy Profit for a Recovering Sears
Emerging with style from its recent financial doldrums, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company today reported the highest first-quarter profit in its 106-year history.
Bolstered by a strong performance at its Allstate insurance subsidiary and improvements in its retailing business, net income surged 59 percent to $435 million, or $1.13 a share.


Suburban and Rural Schools Learning That Violence Isn't Confined to the Cities
When a 16-year-old freshman was stabbed to death by young intruders in his high school classroom in the placid suburb of Dartmouth, Mass., last week, bewildered students and townspeople told each other, "This happens in city schools, not here."
But people in suburbs and small towns across the nation are increasingly confronting a somber truth about their schools: shootings, stabbings and assaults are no longer confined to places like New York City, Detroit and Los Angeles.


National Realty L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Friends Hold a Memorial Matinee for Stella Adler
As an occasion for drama, the memorial service yesterday for Stella Adler did not disappoint.
Her friends, colleagues and students gathered at the Roundabout Theater in Manhattan to share stories and reminiscences about the legendary drama teacher whose approach to acting was passionate, scholarly and volatile.
"She always had her eye on some distant ideal, for she thought the theater should lift man to some higher aspiration," said the playwright Arthur Miller of Miss Adler, the leading American exponent of the Method system of acting, who died at 91 in Los Angeles on Dec. 22.


Dispute Over Black Center Tears U. of North Carolina
After two years of tension that culminated last week in the arrests of 16 protesters who were occupying the chancellor's office, the University of North Carolina remains divided about where to build a black cultural center.
In response to black students' demands, a task force of community leaders and university officials has recommended building a 53,000-square-foot cultural center to replace one that has operated in a small set of rooms in the student union.
But the panel did not agree whether it should be built on the main quadrangle or across a street near the bell tower.


Greyhound Lines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Henry Brandon, British Correspondent, Dies at 77
Henry Brandon, an authority on world affairs who was the longtime Washington corespondent of the British newspaper The Sunday Times, died yesterday at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery in London.
He was 77 and lived in Washington.
The cause was a stroke that he suffered on Friday at a restaurant in London, where he was on a trip, said Pamela Harriman, a family friend and the Ambassador-designate to France.


Pension Agency's Problems Described as Manageable
Unlike the Bush Administration, which saw the Federal pension insurance program as a possible disaster like the savings and loan debacle, the Clinton Administration told Congress today that the agency's problems were real but more manageable.
In testimony before a Congressional panel, Martin Slate, the newly appointed executive director of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, did not dismiss the agency's $2.7 billion current deficit.
Nor did he deny that the deficit would increase.
But he said the deficit did not threaten the agency's operation and that further study was needed regarding future problems.


Cameco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Spinning a Grim Tale of Chicanos Coming of Age Amid Violence
Although Taylor Hackford's "Bound by Honor" will not reach movie theaters until next week, it has already provoked powerful passions.
At a preview in Las Vegas, Nev., several months ago, a violent gang fight outside the theater alarmed Mr.
Hackford.
The film's initial advertising and first title, "Blood In, Blood Out," were viewed as too strong by its nervous producer, the Walt Disney Company.
And the movie's Los Angeles opening has been delayed because of edginess over the Rodney King case.
"It's a tough film," said Mr.
Hackford, whose 1982 hit movie, "An Officer and a Gentlemen," gave him instant Hollywood success.
"All my films are about working-class people. I'm a working-class guy. That's my roots. I grew up with Chicanos. And what I wanted to do was deal with the dynamic of what happened to Chicanos in the barrios and prisons in the 1970's."


Electro-Catheter (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Democrats Muster Only Weak Majority on Stimulus Package
Senate Democrats barely mustered a majority on a test vote today for the scaled-down version of President Clinton's economic-stimulus bill and made no progress toward breaking a Republican filibuster.
Five Democrats deserted the President when the Senate voted, 52 to 46, to make the $15.4 billion measure he proposed last Friday, reduced from an earlier $19.5 billion, the bill it will consider if it ever gets to a final vote.
A vote on ending the filibuster is scheduled for Wednesday morning, but most Democrats expect to fall short of the 60 votes that Senate rules require to halt debate.


NWA INC.
NWA Inc., the parent company of Northwest Airlines, reported yesterday that its losses had dropped slightly in the first quarter, to $99.2 million, from $106.9 million a year earlier.
But the St.
Paul-based airline company said that special factors like foreign exchange rates exaggerated its net loss, and that its operating loss was $69.8 million in the most recent quarter, up from $120.3 million in the first quarter of 1992.


A North Star Retires
Minnesota North Stars center BOBBY SMITH said he was retiring from hockey and will not follow the team when it moves to Dallas next season.
Smith, 35, played for 15 seasons, eight with the North Stars (1979-83 and 1991-93) and seven with Montreal (1984-90), with 357 goals and 679 assists in 1,077 regular-season games.
Smith was the N.H.L.'s first pick in the 1978 amateur draft and was voted rookie of the year in 1979. (AP)


Giants Swing and Don't Miss In the 11th
The 14 strikeouts of Sid Fernandez were just a memory by the 11th inning last night.
Bill Swift's inspiring night of work -- seven innings, one hit -- was already over, too.
By the end of the evening, two pitching performances worth remembering led to an inning Mike Maddux and Bobby Bonilla would rather forget.
Maddux, the most effective of the three-man group filling the role of closer in the temporary absence of John Franco, allowed three runs in the 11th inning of a 4-1 Met loss to the Giants.
After an overpowering performance by Fernandez and an overwhelming effort by Swift, something had to give.


'900' Telephone Business Withers as Problems Rise
Until recently, Jim Feist was a legend in his industry, the man who provided recorded telephone messages from the Pope at $2 a call and whose business in other "900" number services like psychics and sports scores took in $70 million a year.
But now his business is a shambles, as is a big part of the once-booming "900" number industry.
The industry has been wounded by bad publicity, attacked by Federal regulators and sapped by millions of dollars in uncollectable bills.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering $100 million of 6.38 percent medium-term notes due in 2003 at 100 through various securities dealers. *
Gannett Co., Arlington, Va., is offering $250 million of 5.85 percent notes due in 2000 at 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


On Environmental Cost-Benefit Scale, Prevention Scores High
To the Editor:
Your "What Price Cleanup?" series (March 21-23) raises valid questions about environmental priorities and economic imperatives, but your evidence, outlook and conclusions are gravely flawed.


Treasury Yields Little Changed
The yields on Treasury bonds and notes were little changed yesterday as investors and traders kept prices in a narrow trading range.
The yield on the 30-year bond rose to 6.75 percent, from 6.72 percent Monday, as the price fell 11/32 , to 10427/32 in secondary trading.
The yield has bounced from 6.75 percent to 6.72 percent since last Wednesday.


Whether to Go Co-op or Not in Beijing
To the Editor:
A letter I received from China last week shows that Beijing residents are facing a New York-style dilemma of recent years: to go co-op or to remain a renter.


Ingersoll-Rand reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BHC Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. had a $285 million first-quarter loss, as the company's drive to cut expenses failed to make up for the slide in its mainframe computer business.
The loss suggests that the new chief executive faces a difficult first year.  [ Page D1. ]
Sears reported a 59 percent surge in net income to a record, bolstered by the strong performance at Allstate insurance and improvements in its retailing business.  [ D1. ]


Ohio Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Big Loss For I.B.M. In Quarter
I.B.M. reported yesterday that it lost $285 million in the first quarter, as the company's drive to cut expenses failed to make up for the slide in its mainframe computer business.
The loss, compared with a profit in the period a year earlier, suggests that the International Business Machines Corporation's new chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., faces a difficult first year at the helm.
Mr.
Gerstner, the former chairman of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, took over at I.B.M. at the start of April, after an exhaustive search for an outsider to head the troubled computer giant.


NEW HOUSTON AIRLINE CUTS SERVICE TO LOS ANGELES
Ultrair, a fledgling Houston airline catering to business travelers, said yesterday that it had suspended daily service to Los Angeles because of intense competition from rival Continental Airlines and would focus exclusively on the Northeast market.
The change comes only months after Ultrair began three daily flights to Los Angeles; this was later cut back to two.


Haverty Furniture Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooklyn Precinct House Becomes a Crime Scene
A precinct house on a placid Brooklyn side street last night became a crime scene.
It was 1:25 P.M. on a gorgeous spring day, and Police Officer Mary Capotosto had in her custody a 27-year-old man who gave his name as Danny Cook.
She had arrested him three blocks from the southeast corner of Prospect Park.
The charge was possession of cocaine and heroin.


Bias Crimes Now Include The Disabled
The Dinkins administration yesterday expanded the definition of bias crimes to include attacks upon the disabled, including anyone who has or is perceived to have AIDS.
By creating a new category of bias crimes beyond those motivated by race, religion, ethnicity or sexual orientation, the disabled will now have their cases handled by police investigators assigned to a bias crime unit, a move that gives such crimes a higher priority but carries no higher penalty if convicted.


CHRONICLE
The man who helped catapult CAROL MOSELEY BRAUN, Democrat of Illinois, from an obscure Chicago politician to the first black woman elected to the United States Senate, is about to assume another role -- that of the Senator's husband.
Although no official announcement has been made, the Senator's press secretary, Stacey Grundman, confirmed yesterday that Ms.
Braun was engaged to marry her former campaign manager, KGOSIE MATTHEWS, who is now deputy chairman of national affairs for the Washington Strategic Consulting Group.


New Image Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Public Relations Firm In Manhattan
Four well-known executives who specialize in public relations and corporate communications have formed their own agency in New York.
They worked together at the Sawyer/ Miller Group before it merged with Robinson, Lake, Lerer &amp; Montgomery in February.
The principals of the new agency, called Shepardson, Stern &amp; Kaminsky, are: David B. McCall, 65, the chairman; Mark H. Kaminsky, 37, the president; Robert T. Shepardson, 32, the chief operating officer, and Leonard S. Stern, 30, the chief executive.
"It was always in the back of our minds to do this," Mr.
McCall said.
"The merger affected our timing." He described as amicable their departure from the merged agency, now called Robinson Lake/Sawyer Miller.
Ed Reilly, a partner there, agreed.


Inter-Regional Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Armor All Products Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Prepares to Get Tough With Haiti's Generals
After weeks of quiet support for United Nations diplomacy in Haiti, Washington has begun sending strong signals that it will not tolerate delaying tactics or outright defiance by military leaders of international efforts to reinstate the country's exiled president.
In recent days, American diplomats have begun privately spelling out a series of new sanctions that the military leadership and its supporters here will soon face unless they accept a United Nations-brokered plan to end the 19-month political stalemate.
American diplomats have begun to warn Haitian authorities publicly against further stalling.


Three Rings Aren't Enough for This Ringmaster
AS happens every time Ringling Brothers, Barnum and Bailey comes to New York, Eric Michael Gillett is again thinking about running away from the circus.
Mr.
Gillett, you see, is the ringmaster, the man in the spangled cutaway and top hat who over the last six years has been welcoming "children of all ages" to a three-ring extravaganza, singing and introducing the acts.


Books of The Times; Gay Life in the Military: A Record of Success
Conduct Unbecoming  Lesbians and Gays in the U.S.
Military, Vietnam to the Persian Gulf  By Randy Shilts  784 pages.
St.
Martin's Press. $27.95.
Nearly everybody who has ever served in uniform knows the facts.
But secrecy and hypocrisy are often in command and sometimes even wear stars.
The official position is that homosexuals and lesbians are barred from the United States armed forces.
No problem avoiding service; just check the box on the application form asking whether you have "homosexual tendencies" and the Army, Air Force, Navy and Marines won't allow you to join the ranks of the red, white and blue heterosexual servicemen and -women.
That permits the services to praise the Lord, pass the ammunition and tolerate only the official military way.


Theater in Review
Make Up Your Mind  New Group Theater 432 West 42d Street Clinton Through May 2  By Kurt Vonnegut; directed by Sam Schacht; design director, Zaniz; technical director, Kurt S. Nelson; production manager, Michelle Malloy McIntyre.
Presented by the New Group Theater Company, Mr.
Schacht and Scott Elliott, artistic directors.
WITH: Richard Brandon, Tom Brannum, Rod McLachlan and Miranda Sinclair.
At the outset of "Make Up Your Mind," a new play by Kurt Vonnegut being presented by the New Group, an actor delivers a brief synopsis of the hero's background (while stationed at the North Pole, Roland Stackhouse marries an Eskimo, etc.) and an apology.
The purpose of the abridged bio is to spare the audience in this age of short attention spans a whole act of exposition.
The apology is to any Eskimos who might be offended by the humor at their ethnic expense. ("Hath not an Eskimo eyes? If you prick him doth not an Eskimo bleed?")


Delegation, Amid Mixed Reaction, Completes Berlin Tour
A delegation from the International Olympic Committee today completed a four-day visit to Berlin, part of a tour through six cities bidding to be host to the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
The 11 delegates, who are charged with assessing conditions in each city and reporting back to the full I.O.C., were guests of honor at a luncheon given today by President Richard von Weizsacker.
They had earlier been welcomed by Germany's foreign and interior ministers, and by Mayor Eberhard Diepgen of Berlin.


Friend of Gotti Being Charged With Perjury
A businessman who is a close friend of John Gotti was charged yesterday with lying to a grand jury about a corporation that prosecutors say the defendant formed as a sham company to "give the false impression" that Mr.
Gotti had legitimate income.
The indictment of Lewis Kasman, who has said Mr.
Gotti was "like a father to me," is the latest in a series of sustained attacks by the authorities on associates of the Mafia chieftain, who is serving a life prison sentence for murder and racketeering.


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Gambling stocks have been a better bet than gambling
CASINO gamblers would have fared well last year if they had hedged their bets and invested in stocks of the companies they patronized.
Gambling parlor stocks rose more than 50 percent in 1992, and some have done as well this year, despite concerns about growing competition.
Over all, the industry is booming, with dozens of casinos planned for Indian lands and a small fleet of riverboats in the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico.


Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Some Music Machines Go Through the Paces
A mechanized, self-performing piano, going by the name Contraption IPP 71512, held court at the Kitchen for an hour on Friday night.
A massive frame lowered dozens of whirling, vibrating widgets onto the strings of a forlorn piano, under the direction of pre-arranged computer signals.
This diabolical machine was the work of Trimpin, a German inventor and composer who has taken inspiration from the player-piano music of the legendary American experimenter Conlon Nancarrow.
The Contraption is an infinitely more versatile device than the pianolas from which Mr.
Nancarrow drew his revolutionary rhythmic studies; dynamics, articulation and timbre are all under the computer's supervision.
The machine doubles as a prepared piano, altering the tone quality of the strings at a moment's notice.


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Geriatric &amp; Medical Cos.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


COMPANY REPORTS
Pfizer Inc. and SmithKline Beecham reported robust gains yesterday in American drug sales for the first quarter.
The results reflected strong demand for new products at both companies, overcoming the growing pressures on prices that had depressed results at many drug companies.
Pfizer shares jumped $3.25, closing at $65.125 on the New York Stock Exchange, as drug stocks rose again yesterday, continuing Monday's upswing.
SmithKline Beecham's American depository receipts gained $1.50, to $34.75, on the Big Board.
The London-based company said its American pharmaceutical sales were up 25 percent.


Jaco Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aceto Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Dish That Has a Little Lamb (Yes, Only a Little)
THIS recipe for lamb with red wine and cherries uses only a small part of a leg of lamb.
So it is bound to produce the question, What can I do with the rest of the leg?
You can try to find a butcher who will sell you a half-pound of leg of lamb, but that often isn't possible.
If you have to buy a whole or a half leg, ask the butcher to cut it into eight-ounce portions and freeze the remainder for other lamb dishes.


American Realty Trust reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In Indian States, Violence Continues
To the Editor:
In "Carnage Unseen" (editorial, April 11), you list areas of the world where innocents are victims of ethnic wars and tribal hatreds.
Your listing of hot spots recognizes the bloodshed in Kashmir, but fails to mention two other parts of India, Punjab and Assam, that have been aflame for a number of years.
They too have victims unseen and unheard.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


2 Children in Vehicle As It Is Stolen on L.I.
As a mother watched in horror, a man fleeing the police jumped into a station wagon idling in front of a school and took off with two small children in the back seat.
The station wagon and the two children were found 45 minutes later, abandoned on a street six miles south of here in Lynbrook.
The police said the children, aged 2 months and 18 months, were unharmed.


Israel Parade To Include A Gay Group
Weeks of wrangling over a request by a predominantly homosexual congregation to march next month in a parade saluting Israel ended yesterday with a compromise that will put the synagogue's marchers with another organization.
A spokesman for the American Zionist Youth Foundation, sponsor of the May 9 parade, said Congregation Beth Simchat Torah accepted an invitation to march with the Association of Reform Zionists of America in the parade, behind a banner that will include the congregation's name and that of the association.


Doctors Urged to Look For Signs of Depression
Most Americans suffering from depression go undiagnosed and untreated, and a Government-backed panel of experts is urging doctors to be more aggressive in attacking the problem.
The 12-member panel, which spent more than three years developing treatment guidelines for doctors and other health workers, said only one-third of patients who visit a primary-care doctor with symptoms of depressive disorders are appropriately diagnosed and treated.


Automotive Industries Holding reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Frankfurt Journal; Danny the Red Greets the Far Right, but Gingerly
Daniel Cohn-Bendit, who was celebrated as Danny the Red during the student rebellion in Paris in 1968, still has the head full of red hair that gave him the nickname, but his fiery temperament has given way to the philosophical acceptance of middle age.
In a German city where 170,000 of the 628,000 residents are foreigners, Mr.
Cohn-Bendit is now the elected official responsible for "multi-cultural affairs," which have become a lot more complicated all over Germany since an influx of hundreds of thousands of foreign asylum-seekers created a right-wing radical backlash.


Gunmen Fire at Egyptian Official
Gunmen fired on Egypt's Minister of Information outside his suburban home today, wounding his bodyguard and driver but failing in what was apparently an assassination attempt.
The minister, Mohammed Safwat el-Sharif, sustained a minor hand injury from flying glass.
He said his bodyguard received serious bullet wounds to the chest and back, and his driver was shot in the thigh.


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Quiet Visitor to Israel: Martin Bormann's Son
In this week devoted to remembrances of the Holocaust and the Warsaw ghetto uprising, one of the many people who grieved in Israel was the eldest son of Martin Bormann, a Hitler deputy who supervised the mass killing of European Jews.
"My feeling was one of mourning," said the son, also named Martin Bormann, after he and other children of Nazi officers visited Yad Vashem, the Holocaust memorial in Jerusalem.


Financial Benefit Group reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


People
*
Drake Sparkman was named to the new position of senior vice president and group creative director at Griffin Bacal, New York.
He was previously a senior vice president and creative director at J. Walter Thompson, New York.


Panel Receives Familiar Pleas To Retain Bases
They complained of shoddy staff work and secret back-room deals and evoked images of legions of skilled military technicians unfairly tossed out of work.
In short, a truly nefarious situation.
In the first of nine hearings nationwide, a Presidential commission that will decide the fate of scores of military bases heard lawmakers, community leaders and union chiefs today make angry and anguished pleas to save their local installations.


Danek Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; The Politics of Hatred Since the Days of Jesus
"The Longest Hatred" is a plain-spoken two-and-a-half-hour survey of 2,000 years of anti-Semitism, from the beginnings of Christianity to the Holocaust to the establishment of the State of Israel.
What the narrator calls "the story of the politics of hatred" is told through pictures, words and actions that bear a terrible similarity across centuries and nations.
Historians from several countries explore the sources of the hate, which the opening segment, "From the Cross to the Swastika," traces to the New Testament, particularly the writings of St.
Paul.
Prof.
John G. Gager of Princeton University describes the New Testament as a political document that shifted responsibility for Jesus' death from the powerful Roman Empire to the Jews.
The interpretation may be offensive to some Christians and contested by some scholars, but the program leaves no doubt that even if Jews of the time were to blame, many generations have by now paid for the crime.


Yee-Ha! Bar Has a Whiff Of the West
The men wear string ties, jeans and cowboy boots, and the women wear fringed jackets and cowboy hats.
When the band starts belting out country favorites, just about everyone is out on the dance floor doing the Texas two-step.
It's a Saturday night in Redding, Conn., deep in the heart of Fairfield County's back country, and this is the Georgetown Saloon, a bar and restaurant that New Yorkers and New Englanders have been coming to for 15 years to pretend they're out on the ranch.


Food Notes
Best Cookbooks of '92
On Saturday, the International Association of Culinary Professionals presented awards for cookbooks published in 1992 at the group's conference in New Orleans.
"The Splendid Table: Recipes From the Emilia-Romagna" by Lynne Rossetto Kasper (William Morrow, $30) was named the best cookbook of the year and also won the Julia Child Award for a first cookbook.
These were the other categories and winners:


Dow Drops 23.50, as Profit Taking Sets In
Investors could survey a procession of bad news yesterday -- upward pressure on interest rates, worse-than-expected housing starts, even some saber-rattling in the Senate about Bosnia and Herzegovina -- but they needed little excuse to accelerate the stock market's downward slide that began on Monday.
"Profit taking" was the phrase of the day.
Moreover, in a paradoxical trading session, news that would have shaken the market a year ago -- a huge first-quarter loss at I.B.M. -- had little effect; I.B.M. shares even closed up by 1 3/8, to 50 5/8.
The New Direction: Down
Market pessimists saw fresh evidence that a market adrift was at last finding a direction: all the major indexes were down.


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On Salads, Vox Populi Is Clear: The Almighty Caesar Reigns
PERHAPS it's the Parmesan cheese.
Or the olive oil. (It couldn't be the anchovies.) Whatever the reason, Caesar seems to be the people's choice on the salad menu lately.
Anyone logging frequent-diner miles around the country may have noticed that Caesar salad is now offered in a vast assortment of restaurants.
From hotel coffee shops to cutting-edge American places to fancy Continental establishments with plush banquettes, restaurants are serving lettuce with grated cheese, croutons and a dressing that may or may not contain raw egg or anchovies.


Irwin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Sherrard Is Out to Prove the Giants Won't Be Sorry
The Dallas Cowboys, his first pro team, gave up on him after he had broken his right leg twice in seven months.
The San Francisco 49ers, his second pro team, said it wanted him back, but not as a starter.
So even in this era of wild salaries for unrestricted free agents in the National Football League, were the Giants irrational to give Mike Sherrard $4.76 million over three years?
Probably not, because the Giants needed wide receivers and Sherrard, 29, still has a chance to be one of the best.


Mets Are Considering Building a New Stadium
After nearly two years of consideration, the Mets have begun serious exploration of a plan to demolish Shea Stadium and construct a new stadium -- perhaps domed -- as part of an elaborate development project that could begin construction by the end of the decade.
The plan, which would require the approval of the city and state as well as the participation of any number of private investors, might include a multipurpose convention center, underground parking garages as well as one or more hotels.
Construction would be on the stadium's current site or perhaps an adjacent area in the Willet's Point section of Queens.
A direct transportation link with LaGuardia Airport might also be involved.


Dorel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS has broken a long silence to grant her first full-length interview in three decades.
Mrs.
Onassis, who zealously guards her privacy, agreed to talk to JOHN F. BAKER, editorial director of Publishers Weekly, provided that all questions pertain to her professional life as a book editor, that she approve all quotes and that no tape recorders or cameras be used.
Mr.
Baker's article appears in this week's issue of the magazine.


Cuomo Blunts Sharp Queries From Mayors In L.I. Meeting
Officials from the 64 villages of still heavily Republican Nassau County called Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on the carpet here today for what many intended as a grilling about state-mandated programs, cuts in revenue-sharing and other state-inflicted ills.
Instead, the Democratic Governor showing his relish for political give-and-take, carved up his questioners so masterfully that many clamored afterward to pose for pictures with him.


Abitibi-Price reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a poll of students' awareness of Nazi Germany's destruction of six million Jews referred incorrectly to the president of the American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors.
He is Benjamin Meed.


Bridge
The defending champions in the 1993 Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship are headed by Michael Camp.
His team suffered a surprising loss in the first round to a low-ranked squad, but stayed alive in the once-defeated bracket by winning a match Monday night, played at the Young Men's Philanthropic League at 4 East 80th Street.
Camp helped his team considerably with some fine card reading on the diagramed deal.
When his partner balanced with two clubs he liked his diamond ten and ventured two no-trump.
Barbara Haberman as North naturally continued to three no-trump and West led a heart.


Alaska Air Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Life Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Outstanding Again: Dehere Wins Haggerty
TERRY DEHERE, the senior guard from Jersey City who became the career scoring leader this past season for Seton Hall and in the Big East Conference, received the Haggerty Award last night during a dinner at Giants Stadium.
The award, named in memory of Frank J. Haggerty, the co-captain at St.
John's in 1939-40, is voted on by the National Invitation Tournament/ Metropolitan College Basketball Writers Association to the oustanding player in the New York, New Jersey, Connecticut metropolitan area.


Fear and Repression Still Rule Area Occupied by Indonesia
The eyes and ears of the military are everywhere in East Timor, an isolated, impoverished piece of island that was invaded and annexed by Indonesia in the 1970's.
Eighteen years after Indonesian troops poured into the former Portuguese colony, many East Timorese say it remains a place of frightening repression.
The surveillance extends even to the graveyard.


Review/Music; Some Audience Participation In an African-Inspired Concert
By the end of the first concert of the Contemporary Music Festival at Mannes College on Monday night, several members of the audience were ecstatically waving their arms, undulating, whooping, dancing and clapping; others were chanting antiphonally with the calls from the stage.
This was not the usual contemporary-music event.
But it was a sign of the kinds of transformations now taking place in contemporary music.
The program, titled "African Influences," began with two works written during the 1980's by young composers inspired by African folk music, and ended with a selection of traditional African works performed by the African musician and scholar Abraham K. Adzinyah.
Mr.
Adzinyah has participated in such programs before and has, through his teaching activities, lectures and performances, become a compelling advocate for the music of West Africa.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  BOSNIA WAR WORSENING  The Bosnian war continued to worsen, with Serbian, Muslim and Croatian fighters engaging in heavy attacks on civilians.
A1  U.N.
WARNING TO WEST  As the United States and its European allies review policies toward the conflict, United Nations officials are warning that air strikes against the Serbs or rearming the Muslims will imperil peacekeeping and relief efforts.
A10


DEATH IN WACO: Why It Burned; A Fire Carried by the Wind Through Matchstick Walls
It was a solid half-hour before the first fire trucks arrived at the smoldering remains of the Branch Davidian compound on Monday.
But 30-mile-an-hour gusts, flimsy wooden construction and the almost certain use of incendiary fuel would have made saving the structure difficult from the moment the first flames rose along the sides of the building, firefighters at the scene and a fire expert said today.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Franco-Nevada reports earnings for Year to March 31


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wine Talk
IF ever a wine was user-friendly, it's Beaujolais.
It's made from one grape, the gamay; it comes from a single region of France, which happens also to be named Beaujolais; it's easy to drink; it goes with almost anything, and it's inexpensive.
But there is another side to Beaujolais.
In its own way, it can be every bit as complicated a subject as any other French wine.
And just as with those wines, a little extra knowledge can pay big dividends.
What's more, this is a good time to get to know Beaujolais; the 1992 vintage is just now arriving from France.


Selling Unions Like Soap
On television, over the radio and in the newspapers over the last month, Mayor David N. Dinkins has been called cruel to children, kindly to criminals and insufficiently mindful of fire hazards.
Advertisements have also implied that he lies and, oddly, coddles sanitation workers.
To the average citizen of New York City, it might seem that the 1993 campaign for mayor is going full tilt.But the charges are not being fired by the other mayoral candidates.
They are coming from some of the municipal employee unions -- teachers, police officers and firefighters, all of whom have been working without a contract since at least October 1991.


U.N. Aides Cautious on Bosnia
United Nations officials are warning that conducting air strikes against the Serbs or helping the Bosnian Government get arms will imperil their peacekeeping and relief efforts for some 2.3 million people.
A decision to lift the arms embargo on the Muslims or bomb Serbian gun emplacements and supply routes, they argue, would turn the Security Council into the ally of the Muslims in Serbian eyes and encourage their forces to hinder and attack United Nations aid convoys and their military escorts.


California Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American List reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Penguins Have That Unbeatable Look
The Penguins put their enormous talents on display again tonight with a 7-0 triumph over the New Jersey Devils that gave Pittsburgh a playoff record for consecutive victories to go along with the regular-season mark it set less than two weeks ago.
The Penguins, who opened a 2-0 lead in their four-of-seven-game opening-round series with the Devils, scored their 13th consecutive playoff victory, dating to last season.
That broke the mark set by Edmonton in 1984 and 1985.


Chiefs and 49ers Come to Terms on Montana Trade at Last
Joe Montana, who helped the 49ers win four Super Bowls and was urged by fans to run for mayor, is officially leaving San Francisco.
Tonight, the 49ers traded the 36-year-old quarterback -- along with safety David Whitmore and a 1994 third-round draft pick -- to Kansas City for the Chiefs' first-round selection (the 18th over all) in the National Football League draft on Sunday.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Elco Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BMC West (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Guilford Mills reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Alfa Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Monsanto Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cuomo Proposes a Fund for Injured Newborns
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed a $90 million-a-year fund that would supplant part of the medical malpractice system by compensating infants injured during birth.
The fund would be financed through a new $300 fee on every newborn, to be paid equally by the hospital and the attending physician.
The bill would also require for the first time that all obstetricians, family practitioners, pediatricians and anesthesiologists have their credentials renewed by a special state panel every nine years, and would automatically refer doctors against whom malpractice claims have been made to the State Department of Health for review.


Managed Care Will Drive Out Family Doctors
To the Editor:
In line with the Clinton Administration's support of a managed competition form of health care, under which doctors and patients are encouraged to join health maintenance organizations, I want to point out certain ominous events regarding managed care plans in New York City.


Apple Computer Will Open Sales Operation in Mexico
Affirming its commitment to the personal computing market in Mexico, Apple Computer Inc. said today that it was opening Apple Computer Mexico.
The new marketing and distribution development office will provide local sales, marketing, service and support to Apple's resellers, third-party software developers and partners in Mexico.
"The Mexican marketplace offers tremendous growth opportunities for both Apple and our partners," John Floisand, the president of Apple Pacific, said in a statement.
"We're convinced we'll be able to build a strong infrastructure in Mexico capable of addressing customer needs in all market sectors." Apple Computer Mexico is part of Apple Latin America, which is one of five regions that make up Apple Pacific.


DEATH IN WACO: The Government's Plan; Confusion Abounds in the Capital On Rationale for Assault on Cult
The Federal Bureau of Investigation had no recent evidence that children were being beaten in the Branch Davidian compound, F.B.I.
Director William S. Sessions said today.
The Director's remarks contradicted assertions by President Clinton and Attorney General Janet Reno that escalating child abuse had been a major reason to assault the complex near Waco, Tex., on Monday.


Lam Research (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; 3 Reasons To Stay Involved
THE SPORTS industry is approaching full throttle: hockey playoffs are under way, pro basketball is rushing toward a dramatic conclusion, and pro football's annual draft is set for Sunday.
And baseball's back.
The boycotts threatened by Jesse Jackson and his Rainbow Coalition for Fairness in Sport never materialized: Players played; fans paid.


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Queens Bank Robbed of $430,000 After Worker Is Held Overnight
A lone gunman escaped with $430,000 in cash from a Queens bank yesterday after holding an assistant manager hostage in the bank overnight and then forcing her and the manager to open the vault, law-enforcement officials said.
No one was injured in the robbery at the Queens Village branch of the Bank of New York at 224-05 Jamaica Avenue, the officials said.
Investigators of the Joint Bank Robbery Task Force would not say whether they believed anyone else was involved.


5 Sail the Globe In, Yes, 80 Days
More than 120 years after Jules Verne wrote the last line of "Around the World in Eighty Days," five sailors paid tribute to the power of the writer's imagination by celebrating the feat on a catamaran.
After sailing more than 27,000 nautical miles, skipper Bruno Peyron of France and his four-man crew finished their nonstop journey at 9:18 tonight, precisely 79 days 6 hours 20 minutes 50 seconds after they departed.
An American, Cam Lewis, and three Frenchmen -- Olivier Despaignes, Marc Vallin and Jacques Vincent -- shared Peyron's excitement.


Soup and Curry, a Meal That Bridges the Seasons
I CAN eat soup year-round, although seasonal changes greatly influence what ingredients I feature in my soups.
The month of April is cool, with winter lingering, and since the chill makes me crave earthy food, I begin my menu this month with a hearty kale, sweet potato and pasta soup.
Other greens could, of course, be substituted for the kale -- mustard greens, collards or turnip greens would work just as well.
Although the orange of the sweet potatoes is a beautiful contrast to the greens, sweet potatoes could be replaced by another tuber, like white potatoes or carrots.


Wounded Muslims Vow to Return to Srebrenica
In a smoky bomb shelter beneath the main hospital here, wounded and maimed Muslim soldiers airlifted from Srebrenica vowed today to continue their yearlong struggle to defend their homes.
"I'm going back for sure as soon as I'm well," said Muradif Habibovic from his bed.
"Even like this, I will go back." He held up both hands, which were bandaged and missing fingers.


Promus Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Air Fare Suit Is Criticized
Congressional Democrats and Republicans were sharply critical today of an effort by the Justice Department to prevent airlines from giving advance information about fare changes, which it considers price fixing.
During a hearing to examine the department's antitrust lawsuit against major airlines, some lawmakers said that they would consider legislation to allow this kind of information under antitrust law.


Baldor Electric reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Run vs. Swim? Statistician Says The Score Is In
DR.
HOWARD WAINER, a swimmer and statistician at the Educational Testing Service in Princeton, N.J., first began wondering if runners spend energy as efficiently as swimmers when he was an undergraduate in the early 1960's, and used to argue with his runner friends over whose workout was harder.
Now he has put those two interests together in a study published in the current issue of Chance, the journal of the American Statistical Association.


Public &amp; Private; Beyond Doctors
The doctor at the Vermont Women's Health Center in Burlington does not perform abortions.
She has more difficult procedures to do: Caesarean sections, hysterectomies.
Instead, for 20 years, the physician's assistants have been doing first-trimester abortions, as they do Pap smears, annual checkups and other medical services.
In this gynocentric universe, where the staff and the patients are all female, can be found solutions to the newest quandaries in the abortion battle in America.


Federal Inspector Criticizes Indian Point Nuclear Plant for Lapses on Safety
A top inspector from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that the Indian Point 3 nuclear plant, closed since Feb. 27 because of safety and management problems, had been running lately "like a plane losing altitude."
The inspector, Peter W. Eselgroth, said in an interview that the 17-year-old reactor, 35 miles north of midtown Manhattan on the Hudson River here, had not reached the point of being dangerous, but had "all the bad trends." Even before the shutdown, the plant had one of the worst records for reliability in the United States.


Managed Care Will Drive Out Family Doctors; In It for the Money?
To the Editor:
As a college professor, I am amused by some of the comments from medical students in "Medical Students Find Health Reform Unsettling" (front page, April 9), who believe that after six years of training and a residency at "minimum wage" ($29,000), they deserve to be "comfortable," if not downright rich.
Says one, "I think I deserve to get back exactly what I put in: up to half a million dollars."


Book Notes; Shutout Ends: It's Men 12, Women 1
E.
Annie Proulx's first novel, "Postcards" (Charles Scribner's Sons), the story of the tragic repercussions of an accidental killing for a Vermont farm family, has been chosen as the winner of the 1993 PEN/ Faulkner Award for Fiction, the first time that a work by a woman has been honored with the award, one of a handful of top American literary honors.
The 13th annual award was announced yesterday by Robert Stone, chairman of the PEN/Faulkner Foundation in Washington.
Women had been nominated 19 times since the award was founded in 1980 by writers to honor their peers, and among those nominated who did not win it are Cynthia Ozick and Anne Tyler.
At first, the failure of women to be selected for the prize seemed a quirk, then somehow a jinx.
Although women were consistently judges for the prize, unproven conspiracy theories abounded.


Piper Jaffray Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Theater in Review
The Breaks  Women's Interart Center 549 West 52d Street Manhattan Through May 23  Written and performed by Deb Margolin and Rae C. Wright; directed by Cheryl Katz; set by Christina Weppner; lighting by Jeff Zeidman; costumes by Linda Gui; production stage manager, Dan Geist.
Presented by the Interart Theater, Margot Lewitin, artistic director.
While caring for the elderly patients in a nursing home, two nurses take periodic breaks for cigarettes and conversation.
Sitting at a table in a large broom closet, they talk about their work and reveal aspects of their lives.
The play, "The Breaks," written and performed by Deb Margolin and Rae C. Wright, is a small, gently observant mood piece in which intimacy is established through the most indirect of means.


Lasermaster Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Atlantic Southeast Airlines (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Managed Care Will Drive Out Family Doctors; Don't Point at Lawyers
To the Editor:
I was more than slightly amused by "Dedication, Not Money, Keeps Doctors Going" (letters, April 13), defending the incomes of physicians.
While there is no doubt that many doctors work grueling schedules with the true goal of healing people, there is also no doubt that the medical industry is extremely lucrative.


COMPANY NEWS
A.T.&amp; T. CHINA, has signed a $12.4 million contract with China's Hainan Posts and Telecommunications Bureau to set up a switching network for the southern island province.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brand Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DEATH IN WACO: A Cultist's Mind; Experts Say Hostage Approach Led to Bloodshed
Law-enforcement agencies might have avoided an Armageddon in their 51-day standoff with the Branch Davidian sect in Waco, Tex., if they had focused their attention on the fact that they were dealing with a violent sect, experts on cults said in interviews yesterday.
Instead, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and others involved in the ordeal approached it as if it were a hostage situation, the experts said.
By relying on basic principles of hostage negotiation, they said, the agencies apparently ignored or minimized factors that might have told them the approach was unlikely to work, including the facts that the sect members were there by choice and that they held an ideology that glorified armed confrontation.


Vicious 'Ethnic Cleansing' Infects Croat-Muslim Villages in Bosnia
Fighting spread throughout Bosnia today as Serbian, Muslim and Croatian forces attacked civilians with a ferocity that appeared more than ever to overwhelm the United Nations military forces sent here to mitigate the effects of the war.
United Nations commanders who spoke over the weekend of building a broader peace from a fragile cease-fire in the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica today were hopscotching across Bosnia in a desperate attempt to curb the new rush of hostilities.
Deadlocks and More Deadlocks
Even the Srebrenica agreement, which established the eastern town as a "safe area" for tens of thousands of Muslim civilians, appeared to be in danger of collapsing as Bosnian and Serbian commanders deadlocked over meeting the terms.


Corrections
A front-page summary heading yesterday, referring to an article in Business Day about a law firm's settlement of a Government suit in a savings and loan bankruptcy, characterized the terms incorrectly.
The firm, Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, agreed to pay the Government $51 million to settle a claim that it had aided the financier Charles H. Keating Jr. in the fraud that brought on the costliest bankruptcy in the savings and loan debacle.
The firm was not fined.


Personal Health
AT the risk of sounding like your mother, I am going to tell you to "stop slouching and stand (sit) up straight." Not that poor posture will cause some dread disease or turn you into a laughingstock.
But perpetually allowing your body to stand or sit in misaligned positions can exact an unpleasant toll on your physical well-being and possibly your social stature.
Body language says a lot to the world about your self-image.
A person who stands up straight conveys a message of self-confidence and competence, while someone who stands with slouched shoulders and a sagging gut appears depressed and self-conscious.
Poor posture can make you look older and fatter than you are.


Internal Combustion Gets a Different Beat
The Mazda Motor Corporation has developed an automobile engine that the company says provides both high power and low fuel consumption using a design that has long stymied automotive engineers.
The design is for a Miller-cycle engine, named after Ralph Miller, an American who conceived of it in 1947.
This type of engine has had limited use in boats and gasoline-powered electrical generators, but Mazda says its design is the first Miller-cycle engine that is practical for cars.


Rapid Climb
The Haemonetics Corporation makes equipment to collect and process blood for hospitals and blood banks.
Its stock has been rising on expectations that the earnings report scheduled for tomorrow will show gains.
Yesterday, Haemonetics was the Big Board's biggest percentage gainer, rising more than 18 percent, to $20.125, a gain of $3.125.


"USAIR GROUP INC.(N)"
USAir Group Inc.reported yesterday that it had substantially narrowed its net loss in the first quarter to $61 million, down from $738.26 million a year earlier.
But excluding in both quarters the effects of special charges -- such as accounting for retiree health benefits last year and the blizzard in mid-March that canceled thousands of flights -- the Arlington, Va.-based airline's operating profit totaled $2 million in the first quarter, up from a loss of $48.6 million a year earlier.
Operating revenues in the most recent quarter rose slightly to $1.72 billion from $1.65 billion.


Lousiana-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Citicorp and Chemical Post Jumps in Earnings
Citicorp and several other major banks reported sharply increased earnings yesterday, largely because their losses from bad loans had fallen faster than expected.
The loan income of many banks continues to be strong because of the wide gap between the interest they charge on loans and what they pay on deposits.
And banks that actively trade currencies and securities have posted stellar results in these areas largely because of declines in European interest rates, which raise the value of their European bonds.


Crow Leaves A&amp;M Post
JOHN DAVID CROW, who won the Heisman Trophy playing for Bear Bryant, resigned as Texas A&amp;M's athletic director yesterday to go into business with Bryant's son, PAUL BRYANT JR., at Gulf Greyhound Park.
Crow played for the Aggies from 1955 to 1957 under Bear Bryant and later coached under him at Alabama, where he became reacquainted with Bryant Jr., owner of the greyhound racing track in La Marque, Tex.


Bank for East Europe Lives Well in London
Jacques Attali has never been accused of excessive modesty in his grand plans for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the institution set up two years ago by the United States and other Western governments to help speed Eastern Europe's transition to capitalism.
Whether the bank will live up to Mr.
Attali's goal of promoting democracy and ultimately forging a single vibrant market from Lisbon to Moscow may not be known for years.
But Mr.
Attali, the bank's president, has made sure it has a headquarters to match his vision.


Corrections
An article yesterday about subway transportation to John F. Kennedy International Airport misidentified transfer points used by passengers for another airport, La Guardia, who take the subway to the Q33 bus, which stops outside the terminals.
The points, in Queens, are the 74th Street-Broadway station on the No. 7 line and the Roosevelt Avenue station on the E, F, G and R lines.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CORRUPTION SCANDAL HITS ANTI-GRAFT UNIT
The agency created four years ago to clean up graft in New York City school construction contracts faced its first corruption scandal, as two of its own managers were arrested in connection with a bid-rigging scheme.
One of the managers was hired despite a burglary conviction in 1989.
A1.
LIBERALS ARM FOR SCHOOL FIGHT
Gay-rights advocates, liberal clergy and some parents' and teachers' groups are organizing more aggressively than ever before to influence the elections for New York City's local school boards.
A1.


Philip Morris Earnings Climb 10.8%
With the full impact of a major price reduction in Marlboro cigarettes still three to six months away, the Philip Morris Companies issued first-quarter earnings yesterday that reflected strong growth and only a hint of turbulence ahead.
Compared with the first quarter of 1992, the company reported an 8.1 percent gain in revenue, an 8.6 percent rise in operating income and a 10.8 percent increase in profit -- all within the expectations of leading analysts.
Earnings per share rose to $1.38, from $1.20 a year earlier.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
IT'S Professional Secretaries Day (yes, it's listed in many desktop calendars), and the Federal Express Corporation has some timely tidbits from its recent survey of 5,662 secretaries.
Asked what would move them to give back a bonus, most respondents mentioned flexible hours, followed by more responsibilities and challenges, and more recognition.
For all those who consider such choices the stuff of fantasy, there is perhaps some comfort in many advertisers' attempts to offer a little recognition of those who wield increasing clout, particularly at companies that are shedding layers of management.
In several campaigns, companies like the 3M Company, Federal Express, and United Parcel Service Inc., are trying to show their empathy, respect and support for secretaries.


Campus Journal; A Cloistered College Feels the Outside Closing In
Tucked into the hills that rise sharply from the west bank of the Hudson River 20 miles north of New York City, Nyack College has long been something of a place apart.
It was founded in 1882 to train Christian missionaries, and though that is no longer its exclusive mission, it retains many of the trappings -- and many of the problems -- of a conservative liberal-arts college in a secular era.
Most of the college's 560 undergraduates live in dormitories on the wooded campus and have little to do with the nearby town.
They take a pledge not to smoke, drink or dance.


Serving Up Blackjack Along With Borscht?; Catskills Resort Owners Put Their Hopes in New Attitudes Toward Casino Gambling
George Parker is fed up with the name Borscht Belt.
As chairman of the Concord, one of the largest resorts in the Catskills, he is tired of being associated exclusively with the comedy, dance styles, decor, music and even food of another era.
Sick, in other words, of running on nostalgia.
So as he strolls through his 1,225-room hotel, past the 1968 photograph of a youthful Woody Allen looking like a deer caught in headlights, past the club where his onetime baby sitter, Buddy Hackett, got his start, past the dining room where, indeed, borscht is still served, he is talking about a new vision.
A vision with appeal to middle-class families and upscale singles, a vision more exciting than shuffleboard or even Simon Sez, a vision for the 90's.


Maker of Abortion Pill Reaches Licensing Pact With U.S. Group
The French company that makes the abortion pill RU-486 has agreed to license the drug to an American contraceptive research group so it can find a manufacturer in the United States, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs said today.
The Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, said that after a meeting today in Rockville, Md., Edouard Sakiz, president of the French company, Roussel-Uclaf, agreed to license the drug and the technology to make it to the Population Council, a not-for-profit research organization based in New York City.


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Foul! 64 in All to Be Exact as Knicks Top Heat
It was not exactly a day at the beach, but the Knicks left Miami with the victory they needed.
In a game slowed by 57 personal fouls, seven technical fouls and some strange delay tactics by the Miami Heat, New York (57-22) outlasted the frustrated Heat, 109-97, tonight at Miami Arena.
The Knicks' 12th victory in their last 14 games kept them one game in front of the Chicago Bulls in their race for best record in the Eastern Conference.
Both teams have three games remaining, including Sunday's Knicks-Bulls showdown at Madison Square Garden.


Agencies to Drop Media-Buying Effort
Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York said yesterday that it had named Steven J. Farella to the new position of executive vice president of media services.
The appointment ends, for now, a yearlong effort by Mr.
Farella to found a media-buying consortium to handle that service for several agencies simultaneously.
"I feel very lucky to have had the opportunity to see if an idea of mine could change the way agencies serve clients," Mr.
Farella said.
The primary reason for the consortium's lack of acceptance was that "clients were not enthusiastic because of what they perceived as the potential for conflict," particularly if members of the consortium handled accounts in competitive categories like automobiles, he said.


Humana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Body of Turkish President Lies in State


Liberals Cooperating in New York School Races
Gay-rights advocates, liberal clergy and some parents' and teachers' groups are organizing more aggressively than ever before to influence the elections for New York City's local school boards.
These groups have often had common interests in the past, but this year they find themselves working together even more closely in the face of an energized effort on the other side of the political spectrum by the Roman Catholic Church, the Rev.
Pat Robertson and some community groups with a conservative social agenda.


DEATH IN WACO: The Overview; F.B.I. CITES FRESH EVIDENCE THAT CULT SET FATAL FIRE; OFFICIALS' ACCOUNTS CLASH
Federal law-enforcement officials said today that they had new evidence that the fire that killed 86 people on Monday at the Branch Davidian compound was set from within.
But survivors of the inferno shouted denials of the Government's accusation as they were led into court in chains.
They blamed Federal agents for the fire.
In a day of charges and countercharges, the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced that it had found fuel canisters that it said had been used as part of an act of mass immolation ordered by the cult leader, David Koresh.
The bureau also said it had three eyewitness accounts of people inside the compound setting fires.


James O'Driscoll, 57; Aided College Students
James Edward O'Driscoll, an administrator at the Institute of International Education in Manhattan, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 57 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


I.M.F. UNVEILS PLAN FOR SOVIET LANDS
To help the former Soviet bloc's transition to a market economy, the International Monetary Fund unveiled a program today to provide billions of dollars in loans under less stringent conditions than usual to Russia and more than 20 other countries.
Michel Camdessus, the fund's managing director, said the program would provide $4 billion to $6 billion in loans during the next 18 months to help former Soviet bloc nations buy imported goods, ranging from food to spare parts needed to modernize industry.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Computer Task Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


High Court Rejects I.R.S. Depreciation Rule
In a significant taxpayer victory, the Supreme Court ruled today that businesses can depreciate the value of the customer base they acquire when they buy another going business, as long as they can show that the customers' patronage has a value that will diminish over time.
The 5-to-4 ruling rejected the Internal Revenue Service's long-held view that a customer list -- like a list of newspaper subscribers, bank depositors or insurance policyholders -- is simply one aspect of the company's good will.
Under Treasury Department regulations dating to the 1920's, good will may not be depreciated.


George Mickelson, 52, Governor Of South Dakota, Dies in a Crash
Gov.
George S. Mickelson of South Dakota, who followed his father's career path from a rural law practice to the state's highest office, died in a plane crash in Iowa on Monday night, a spokesman for his office said.
He was 52.
Governor Mickelson was one of eight people killed in the crash about 15 miles southwest of Dubuque as they were returning from a trip to Cincinnati to promote economic development in the state, the spokesman said.
Engine trouble was suspected.


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Justices Spar Over Validity Of a District Based on Race
Members of the Supreme Court sparred with one another today as much as with the three lawyers who appeared before them to argue over the validity of a new Congressional district that runs like a ribbon through 10 North Carolina counties.
The question was whether the district is the result of an unconstitutional racial quota, a routine application of the Federal Voting Rights Act, or -- the prospect that appeared to intrigue the Court most -- perhaps both.


Two Officers Are Wounded By Suspect
Two police officers were critically wounded inside the 70th Precinct station house in Brooklyn last night when a suspect arrested on drug charges managed to grab one of the officer's guns in a bathroom and opened fire.
The assailant then killed himself by shooting himself in the forehead, the police said.
The officers, Mary Capotosto, 29 years old, and Robert Noblin, 25, were rushed into surgery at Kings County Hospital.
Officer Capotosto was shot in the head and Officer Noblin was shot in the neck and torso.


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FIserv Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Throw a Draft And They'll Come
College football coaches want their underclassmen to remain on their teams and to finish degrees.
National Football League executives say they want the same thing.
For each of the last five years, however, a steady number of underclassmen, mostly juniors, have entered the N.F.L. draft, and this year's draft is no exception.
And some of the underclassmen will again shine: At least 10 juniors are projected to be first-round picks.


Review/Theater; By Wilder, 3 Works Rarely Seen
"Wilder, Wilder, Wilder," originally produced by the Willow Cabin Theater Company at the Harold Clur
man Theater, has reopened at Circle in the Square.
Following are excerpts from Wilborn Hampton's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 21, 1992.
Regarded for too long as the author of the High School Senior Play, Thornton Wilder was perhaps the American theater's greatest innovative genius.
Often with breathtaking effect, Wilder explored the arrangement of time and space not as cosmic forces but as basic elements that define our everyday lives.
Willow Cabin's polished staging of these seldom performed plays not only offers a rare chance to glimpse the origins of Wilder's great works to come, but also allows them to shine as small gems on their own.


Children's Books by Children
EZRA JACK KEATS, a children's book author and illustrator who died in 1983, showed a passion for urban settings and hot colors in his books.
His work is the inspiration for an annual bookmaking contest for children, sponsored by the Ezra Jack Keats Foundation and the New York public schools.
Winners are chosen on the school, borough and citywide levels.
Librarians and art teachers recently judged 156 books by 196 children, some of whom worked in pairs.
The citywide winners were Kate Fahy and Priscilla White, both 11, from Public School 232 in Howard Beach, Queens, for "Zekee the Garglefunk" (shown here with two winning school-level entries), and Christopher John Camuto, 13, from Intermediate School 259 in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, for "Erik's Big Move."


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail; How Volunteers Help
To the Editor:
Your compelling and provocative "Children of the Shadows" series is an urgent call to action.
The youngsters you profile are crying out for help and the individual attention of a caring adult.
More men and women must be willing to intervene in the lives of young people who are survivors despite incredible obstacles or are in danger of falling between the cracks because of disintegrating homes and overworked, understaffed schools.


WHERE TO FIND IT
IF a lampshade is the first thing you notice when you enter a room, most likely the shade is all wrong.
"You want shades that are pleasing to the eye, but not jarring," said Susanne Wellott, a lampshade designer in Bronxville, N.Y.
"You want to think, 'What a lovely room.' Then you notice the details, the great pillows, the lovely lampshades."


Miscalculation, Then Embarrassment
As Democrats have been forced to negotiate away almost all of President Clinton's package to stimulate the economy, a vexing question has emerged: How did such a small economic initiative turn into such a large political embarrassment?
By holding out for a plan that even Administration economists knew would have modest impact, Mr.
Clinton expended much of his early and precious political capital on a proposal that he had never intended to make his biggest fight.
And the resulting political defeat has left the Administration vulnerable to future assaults by Republicans, who surprised even themselves by finding unity.


Choice and Journey's End In Canadian Hotel Venture
Choice Hotels International, the franchise hotel giant, said yesterday that it had formed a joint venture in Canada with the Journey's End Corporation, Canada's biggest hotel management company.
The venture, to be called Choice Hotels Canada Inc., will initially have 174 inns, 120 of them currently owned by Journey's End.
"Together we expect to have over 500 hotels in the Canadian market in the next four or five years," said Gerald Petitt, president and chief operating officer of Choice, who described the joint venture as "a truly equal partnership." The board of directors will be "50-50," he said, "and we'll split the profits right down the middle."


DEATH IN WACO: Washington Memo; A Strategy of Openness Aims to Avert Backlash
Hoping to win public understanding for its tear gas assault on the Branch Davidian complex near Waco, Tex., senior officials from the Federal Bureau of Investigation held an unusually elaborate three-hour briefing with reporters today to describe the reasoning behind their attack.
The briefing disclosed few new details about the assault, but was part of a broader public relations strategy by the Justice Department, with the approval of the White House, to put forward senior officials, including Attorney General Janet Reno, to explain themselves in an effort to avert any political backlash.


Administration Offers Plan for Better Schools
The Clinton Administration today unveiled its plan to improve the nation's public schools through a set of broad guidelines not only on school and student performance but also on the skills that young people will need to survive in an uncertain economy.
Education Secretary Richard W. Riley was joined by Labor Secretary Robert W. Reich to announce the $420 million package of legislation, which would create a board of 28 educators and representatives from business, labor, state and Federal governments.
The board, which would get $15 million under the Goals 2000 legislation, would identify a broad variety of occupations for students who are not bound for college and the skills needed for those jobs.


Fugitive Bolivian Ex-Ruler Gets 30-Year Term
The Supreme Court today sentenced Gen.
Luis Garcia Mesa, a former military dictator, to 30 years in prison on charges of murder, looting the country's treasury, corruption and abuse of constitutional power during his bloody 14-month rule in 1980 and 1981.
Mr.
Garcia Mesa, who was sentenced in absentia, disappeared in 1989 while his trial was going on.
The Government of Jaime Paz Zamora has promised to capture Mr.
Garcia Mesa before its term expires in August, but few Bolivians expect it to deliver on its promise.


Uncovered Short Sales Drop a Bit on Big Board
A month that saw big victories -- and some big losses -- for short-sellers ended with only small changes in the overall short-interest positions in stocks traded at the New York and American Stock Exchanges, the exchanges reported yesterday.
The Big Board reported that the overall short position for trades through April 7 was 966.7 million shares, down 2.5 percent from 991.2 million shares on March 8.
The Amex reported an increase of 6.1 percent, to 77.4 million shares from 72.9 million.
The periods cover trades that settled between March 15 and April 15.


Phoenix Cardinals Sign Beuerlein, Instead
The Phoenix Cardinals, unable to land JOE MONTANA, got another ex-Notre Dame quarterback yesterday when they signed STEVE BEUERLEINto a three-year, $7.5 million contract.
Beuerlein, a fourth-round draft choice of the Los Angeles Raiders in 1987, has been a backup to TROY AIKMAN at Dallas for two years.
But the Cardinals said their latest free-agent acquisition may be their starter.


Maxwell Out 2 Weeks
Guard VERNON MAXWELL has broken a bone in his left wrist and will be out of the Houston Rockets' lineup for at least two weeks.
General Manager STEVE PATTERSON said that Maxwell suffered a non-displaced fracture of the navicular bone during last Friday's game in Seattle. (AP)


40 Bodies of Cult Members Are Found in Charred Ruins
As wisps of smoke rose from the ashes of the Branch Davidian compound, investigators said today that they found about 40 bodies protruding from the charred rubble.
Texas law-enforcement officials said at a news briefing here that the bodies had not been identified, and that they could not determine whether they were men, women or children.


New Jersey Voters Approve 69% of Education Budgets
For the second year in a row, New Jersey voters treated their school districts with relative kindness, approving 69 percent of the local budgets.
The approval rating Tuesday was far above the recent low -- 52 percent in 1990 -- but a bit less than the 73 percent recorded last year.
Education officials said the 31 percent of the budgets that were defeated were victims of the perpetual concern about property taxes and a low turnout at the polls.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Avco Financial Corp., a subsidiary of Textron Inc., is offering $200 million of 5.50 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.785, to yield 5.55 percent, through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Baker Hughes Inc., Houston, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $250 million of liquid-yield option notes due in 2008 through Merrill Lynch.


A Russian Assessment
The Russian chairman of a joint United States-Russian commission on American P.O.W.'s said today that he was convinced that a report that counted 1,205 American prisoners of war in Vietnam in 1972 was a genuine document from the archives of the Soviet Communist Party.
But he added that he could not vouch for the veracity of the information in the report.


Market Place; Pollution-control companies find little to celebrate on Earth Day.
WHEN America's baby boomers elected one of their own, Bill Clinton, to the Presidency last November, he and his running mate pledged to put environmental protection at the top of their to-do list.
But for problems that may take millenia to fix, there's a temptation to put them off until tomorrow.
And with bloodshed in Bosnia, holes in the health-care system, budget deficits and trade skirmishes clamoring for the Administration's attention, who has time to deal with the environment?


Test for Wireless Network
Sixteen companies, including several cellular and cable television concerns, formed a consortium yesterday to test a nationwide network for new wireless pocket telephone and computer services.
Called the National PCS Consortium, the group is the latest entry in the race toward "personal communication services." Dozens of companies are already conducting experiments in the new technology, which allows people to use very small and inexpensive wireless phones and to transmit relatively large volumes of data over the air.


Economic Scene; The U.S. could regret getting its way on trade with Japan.
ANYONE for Japan-bashing?
It has long been a riskless sport in Washington.
Labor approved, as did most big businesses.
And Japanese leaders, loath to tamper with the alliance, have carefully confined their contemptuous ripostes to domestic audiences.
But the tone of the relationship is changing.
While President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa agreed to disagree, no one familiar with the bland diplomatic rhetoric that the Japanese have honed to an art form could interpret last week's exchange on trade as business-as-usual.


On This Earth Day, Green Stocks Sing the Blues


A Mayoral Challenger's Challenge; Stein, Behind in Polls, Sets About Recharging His Campaign
For years, few New York City politicians have had better friends among the loyal old-line Democrats of the Queens County organization than City Council President Andrew J. Stein.
But now, just when such friendship might be expected to pay off in early support and shoe leather for Mr.
Stein's mayoral campaign, Queens is distinctly on the sidelines.
"I have a long relationship with Andrew, but from a practical sense he really hasn't seemed to take off in the polls," said the county Democratic leader, Representative Thomas J. Manton, who knows firsthand the risks of early endorsements, having backed Richard Ravitch and then Edward I. Koch in the Democratic mayoral primary in 1989, before finally settling for David N. Dinkins in the general election.


Corrections
A headline on Saturday about a delay in the issuing of a report on sexual assaults by Navy aviators referred incorrectly in some copies to the Government agency delaying the report.
It was the Defense Department, not the Navy.


HORSE RACING: Notebook; A Field of Undecideds In Derby Countdown
Storm Tower is in, probably.
El Bakan is in, probably.
Foxtrail and Devoted Brass are out, definitely.
Sea Hero, Dixieland Heat, Wallenda and Corby are in, and training.
Prairie Bayou has been there for two weeks, and is still the favorite.
And Rockamundo, who won the Arkansas Derby on Saturday at memorable odds of 108-1, has arrived and now reigns over the backstretch at Churchill Downs as the newest symbol of the confusion shrouding the countdown to the 119th Kentucky Derby.


A Book's Dark Tales Of Bush's Arts Agency
John E. Frohnmayer, the former chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, charges in a new book that long before President George Bush dismissed him in February 1992, the White House staff worked steadily "to cripple the N.E.A. internally by putting in political operatives."
Mr.
Frohnmayer, 50, denounces John H. Sununu, President Bush's former chief of staff, as the main culprit in sabotaging his agency.
He also states that while President Bush was encouraging him in a series of private meetings, Mr.
Sununu would "bark out his orders," which were invariably contrary to the President's.


McNeil Retires With No Regrets
As other National Football League players are busy taking advantage of unrestricted free agency, Jets running back Freeman McNeil, who helped set the scene by being the lead plaintiff in the lawsuit that ushered the new system in, has decided to exit the stage.
McNeil, an unrestricted free agent, will never be able to enjoy the fruits of free agency.
He retired today, a day before his 34th birthday.


Books of The Times; Winning Drug Fights but Not the War
Swordfish  A True Story of Ambition, Savagery and Betrayal  By David McClintick  Illustrated. 606 pages.
Pantheon Books. $25.
Is there a way to win the war against illegal drugs in America?
This is the question raised by David McClintick's arresting new book, "Swordfish: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery and Betrayal," his first since his remarkable 1982 best-seller, "Indecent Exposure: A True Story of Hollywood and Wall Street."


A Truce, or Else
As a vast European tragedy unfolds a tragedy unprecedented in 50 years -- where is the Western political leadership that will halt this slaughter of the innocents?
Sanctions have not persuaded the Serbians to accept the Vance-Owen peace plan and honor a cease-fire.
The case for Western intervention in Bosnia has become overwhelming.
Margaret Thatcher may have been emotional in calling for military intervention against Serbians.
But she struck a chord with millions.


Singer's Husband Charged in Beating
The husband of the singer LaToya Jackson was arrested yesterday and charged with assault.
He is accused of kicking her and beating her with a chair.
Ms. Jackson, 36 years old, was treated at Lenox Hill Hospital and released.


Free-Vaccine Plan Creates Unusual Array of Skeptics
As President Clinton proposes to spend $1.1 billion a year buying vaccines for all American children, he faces an unusual combination of skeptics: not just Congressional conservatives but also some of the socially conscious doctors who work the neighborhoods where immunization rates are lowest.
Nothing like a political alliance is being born among such odd bedfellows.
But the complaints that Republicans hurled today from a Capitol Hill hearing room find an odd echo across the Anacostia River, inside a medical van that works the city's poorest wards.


Europe, U.S. Reach Partial Pact
The Clinton Administration announced today that it had reached a partial agreement with the European Community in a Government contracts dispute, but that it would proceed with trade sanctions anyway because a full settlement had not been achieved.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said that the United States had agreed to drop "Buy American" rules for the Tennessee Valley Authority and the Energy Department's five electric power administrations.


BELLSOUTH CORP. (N)
New telephone lines and an increase in people buying cellular telephone service caused first-quarter profits to rise at the BellSouth Corporation, the largest of the Baby Bells.
First-quarter earnings per share were 1 cent below the mean of analysts' estimates, according to Bloomberg Business News, and BellSouth stock closed yesterday at $56, down 50 cents.


Bringing Discipline to Debt in Albany
Decades of undisciplined borrowing have earned New York the lowest credit rating of any state government.
A constitutional amendment approved by the State Legislature this month promises substantial reform.
But given the years of sinning and prolonged resistance to change, New Yorkers -- who must approve the amendment -- should withhold final judgment until they see the fine print.
The amendment aims to remove one major restriction on state borrowing and to give voters more say.
New York requires voter approval for each borrowing, and allows only one bond issue on the ballot each year.


2 Transit Officers Cleared In Shooting of 3d Officer
A grand jury yesterday cleared two transit police officers in the shooting of an undercover officer in a dimly lighted subway station in Brooklyn last November, the Brooklyn District Attorney announced.
The incident, in which two uniformed white officers fired 21 times at a black officer in street clothes, raised the sensitive issues of race and police training.
The white officers said that the black officer, Derwin Pannell, had a silver pistol drawn and appeared to be a robber.


Cult Members' Relatives Begin a Wrenching Wait for Remains of the Dead
After waiting 51 days for the ordeal to end, relatives of the Branch Davidians are waiting once again.
But this time the wait is far grimmer: for word that they can pick up orphaned children or, worse, for permission to retrieve the remains of the 86 people who perished in the incinerated cult compound on Monday.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jane Ira Bloom Saxophonist Blue Note
Swing is such a strong musical force that it can obscure compositional shortcomings.
Jane Ira Bloom, a soprano saxophonist who has recently released a new album, "Art and Aviation" (Arabesque), composes tunes that hurtle forward with real velocity.
Ms.
Bloom performed at the Blue Note on Monday night, and it was clear that the swing was hiding some real deficiencies.


Review/Television; In 90 Minutes, 500 Years' Worth of Destruction
The Earth Day message from HBO is that America was a much pleasanter land when it was inhabited by more bison than human beings, and when none of the latter were white Europeans.
If pretentiousness were an ecological threat, "Earth and the American Dream" would face a heavy fine for fallout.
Moving through 500 years of assaults on the environment in 90 minutes, Bill Couturie (who won an Academy Award for his 1989 documentary, "Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt," a work about AIDS) exploits visual effects the way American industry has exploited natural resources.


People
*
Steven Landsberg and Jim Johnson were named to new positions at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.
Each will be a senior vice president and creative director.
Mr.
Landsberg was previously a senior vice president and associate creative director at Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell, New York, and Mr.
Johnson was previously a creative director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.


G.A.O. Finds Pension Risk In Funds Shifted to Insurers
Millions of people whose pensions have been transferred to insurance companies are inadequately protected because of gaps in state guaranty programs and weak oversight by the Federal Government, according to a report released today by the General Accounting Office.
The report focuses on the estimated three million to four million individuals whose pension plans have been transferred to insurers in the form of annuities.
Since the mid-1980's, failures of insurance companies have increased sharply, and today's report was compiled at the urging of members of Congress whose constituents have lost partial pension benefits when insurers failed.


Saved by April Fool's
To The Home Section:
I'm glad your article on Helen Gurley Brown and her survival guide for women over 50 appeared on April 1; otherwise, I might have thought we were to take seriously her instructions to spend our remaining years in a relentless pursuit of thinness and sex, not for any inherent pleasure, but to stay young, young, young.
Dear Mrs.
Brown: You look tired.
Give it up.
Try instead to deepen your friendship with women, to appreciate your own success, to enjoy sex as part of a richer communion and to share your fears and vulnerability.
And ask yourself what gives your life meaning, the discovery of which allows us to approach life's end with some measure of grace and inner peace.


In Emergencies, These Children Commute to Work
GOLDMAN, SACHS is a heavy-duty name.
It means Wall Street.
Investment banking.
High finance.
But what about the strollers parked in the granite lobby of the investment firm's towering headquarters in lower Manhattan?
And the highchairs and booster seats in the cafeteria?
Or the addition of peanut butter-and-jelly sandwiches to the menu?
And why is "The Little Engine That Could" in the firm's prospectus-filled library?


Review/Music; By Lost Composers, in a Lost Style, From a Lost Era
On the eve of Holocaust Memorial Day, the Hawthorne String Quartet devoted a program to Jewish composers imprisoned in the so-called model concentration camp at Theresienstadt, near Prague.
Three were Czechoslovak, one Austrian; none survived the death camps to which they were sent in 1944 and 1945.
The concert, Sunday night at Merkin Hall, gave a close and harrowing sense of the Holocaust's ineradicable calamity: the perishing of a whole musical culture, and the systematic murder of creative souls.
The Theresienstadt camp, established in 1941, served mainly as a holding point for prisoners on their way to the death camps farther east.
It also became a place of temporary confinement for painters, writers and musicians.
The Nazis found that the artistic dimension of the camp made for good propaganda, a disguise for atrocities being committed elsewhere.
They concocted an absurd film -- "Hitler Presents the Jews With a City" -- in which Theresienstadt metamorphosed into a bustling, culturally active village.
A Jewish organization was allowed to put on a concert series that included chamber, choral and orchestral music, even several operas.
Composers did not work in defiance of the regime, but beneath its lethal gaze; it was a diabolical period of grace.


AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO. (N)
The $5.6 billion first-quarter loss reported by the American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday stemmed entirely from a one-time charge against earnings to account for retirees' benefits.
Without the $7 billion charge, which A.T.&amp; T. had previously announced, and another accounting change, net income increased 11 percent over the first quarter of 1992, to $996 million.
But revenues rose just 2.2 percent, to $15.7 billion from $15.3 billion.
The results were in line with analysts' expectations.


AMR Loss Is Greeted Positively
The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, reported first-quarter results yesterday that delighted investors and analysts, sparking the second rally in airline stocks in two weeks, as well as rare optimism for the long-troubled industry.
"It's like an oasis," said Candace Browning, airline analyst at Merrill Lynch.
"This is the first tangible earnings rally we've seen in years." Airline bonds also rallied as a result of the AMR report.  [ Page D22. ] .


McDonnell Posts $216 Million Profit
At a time of huge reductions in military spending, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the nation's largest military contractor, reported a first-quarter profit today of $216 million -- a dramatic turnabout from its $1.51 billion loss in the period a year earlier.
The company also said that its troubled C-17 plane had finally turned the corner and would post a profit in the second quarter.
McDonnell Douglas said it had a loss of only $1 million on the C-17, its huge military cargo plane, compared with a loss of $80 million in the first quarter of 1992.
That change provides some ammunition for the company's chairman and chief executive, John F. McDonnell, who will try to persuade Congress on Thursday that the plane is worth saving despite being more than a year behind schedule, hundreds of millions of dollars over budget and beset by technical and design problems, including flawed landing gear, flaps and wings.


COMPANY NEWS
BANKAMERICA CORP., San Francisco, has completed the sale of Phoenix-based Caliber Bank to the Independent Bancorp of Arizona.
Terms were not disclosed, but the price had been reported to be $160 million.
BASF CORP., Parsippany, N.J., the North American operations of BASF A.G., the German chemicals company, ended negotiations to sell its resin-based fibers and structural adhesives operations to Hexcel Corp., Dublin, Calif., because the companies could not reach financial terms.
The companies signed a letter of intent in August.


Bond Refunding For Los Angeles
A $559.4 million refunding by Los Angeles County for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority was by far the largest municipal offering yesterday as debt issuers continue to take advantage of low interest rates to refund issues sold when rates were higher.
Some of the Los Angeles bonds to be refunded carry interest rates as high as 6.90 percent.
Strong demand allowed underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company to reprice the sales tax revenue refunding bonds a little higher, thereby lowering yields.
The maximum yield is about 5.7419 percent for a bond due in 2013, with a bond due in 2021 priced to yield about 5.6603 percent and one due in 2018 priced to yield about 5.7377 percent.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday about a news conference after a shooting at a police station misidentified the police official at the left.
He was First Deputy Commissioner John S. Pritchard 3d.


Players Back Ex-Coach
Nine black Central Michigan players joined a Federal lawsuit their former coach filed against the school Tuesday.
KEITH AMBROT, the former coach, was discharged for using a racial epithet after his team lost a game in November.
Dambrot, who is white, filed a lawsuit Monday in United States District Court in Bay City, Mich., alleging the school violated his right to free speech.
He is seeking damages, reinstatement as coach and a preliminary injunction to reverse the hiring of the new coach, LEONARD DRAKE.


Defense Minister Accused in Italian Scandal
With his tattered nine-month Administration in its last hours, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato faced a final indignity today when Defense Minister Salvo Ando became the latest senior official to be accused by Sicilian magistrates of associating with the Mafia.
Mr.
Amato's Government has at once overseen the exposure of postwar Italy's greatest political scandal -- including huge kickbacks and political ties with the mob -- yet been unable to escape infection by it.
Two days after Italians voted overwhelmingly in a referendum heralding major political change, Mr.
Amato went before Parliament tonight in a first step toward the Government's resignation, which is expected on Thursday.


Panel Backs Airport Plan For Riverhead
Ignoring fears on eastern Long Island about jet noise and traffic congestion, the Long Island Regional Planning Board voted today to support an air cargo operation and a major industrial park on 1,000 acres of the Navy-owned Calverton jetport in Riverhead.
The vote, the culmination of a $500,000 airport feasibility study paid for by the Federal Aviation Administration, came the same day the six-member planning board approved a revised protection plan for nine special groundwater areas on Long Island, the largest of which is an area of pine barrens surrounding the air field.


AMOCO CORP. (N)
Amoco Corp., the nation's fifth-largest oil company, said yesterday that higher prices for natural gas and crude oil in the United States, as well as lower costs, contributed to its swing to a profit in the first quarter.
Excluding special charges, earnings from operations rose to $343 million in the quarter, up 33 percent from $257 million a year earlier.


High Mexican Interest Rates Are Luring Wall Street Cash
Lured by eye-catching interest rates of 16 percent or more, American money managers and a few risk-taking individuals are investing billions of dollars in Mexican Treasury securities and thus helping to finance Mexico's move to an industrial economy.
The investors are gambling that their investments will not be wiped out, as many were in the late 1970's when Mexico ordered a sweeping devaluation of the peso that when measured in dollars immediately shrank the size of the savings that thousands of American retirees had built up in Mexican banks.


CHRONICLE
It was one more trip to the altar yesterday for BILL WYMAN, 56, the former Rolling Stones bass player who was married for the third time -- to SUZANNE ACCOSTA, 33, an American who has been described as a fashion designer and model.
According to the Press Association, the British news service, the civil ceremony took place in a 16th-century dungeon in the village of St.-Paul-de-Vence near the Riviera coast in France.
It was followed by religious rites in the 13th-century Church of the Conversion of St.
Paul.


Nuclear Fuel to Be Moved Through Populous Areas
Eager to rid the Shoreham nuclear power plant of its last radioactive pellets, the Long Island Power Authority has decided to move 100 tons of nuclear fuel by train to a power plant in Pennsylvania in 33 separate trips, using a route that passes through densely populated neighborhoods of Long Island, New York City and Westchester County.
The shipment, scheduled to begin in early June and end by next January, will allow the authority to complete its dismantling of Shoreham next year, authority officials said, but the route may raise safety concerns.


Justices Signal Support for Longer Jail Terms for Hate Crimes
The Supreme Court today appeared on the verge of embracing an increasingly popular state response to bias crimes, the use of longer sentences for criminals who choose their victims on the basis of race, religion or personal traits.
The Justices appeared decidedly sympathetic as Wisconsin's Attorney General, James E. Doyle, in an hourlong argument, defended his state's hate crime law.
The case has split civil liberties groups and plunged the Court back into the debate over hate crimes for the second year in a row.


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail; Kinship Foster Care
To the Editor:
Your "Children of the Shadows" article on Ladeeta from Brooklyn is an important account of a young woman's strength, courage and accomplishment.
The missing piece, however, is that for the last four years Ladeeta has been in kinship foster care under the auspices of St.
Christopher-Ottilie.
Kinship foster care empowers a relative to step in where the parent can no longer cope.
Though this often requires more intervention by the social service agency, the sense of belonging greatly increases the child's chance for long-term success.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
SANDING a wood floor to renew it for refinishing is a major remodeling task, not because the procedure is particularly difficult but because it is noisy and tedious and generates monumental amounts of dust.


Dow Swings Wildly, Ends Down by 4.05
Actively trading a wide swath of stocks including computer, banking and airline issues, investors took the Dow Jones industrial average on a turbulent ride yesterday, with the Dow closing down 4.05 points at 3,439.44.
Broader indexes were mixed.
The Nasdaq composite index rose sharply, but the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index fell slightly.


TRIAL OF GOVERNOR IS IN JURY'S HANDS
Jurors began deliberations this afternoon in the ethics trial of Gov.
Guy Hunt after hearing theatrical closing arguments geared alternately toward conservative religious beliefs and the national revulsion with big-money politics.
If convicted on the felony ethics charge that he illegally converted money raised for his inauguration for his personal use, Mr.
Hunt, Alabama's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction, could face 10 years in prison and a fine of up to $10,000.
He would also be removed from office and replaced by Lieut.
Gov.
Jim Folsom Jr., a Democrat.


Now Starring in the Carnival's Sideshow, It's the New York Mets
American League East players used to talk about the phenomenon quite often when the Yankees were contenders and suffered from a malady known as the Steinbrenner factor.
No matter how good the Yankees were thought to be, no matter how many victories were projected, the theory went, five or so games could be extracted from the great expectations.
Not because of lack of talent, but because of distractions.


Events: Teapot Show And Cherry Blossoms
Teapot Territory
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
An exhibition and benefit sale of teapots and tea accessories by more than 150 artists will be held from Tuesday through May 2.
Tea will be served each day from 3 to 5 P.M.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Chuck Cary, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Jeff Schwarz, pitcher, form Nashville of the American Association.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Activated Keith Miller, third baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed David Howard, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.


Review/Opera; Holocaust Memorials Can Also Be Operas
The most striking image in Morton Subotnick's stark chamber opera "Jacob's Room" is of a woman draped in a yellow shawl chanting the Lord's Prayer as she kneels and sways before a projected image that is distorted beyond recognition.
Her voice is distorted, too: amplified and computer processed, it sounds like a metallic chorus, both frightened and frightening, and more cynical than hopeful.
A Hebrew text is projected on the woman's shawl, and as she sways in a pool of light at the center of a nearly dark stage, she looks more like a ghostly holograph than like a real person.
Mr.
Subotnick's 50-minute work had its world premiere here tonight as part of the American Music Theater Festival, and it is being presented at the Klein Branch of the Jewish Community Centers of Greater Philadelphia through Friday.


Home Video
Old movies usually cost $14.98 in video stores, but at discount stores and supermarkets the price can drop to as low as $5.99.
For some movies, that is.
You won't find "The Sound of Music" at $5.99, but the price applies to a raft of public-domain titles and B movies that studios and distributors figure they might as well sell as have lying around film vaults.


Agency executives unite to urge the ad cure for ailing branded products.
BRAND-BUSTERS, beware!
The American Association of Advertising Agencies is getting its act together and going after you.
As the industry organization opens its 75th annual meeting in Laguna Niguel, Calif., its members -- the top executives at the nation's leading agencies -- seem united in a single cause: a concerted plea to their clients, the country's consumer-product marketers, to recognize the brand-building powers of advertising.


Envoy Says P.O.W. Evidence Undermines Old Russian Report
A special Presidential envoy to Vietnam presented President Clinton today with evidence that he said undermined a recently found Russian document suggesting that Hanoi lied to Washington about the number of American prisoners it held in 1972.
Even as the envoy, John W. Vessey Jr., raised his questions, Clinton Administration officials said there had been no decision on moving toward recognition of the Hanoi Government or easing the 18-year-old trade embargo against Vietnam.
"No decisions have been made by the President in terms of what are the next steps to be made, and no recommendations have been made to him," said a senior Administration official who insisted on anonymity.


Anger Greets Croatian's Invitation To Holocaust Museum Dedication
As world leaders gathered for the opening of the Holocaust Memorial Museum here, Holocaust historians and survivors today condemned an invitation to the President of Croatia, Franjo Tudjman, who has been accused of writing that estimates of six million Jewish dead were inflated and that Jews were among those running a Croatian concentration camp.
Mr.
Tudjman, (pronounced TOODGE-mahn), in a 1988 book "Wastelands: Historical Truth," estimated that 900,000 Jews, instead of six million, died in the Holocaust, said Simon Wiesenthal, the renowned Nazi hunter.
Elie Wiesel, the Nobel laureate, has also attacked the Croatian President for asserting that the number of dead in the Holocaust had been exagerrated.


Back to the Future


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  2 OFFICERS CLEARED IN SHOOTING OF 3D
A grand jury cleared two transit police officers in the shooting of an undercover officer in a dimly lighted subway station in Brooklyn last November, the Brooklyn District Attorney announced.
The incident raised the sensitive issues of race and police training.
B3.
A DESPERATE PRISONER, SUDDEN SHOTS
The police said it was a sense of hopelessness that prompted Danny Cook to grab an officer's gun in the bathroom and open fire, critically wounding two police officers, and then turn the gun on himself.
B3.


Insurance Chief's Turnabout on Empire's Board
The State Insurance Superintendent, who last week attacked Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield for allowing its chief executive to serve simultaneously as chairman of the board, endorsed legislation in 1990 that enabled the executive, Albert A. Cardone, to fill both roles.
The Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, acknowledged yesterday that he wrote a letter in 1990 in which he recommended approval of the measure, but added that Empire's performance over the last three years had made him reassess his position.


Palestinians Agree To Mideast Talks
Palestinian representatives decided to end a boycott of the Mideast peace talks, and Israel and the Arab countries said they would resume negotiations in Washington next week.


Welfare Reform That Works
Small, positive change.
That's been the unvarying refrain from studies of state programs to move welfare recipients into jobs.
But now there's better news.
A study of California's welfare reform shows that programs emphasizing job search, education and training can increase earnings by sizable amounts and also cut welfare outlays.
Even better, the earnings boost for individuals gets bigger over time -- inviting hope that small change might eventually yield large gains.
California's welfare program mirrors the Family Support Act, a 1988 Federal reform, and incorporates President Clinton's call for reciprocal obligation.
Welfare parents continue to get benefits, but in exchange agree to participate in programs designed to get them into steady jobs.
The California plan places welfare recipients in literacy, schooling, job-search and training programs.
It provides transportation and child care while recipients enroll in the program, and continues child care for a year after they locate jobs.


Mr. Clinton's Invisible Drug Policy
President Clinton has yet to develop a national drug policy.
He hasn't appointed a drug czar, and key positions in Health and Human Services remain vacant.
Most alarmingly, the President's anti-drug budget follows the same approach as President Bush's did.
It proposes to spend significantly more for law enforcement than for prevention and treatment, which didn't work under George Bush and won't work under Bill Clinton.
Even Federal judges are protesting the inadequacy of Washington's policies.
Last week two senior Federal judges said they would refuse drug cases because they've found that harsh mandatory sentences and the emphasis on punishment over treatment have failed to dent the problem.


Westchester Plans to Buy Hotel To Shelter Homeless Families
The Coachman Hotel, a shelter for 110 homeless families that has become a symbol of the intractability of the homeless problem even in this wealthy area, is expected to get a new owner: Westchester County.
In taking over the Coachman, the largest hotel for the homeless in the county, officials hope to accomplish what other municipalities, including New York City, have been unable to do: get all the homeless out of commercial hotels and motels.


CLINTON DECLARES NEW U.S. POLICIES FOR ENVIRONMENT
Repudiating two major Bush Administration environmental policies, President Clinton said today that the United States would sign an international treaty protecting rare and endangered species and follow a specific timetable to reduce the threat of global warming.
In his first major speech on environmental policy, President Clinton declared: "We cannot walk away from challenges like those presented by the biodiversity treaty. We must step up to them."


Eagles Sign Jets' McMillan
Free safety Erik McMillan finally severed his acrimonious relationship with the Jets yesterday, signing a three-year contract worth about $3.8 million with the Philadelphia Eagles as an unrestricted free agent.
The signing reunited McMillan with the defensive coordinator, Bud Carson, who filled that role for the Jets during McMillan's first two seasons, 1988 and 1989.
McMillan was voted to the Pro Bowl in those seasons and was also voted National Football League Defensive rookie of the year in 1988.
When Bruce Coslet took over as Jets coach in 1990, McMillan's career took a nosedive.
First he lost his starting free safety job to Lonnie Young in 1991 and last season he was switched to cornerback, but he couldn't beat out Mike Brim and wound up playing nickelback and on special teams.


Mets Provide the Power, and Gooden Adds the Finesse
It didn't seem to matter, throughout Dwight Gooden's successful night of work, that the old "K corner" might forever remain obsolete.
On the Shea Stadium mound where Gooden once produced breathtaking displays of power pitching, his effectiveness last night was far more subtle but just as appreciated.
Had the corner still existed, two seasons after a surgical shoulder changed Gooden's professional life, it would have registered a 3.
The scoreboard glowed with a zero, the only figure that really matters.
"I just take the out as it comes," Gooden said.
And the Mets will take what they can get.


Lawmaker Protests Curbs on Official Mailings
A Democratic State Senator charged today that the Republicans who control the Senate censored his most recent constituent newsletter in retribution for his outspoken criticism of Senate mailing practices.
Senator Franz S. Leichter of Manhattan said that Stephen F. Sloan, the Secretary of the Senate and an appointee of the Senate Republicans, had on two occasions rejected language that Mr.
Leichter submitted for inclusion in his April newsletter.


Brazilians Vote Down Kings and Keep Presidents
Rejecting appeals to restore the country's 19th-century monarchy, Brazilians voted today to retain the system they borrowed from the United States 104 years ago -- a presidential republic.
But in a reflection of the enduring fascination with the Bragancas, Brazil's royal family, about 12 percent of voters, or eight million people, apparently obeyed the monarchist command to "vote for the King."


Howard Young, 81, Theatrical Producer
Howard Young, a producer of plays and musicals for Broadway, national tours and the Sacramento Music Circus, of which he was a founder, died on Monday at the Pleasant Care Convalescent Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 81.
With his partner of many years, Russell Lewis, Mr.
Young produced 8 shows on Broadway and 27 for national tours from 1945 to 1951.
Among their Broadway productions were revivals of Noel Coward's "Tonight at 8:30," with Gertrude Lawrence; "Lady Windermere's Fan," with Cornelia Otis Skinner, and "The Desert Song." Their Broadway credits also include two plays by John Patrick, "The Trial of Mary Surratt" and "The Curious Savage."


Casting a 'Ring' Is an Art, the Art of Logistics
Casting an opera production is difficult.
Casting a production of Wagner's "Ring" is very difficult.
Casting a "Ring" production at the Metropolitan Opera is hair-raisingly difficult.
So if in the midst of orchestral splendor and a number of excellent singers, you encounter a few more in major roles who are anything but, be critical, if you must, but try also to understand what a tough business this is.
One wonders whether Wagner ever thought about the logistical questions his followers would have to ask: Are the right singers out there to begin with?
Will they come this far and stay in New York as long as they are needed?
Will they accept the Met's fees when others are offering higher ones?


Review/Television; Of Inspector Morse And His Personifier
With series extending over several years, television often provides viewers with the unique pleasure of watching actors chisel away artistically at the characters they portray.
Combining skill with intuition, the interpretations can become more precise and more subtle.
Consider only public television's "Mystery" and its powerhouse lineup of British detectives.
From Jeremy Brett in "Sherlock Holmes" to David Suchet in "Poirot," the series is awash in performances that have steadily evolved into the definitive portraits of characters created in crime novels.
Casting is crucial, of course, and television has a curious knack for getting just the right person for the right role.
Can anyone other than Leo McKern be imagined as Rumpole of the Bailey?
And now the same must be said of John Thaw's Inspector Morse, currently going into the last lap of its sixth season PBS, Thursdays at 9 P.M.


U.S. Rejects Sheik's Jailing As Too Costly
The Justice Department said yesterday that there was no "concrete evidence" that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman had participated in terrorist acts and that he was not being detained while the Government tries to deport him because it would cost too much money.
The department made the decision even though Mr.
Abdel Rahman, a Muslim cleric whose followers include at least two suspects in the World Trade Center bombing, is on the State Department's watch list for terrorists and other undesirables.


We Suffer, Too, Serbs in Bosnia Cry
Nenad Deronjic stared down at the grave of his 5-year-old nephew, next to the grave of his brother, then looked across the pine-covered mountains whose ravines are now dotted with devastated towns.
"It's unjust," muttered Mr.
Deronjic, a 26-year-old policeman and a Bosnian Serb.
"The whole world is moved by the suffering in Srebrenica and not by our suffering."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  CLINTON'S ENVIRONMENT POLICY  Repudiating two principal Bush Administration policies, President Clinton pledged to follow a specific timetable to reduce the threat of global warming, and said he would sign an international treaty protecting endangered species.
A1  MEXICO DRAWS U.S.
INVESTORS  Lured by eye-catching interest rates of 16 percent or more, Americans are investing billions of dollars in Mexican Treasury securities, thus helping to finance Mexico's move to an industrial economy.
A1


No Hard Feelings and No Hard Hits
The ominous specter of payback hung in the Madison Square Garden air last night before the Knicks took on the Nets.
Kenny Anderson sat on the end of the New Jersey bench in street clothes with a brace on his left wrist, a vivid reminder of a season derailed.
Meanwhile, the man who perpetrated the injury, Knicks guard John Starks, was prancing with apparent impunity on the floor.


Hotel Fight Offers a View of Pritzkers
A long-running lawsuit filed in Puerto Rico against Jay A. Pritzker, the financier and chairman of the Hyatt Corporation, is nearing a climax that could deprive the Pritzker family of its control of the island's fabled Dorado Beach and Cerromar hotels, the core of Hyatt's Caribbean operations.
The Federal lawsuit, filed in 1988, has become a bitter and expensive test of wills between Mr.
Pritzker, whose family has interests that range from medical technology to real estate, and Paul S. Dopp, a New Jersey businessman who holds a 12 percent stake in the Dorado hotel holding company.
The case also offers a glimpse into the Pritzkers' Chicago-based private empire -- where self-dealing and intense personal loyalties sometimes seem to outweigh the fine points of law and accounting.


Armand D'Amato's Law Firm Paid for Work It Did Not Do, Executive Testifies
A defense contractor paid Armand P. D'Amato's law firm $6,500 for a three-sentence report that the firm did not even write, a former executive of the defense contractor testified today at Mr.
D'Amato's trial on charges of defrauding the Unisys Corporation.
The report was one of five -- none longer than two paragraphs -- that were secretly written by a Unisys employee as part of what the Federal Government contends was an elaborate scheme to conceal the fact that Mr.
D'Amato had been hired by Unisys to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, to help obtain military contracts for the company.


A Top Official At Baxter Quits
G.
Marshall Abbey, a leader of Baxter International Inc.'s illegal effort to be removed from the Arab boycott of Israel, resigned this week as corporate senior vice president and general counsel.
Mr.
Abbey, 59, stepped down on Tuesday after discussions with Baxter's chairman, Vernon R. Loucks Jr., and members of the board.
He had been Baxter's general counsel for 24 years.
Company executives have readily acknowledged that Baxter was eager to be removed from the boycott list but whether Mr.
Abbey was leading the way or following others' orders is not clear.


Justices Affirm Route of Appeal By State Inmates
By the narrowest of margins, the Supreme Court today kept the Federal courts open to appeals from state prisoners challenging their convictions on the ground that they were interrogated by the police without being told of their right to remain silent.
The 5-to-4 decision, written by Justice David H. Souter, rejected arguments put forward last year by the Bush Administration and a majority of the states that state prisoners who had had a "full and fair opportunity" to bring one state court appeal on the basis of a violation of the Supreme Court's Miranda rule should not be able to reargue the question in a Federal habeas corpus petition.


Finding a Way: The Quest of Derrick, 19
Derrick White rides through the crumbling asphalt roads of the Hurt Village housing project where he played tag among the steel clotheslines and shot baskets through bent and wobbly hoops.
He passes the trash bins where men with black plastic bags mine for cans to sell to a recycling center.
He passes the "dope track," where he saw a friend shot in the neck and killed.
Beyond the project, he passes the supermarket that refused him a job interview because, he believes, his address marks him as a project kid.
He passes Northside High School, where he graduated 15th last year in a class of 299, third among the boys, and was king of the senior prom.
He stops at a McDonald's restaurant, five miles away, where he worked 20 to 25 hours a week throughout the 11th grade.
A Graduate in the Grease Pit
Inside, he points to the spot where he grilled hamburgers.
"You get tired of it," he said.
"You be back there cooking and cooking." Startled, he recognizes the fellow there now, a classmate at Northside High.
"Man!" he whispered.
"He got a diploma and he's working at McDonald's."


Foreign Affairs; Italian Upheaval?
"Non cambia niente," the street vendor answered when asked what would happen now that Italians have overwhelmingly voted to reform their political system.
"Nothing will change."
His was a doleful, overly harsh and cynical judgment on this week's historic vote to cut down Italy's volatile 14-party system to about four parties and to make government more accountable, more efficient and more honest.
But it was understandable among a people long plagued by massive political corruption and instability.


Alice Ettinger, X-Ray Specialist And Tufts Radiology Teacher, 93
Dr.
Alice Ettinger, who helped to bring new X-ray techniques to diagnose gastrointestinal illness to the United States and taught radiology for five decades at the Tufts University School of Medicine, died on April 14 at the Norwood Retirement and Nursing Home in Norwood, Mass.
She was 93 years old.
The cause of death was pneumonia, said her nephew, Michael Roemer.


No Headline
"We were holding our breath on global warming, and we got everything we had hoped for." -- JIM MADDY, an environmentalist, on President Clinton's speech.  [ A10:6. ]


Prosecutor Says Parole Officer Aided Drug Gang, Leading to Dealer's Killing
A violent gang of Queens crack dealers had two moles in the State Parole Division, one of them a parole officer, who provided information that led to the 1987 slaying of another drug dealer, a prosecutor declared in court yesterday.
The prosecutor's assertion came at the opening of the trial of Gerald Miller, reputed to be one of the most brutal and successful of the young kingpins who dominated the southeast Queens drug-trafficking scene at the height of the crack epidemic in the 1980's.


Buying Low
In the electronics group dominated by giants like Matsushita and Pioneer, Lowrance Electronics Inc. has a special niche.
The Tulsa, Okla., company makes depth sounders to plumb the bottoms of lakes and to find fish.
Even though the company reported a second-quarter loss last month, investors bid up the shares yesterday.


Corrections
An article and a chart in Business Day on April 13, about conflicts between Japan and its Asian neighbors over its trade policies, misstated three years' trade balances between Japan and South Korea.
South Korea had a $5.2 billion trade deficit with Japan in 1987, a $3.9 billion deficit in 1988 and a $4 billion deficit in 1989.


Knicks By the Numbers: 2 Victories = the Top Spot
The Knicks would finish with the Eastern Conference's best record and the homecourt edge in the conference playoffs simply by winning their last two games, tomorrow night at Philadelphia and Sunday at home against the Chicago Bulls.
But it would get complicated if the Knicks (58-22) and Chicago Bulls (56-23) finish with the same record.
If the Bulls beat the Knicks on Sunday, the head-to-head season series would end tied, 2-2, which is the first tie breaker for teams that finish with the same records.
And if a Chicago victory on Sunday gave both teams identical overall records, they would also have identical records in the conference, the second tie breaker.


Topics of The Times; New York's Field of Dreams
One afternoon this week a Times Square habitue strolled over to Bryant Park to see what was happening.
Nothing, she is happy to report, was happening.
Which is to say there was nobody dealing drugs, bloating on booze or in the midst of a misdemeanor.
The only action, in fact, was that of hands turning the pages of newspapers and books; of jaws chomping the remains of lunch; of heads as they swiveled to take in daffodils, narcissi and a tall stand of pink tulips.


Parcells Isn't Telling the No. 1 Secret
Coach Bill Parcells emerged from his self-described bunker today, brandishing the top pick in the National Football League draft and, as usual, playing it coy.
This was only Parcells's third public appearance since he took over the New England Patriots three months ago, but that doesn't mean he hasn't been busy.
Parcells has already gone through seven mock drafts preparing for Sunday, but the best may be ahead.


National Awards for Magazines Great and Small
The 1993 National Magazine Awards, given yesterday, rewarded journals both of wide renown and relative obscurity.
Harper's Bazaar and The New Yorker, which received barrages of publicity in the last year because of their new high-profile editors, Elizabeth Tilberis and Tina Brown respectively, won two awards each.
Harper's Bazaar won for design and for photography and The New Yorker won for feature writing (under Tina Brown) and for fiction (for articles published by the former editor, Robert Gottlieb).


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHAT should you do if your child comes home with scraped knuckles and a bloody nose, obviously results of a fistfight?
Does it matter if your child threw the first punch?
What if your child claims to have been standing up for your own good name, or defending a friend who was being picked on?
What if your child is a girl?
In our culture, we give children, especially boys, mixed messages about fighting.
We both abhor and revere violence.


CHRONICLE
William Shakespeare figures heavily in the life of LYNN REDGRAVE this week.
On Friday, she will celebrate his 429th birthday by performing at the Actors' Fund Retirement and Nursing Homes in Englewood, N.J.
She will perform excerpts of a one-woman play, "Shakespeare for My Father," that she wrote.
She opens in it Monday on Broadway at the Helen Hayes Theater.


Trouble With Off-the-Shelf Tank Parts
To the Editor:
"Tank Parts, Off the Shelf" (editorial, April 6) leaves a mistaken impression about defense systems and their procurement.
Your analogy to electronic components is inapt.
An electrical engineer can take resistors, capacitors, inductors and the right chips and build almost anything, from a stereo amplifier to a fire-control computer.
Tanks are mechanical, not electronic.
Light bulbs, wiring, hydraulic lines and fittings, gaskets, sealants, coatings and fasteners are one thing.
But where can a designer shop for 120-millimeter high-velocity, smooth-bore main guns, composite ceramic armor of the right shape, turrets, laser gun sights, automatic loaders, high-performance terrestrial gas turbines or battle-damage-tolerant transmissions?


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail; For Parent Involvement
To the Editor:
I am a high school teacher at Washington Irving High School.
I teach English as a second language to students who have come from all over the world.
Last week, on the first day of our spring vacation, one of my students, Christian Abakpa, was brutally murdered while playing basketball.
His classmates and I would like to express our feelings on this senseless tragedy.
My students, like Christian, are all immigrants whose parents brought them here for a better life.
They tend to be highly motivated, diligent students who want to learn English.
Parent involvement is critical in this, and I don't see as much of it as I would like to in my students.


Money Fund Yields Mixed As Focus Turned to Taxes
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were mixed in the latest week, reflecting seasonal tax pressures and uneasiness in the stock market.
According to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report, tax-exempt money fund yields rose sharply in the week that ended Tuesday.
Yields jumped an average 8 basis points, and investors withdrew $2.7 billion from tax-exempt funds, which now total $108 billion, The Money Fund Report said.


Corrections
A report in the Journal column of the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about a show of historic clothing misstated the date.
The show, "Costume as History -- Women as Art," will be held at the Flowerfields Estate on Mills Pond Road in St.
James, L.I., at 5 P.M. this Sunday, not Saturday.


Gravestones Overturned and Swastikas Painted at Jewish Cemetery


Radioactive Cargo to Ride the Rails


TALKS WILL RESUME
Representatives of the Palestinians decided to end their boycott of the Middle East peace talks today, and Israel and the Arab countries announced that they would resume the negotiations in Washington next week.
The decision followed a bitter debate among the Palestinians; a diplomatic campaign by the United States, Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia, and concessions by the Israelis that finally wooed the Palestinians back to the table.


Airlines Lead Rise in Corporates
Prices of corporate issues moved slightly higher yesterday, led by a jump in the bonds of the three major airlines.
Prices of tax-exempt municipal bonds held steady and the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond bounced a little, but finished at 6.75 percent, unchanged from Tuesday.


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail
To the Editor:
Your "Children of the Shadows" article of April 8 describes Crystal Rossi, a 12-year-old girl, and her dissatisfaction with her junior high school in New York City.
She finds her teachers "mean" and "always yelling at her." Teachers with large classes are not able to "provide individual attention."
Whose fault is this?
Her school is "underfinanced," and thus, presumably unable to provide individual attention to each student.


Yanks Wreck Eck Again To Topple the A's in 9th
The Yankees conquered Dennis Eckersley again tonight, but this time Steve Farr and the Yankee bullpen did their jobs.
The Yankees scored three runs in the ninth inning when Dion James and Bernie Williams lashed singles off Eckersley to give them a 5-3 victory over the A's at the Oakland Coliseum.
It was Eckersley's third straight blown save this season, the same number he botched all last season when he converted 51 of 54 chances in winning the Cy Young and Most Valuable Player awards.
"If there was ever a turning point in the season maybe we can look back at this being it," said Randy Velarde.
A Chance for Redemption
Trailing by 3-2 entering the ninth, the Yankees loaded the bases on Danny Tartabull's single off Bobby Witt, Randy Velarde's pinch-hit double and Mike Stanley's walk against Rick Honeycutt with no outs.
A's Manager Tony LaRussa had seen enough and called for Eckersley.
Twenty four hours after the Yankees had scored three ninth-inning runs off Eckersley, the A's stopper had a chance to redeem himself.


Advertising Council Chairman Named
Philip H. Geier Jr., chairman of the Interpublic Group of Companies New York, has been named chairman of the Advertising Council for the 1993-94 term.
Mr.
Geier, who has been a vice chairman of the council for the last three years, succeeds Herbert M. Baum, president of the Campbell Soup Company's North and South American division.


Copeland Is Cleared
Olympian DIRK COPELAND, who reportedly failed a drug test following a race in Uruguay, won't be penalized by the United States Cycling Federation.
The federation said that officials in Uruguay didn't follow drug-testing procedures established by international and American cycling authorities.


Violence Erupts on Israeli Borders as Talks Are Set
As a new round of Middle East peace talks was formally announced for next week, serious violence erupted today on Israel's northern border and in the occupied Gaza Strip.
In the north, Israel and its client Lebanese militia fired artillery rounds at villages in southern Lebanon said to be strongholds of the militant Party of God.
The barrage followed stepped-up attacks by the pro-Iranian guerrillas on the so-called security zone that Israel established in that part of Lebanon.
A man and a woman, both civilians, were killed, and nine others were wounded, according to news reports from the area.


BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO. (N)
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company reported lackluster results for the first quarter yesterday.
Sales rose only 4 percent from the period a year earlier, after subtracting 2 percentage points for changes in foreign-exchange rates.
Profits from continuing operations were up 7.6 percent as cost-cutting measures took hold.
Formally stated, profits showed a 90.6 percent gain, reflecting noncash accounting changes last year, which recognized benefits promised to retirees, and a reduction in earnings after the sale in December of the Drackett household products unit.


U.S. and Allies Differ on Arms for Bosnia Muslims
Differences emerged between the United States and its European allies today on the issue of allowing Bosnian Muslims to import arms, with France declaring that such a move would increase the conflict and mean an end to its relief role in the Balkans.
France's Foreign Minister, Alain Juppe, said lifting the United Nations arms embargo to help equip the outgunned Muslim-led Bosnian Government would "mean the internationalization of the conflict and a general conflagration in the Balkans."


Two German Trials Reopen Pre-1989 Wounds
Trials of an accused terrorist and a former Prime Minister opened in Germany this week, plunging eastern Germans into another painful review of the crimes of past dictatorships.
The two trials, and that of Markus Wolf, the former East German spymaser, which is scheduled to open in May, may provide new insights into techniques of repression in the former East Germany.
They could also result in prison sentences for men who stood at the apex of power in that vanished Communist state.


Snubbing the European Community Negotiator


Word Perfect Joins Borland On Software
Borland International Inc. and the Word Perfect Corporation said today that they had entered a strategic alliance to develop and market software together.
Their first product will be Borland Office for Windows, a software package that combines Borland's Quattro Pro for Windows spreadsheet program and Paradox for Windows data base with Word Perfect for Windows word processor.


'A Little Bit of Truth'
To The Home Section:
Some 20 years ago, fresh from college, I spent three months working for Cosmopolitan magazine and its editor, Helen Gurley Brown.
At that time, I thought she was a strong, hard-working, ground-breaking woman, if a little on the cool side.
Today I feel quite differently, especially after reading your article  [ "Go Ahead, Say It: Sex and the Older Woman," April 1 ] .
I think she is a pathetic, desperate, insecure child who is dangerous in her thinking and who just doesn't get it, even at age 71.


Bright Colors For Bright Eyes
NEW parents once snatched up black-and-white mobiles as if they were tickets to the Ivy League, having read that newborns are stimulated by black and white objects.
But that fad seems to be history, said Kim Staller, the buyer for E.A.T.
Gifts, a children's and home accessories shop in Manhattan.
"People have forgotten about the black-and-white mobiles," she said.
"Eventually kids can see color, so parents don't want to buy new ones. Mobiles are not just for newborns. Kids are hanging them instead of posters."


Yeltsin Wins a Legal Point, but a Vote Is Yet to Come
A ruling today by the Constitutional Court made it statistically more likely that President Boris N. Yeltsin would win a vote of confidence in Sunday's referendum.
But even such a victory is not expected to resolve the political impasse that has brought Russia to a near-standstill.


Ago Journal; From Royal Pearls, a String of Profits
Kokichi Mikimoto always viewed the oyster as his world, and he did most of his viewing from his simple wooden house here high above Ago Bay's choppy waters.
The oldest employees of the world's most famous pearl manufacturer still remember seeing their fierce company founder, telescope in hand, scanning the waters below to see if any workers were slacking off on the giant wooden floats that support baskets full of busy bivalves.
On the wall of his living room, largely untouched since the day he died in 1954, are pictures of the three Emperors and Empresses who received his pearls as royal gifts, and proclaimed him a national hero.


Absolutely, Positively: It's Islanders in Overtime
A broken leg in December and so many younger teammates all around him have 28-year-old Ray Ferraro feeling like a hockey elder in this, his ninth season.
"It felt like we were playing the senior league hockey game," Ferraro said of the Islanders 5-4 double-overtime victory over Washington Tuesday night, "and we had the 11 P.M.-to-1-o'clock ice time."


Cantinflas, Mexican Comic Actor And Philanthropist, Is Dead at 81
Mario Moreno, who was better known as Cantinflas, Mexico's most famous comic actor, died on Tuesday in Mexico City.
He was 81.
The cause was lung cancer, said his son, Mario Jr.


Essay; MEGO of the Year
Occasionally a speech is written of such apparently stupefying dullness that it rates the accolade "MEGO of the Year." (MEGO is the acronym for "My Eyes Glaze Over.")
This year's award -- a half-lidded eyeball on a field of z's -- goes to Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, for his speech this week to the Economic Club of New York.
Its stirring title was "Remarks," a come-on to become comatose.


Giants Plan to Stalk Defense in Draft
The Giants have excellent running backs, two new starting receivers, a veteran offensive line and quarterbacks for the present and the future.
So their focus in the National Football League draft Sunday and Monday will be on defense, specifically a pass-rushing defensive end and a linebacker.
General Manager George Young met with reporters today and confirmed the quest for defensive help for a team whose previously solid 3-4 defense was in chaos last year under since-departed coaches.
But he cited two stumbling blocks to the Giants' draft: the lack of a first-round choice and the physical and schematic changes in the kind of players coming out of college.


With One Eye on Bulls, Knicks Roll Over Nets
There were no flagrant fouls.
There was no trash-talking.
And for the Knicks, beating the Nets was no problem.
Extending its home winning streak to 19 games, New York rolled to a 105-74 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.
It was the Nets' season-low point total, it was their largest margin of defeat this season, and it was the fewest points allowed by New York this season.


Man Is Held in Abandoning Of His Handicapped Son, 9
A Long Island man was arraigned yesterday on charges that he abandoned his severely handicapped son in a bowling alley in South Farmingdale, L.I., after telling the manager that the child was "too much trouble."
The authorities said the man was apparently distraught over his inability to find help in caring for the boy.


AMERITECH CORP. (N)
The Ameritech Corporation yesterday reported first-quarter earnings that were slightly more than some analysts' forecasts.
Income, excluding a one-time charge for an overseas investment, totaled $337.3 million, or $1.25 a share.
"Earnings per share were actually above the $1.23 per share we had expected," said Blake Bath, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company.
"All in all, it was a pretty good quarter."


Sports of The Times; On Mulling The Mets' Mousetrap
NOW that the Mets are thinking about building a better mousetrap, the world won't beat a path to even a domed door unless the front office builds a better team.
But if a modern Mets stadium materializes in another decade either on the site of Shea Stadium or in nearby Willets Point, it should observe the 10 commandments of modern baseball construction as handed down by the Toronto Skydome and Camden Yards in Baltimore:


Elegance of the 40's Rescued for the 90's
"I MENTIONED Billy Baldwin's name on a trip to Los Angeles last year," Matthew Smyth recalled, "and someone who should have known better said, in all seriousness: 'You mean Alec Baldwin's little brother, the actor? Does he make furniture, too?' " Mr.
Smyth, a designer, was appalled.
But if he and his partner, Susan Dempsey, have anything to say about it, the country's homeowners and young design enthusiasts will soon be on intimate terms with this Mr.
Baldwin (no relation to Alec), the dapper decorator who brought richness of finish, purity of line and brilliant Matisse-inspired color to the homes of such clients as Greta Garbo, Cole Porter, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and Mike Nichols.
He died in 1983.


Topics of The Times; Romantic Coincidences
It's an experience well known to people who live in Manhattan: A fleeting glance in an elevator.
A furtive gaze through a bus window.
A lost opportunity for romance in the big city.
In the film "Indecent Proposal," Robert Redford describes one such encounter with a young woman.
"I was on the subway coming home from something, a movie, I think," Mr.
Redford's character, Gage, recalls.
"And sitting across from me was a girl. She was wearing a dress buttoned up to here. She was the most beautiful thing I'd ever seen. . . . Finally I reached my stop and got off. . . . And just as the train was pulling out, she looked right at me and gave me the most incredible smile. . . . I wanted to tear the doors open. . . . And now 30 years later, there's not a day goes by that I don't think about her."


'Never Again' -- Except for Bosnia
"Never again." These emphatic words echo and re-echo this week.
Half a century after the Holocaust -- on the 50th anniversary of the last gasp of the Warsaw Ghetto -- statesman after statesman proclaims with fervor that "never again" must such a crime be tolerated by the civilized world, never again must six million Jews be gassed to death, never again must genocide occur.
Yet what are we hearing?
Is this truly a proclamation of a moral imperative?
Or merely a pompous affirmation of hypocrisy?
The answer depends entirely on what these two powerful, poignant words really mean to us.
And that depends on what we have learned from the scorching shame of a defenseless people massacred while the civilized world watched passively.


'There Are No Jobs'
The following text was taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
WUBNESH HYLTON , 19, Brooklyn (Hunter College): Working is not, like, a luxury; it's a necessity.
Just like for a college student, you know, going to school only is not reality.
You have to work and go to school.
That's just the way it is.
I pay my rent.
I pay my bills, you know.
Every once in a while I'm afforded a little luxury, you know, but it's pretty straight-laced.
BERNARDO VASQUEZ , 17, Manhattan (A. Philip Randolph High School): I have responsibilities.
Like, my father is a superintendent.
I have to clean the building and stuff like that.
I have to take care of my sisters once in a while.
And in the case of the work ethic in the sense of ---- I might not like doing this job.
But I'd better do it well, so I'd better start liking it.
Because my father is going to come along and check the corners to see if they're clean.
So I'd better start liking it.
WUBNESH I enjoy my work.
I just wish it paid more. . . .
I don't know if I'll keep with it.  . . .
It pays the bills, but it doesn't allow you to have any fun and put something in the bank, too.
JUAN RIVERA , 18, Brooklyn (Edward R. Murrow High School): The thing about it is, is on the job, as far as it getting boring for me.
And I might move on or something.
WUBNESH There are no jobs.
I think young people want money.
And a lot of young people are willing to work for it.
But, again, young people want glamorous jobs.
They want to work in the Gap.
They don't want to work in McDonald's.
JUAN The other reason that a lot of young people don't go out and get jobs is that they don't know how to represent themselves.
They might go in with these jeans, you know, untied shoes. . . .
And they might not know what to say.
They come in, like, "What's up?" you know?
And they don't know how to represent themselves or something like that in an interview.
WUBNESH When you're younger, identity is something that you have to show.
When you get older, identity becomes a part of you, and no matter what you wear, you know who you are.
So, when you get older, you put aside your ego with that Champion sweat shirt or whatever.
And you get done with a T-shirt.
You know, a suit and stuff.
It's not such a big deal anymore.
EMMA KRAMER-WHEELER , 16, Brooklyn (Edward R. Murrow High School): Role models really help.
I think that might be the most important thing.
If you see somebody who you can relate to, who has gotten somewhere, you know you can get somewhere.


F.B.I. Saw the Ego in Koresh, But Not a Willingness to Die
In the last week and a half of David Koresh's life, Federal agents picked up three scrawled communiques that were dropped out the front door of the Branch Davidian compound, apparently dictated by the cult leader but signed in the name of God.
They threatened that catastrophe would befall God's enemies.
"Open your eyes and not your mouth," read one.
"Fear the hour of judgment, for it has come."


Fernandez Urges Scrutiny of Conservatives
Speaking out for the first time about New York City's raucous elections for local school boards, the ousted Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, said he was a victim of the conservative religious groups seeking to influence the campaign, and he warned voters to scrutinize the conservatives' candidates closely.
"I think you can't separate what happened to me from their agenda on a national level," he said of the conservative forces.
"My colleagues all around the country are telling me they are very concerned about this issue."


Distinct Choice in Los Angeles Race
The two victors of Round 1 in the Los Angeles mayoral race are expected to present Angelenos with the clearest clash of political ideals and approaches seen in modern memory here, a memory dominated by the pacifying aura of the sphinx-like Tom Bradley for 20 years.
In Tuesday's nonpartisan election a tough-talking Republican businessman and veteran power broker, Richard Riordan, ran a strikingly strong first in this liberal city, getting 33 percent of the vote in a field of two dozen candidates.
The runner-up was City Councilman Mike Woo, a polished liberal Democrat who is heir to Mayor Bradley's multiethnic coalition, with 24 percent.


INSIDE
Court Hears Bias Crime Case
Hearing oral arguments, the Justices appeared on the verge of backing longer sentences for criminals who choose their victims based on race, religion or personal traits.
Page B11.
U.S.
Rejects Sheik's Jailing
Officials said that there was no "concrete evidence" linking Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman to terrorism, and that he was not being held pending deportation because of the cost.
Page B1.
A Better Chance for Yeltsin
A ruling by Russia's Constitutional Court made it more likely that President Boris N. Yeltsin would win a vote of confidence on Sunday.
Page A3.
Prison Standoff Near End
The 11-day siege in Lucasville neared an end as inmates freed guards who had been held hostage.
Page A16.
Choice in Los Angeles
A tough-talking businessman and a liberal councilman will vie in a mayoral runoff in Los Angeles.
Page A23.
Buying Hotels for Homeless
To get the homeless out of commercial hotels, Westchester is buying one of the county's largest.
Page B1.


Police Routine, a Desperate Prisoner and Sudden Gunfire
The shooting in a Brooklyn precinct station house was a collision between a police officer who thought he was handling a routine drug arrest and a suspect who viewed it as the end, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
As he sat in the grim holding cell in the 70th Precinct station house on Tuesday, Danny Cook told two other prisoners that he had nothing else to live for, the officials said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The U.S. will proceed with trade sanctions against Europe despite a partial agreement on Government procurement contracts.
The dispute -- the first trade issue taken up by the Clinton Administration -- has attained symbolic importance as a barometer of trans-Atlantic trade relations.  [ Page D1. ]
American money managers are investing billions of dollars in Mexican Treasury securities, lured by eye-catching interest rates of 16 percent or more, thus helping finance Mexico's rapid move to an industrial economy.  [ A1. ]


An Architect's Furniture With a Magician's Touch
WITH high office usually come perquisites.
In France, inevitably, they include custom-made furniture.
In 1989, when Jack Lang, then France's Minister of Culture, refurbished his office in Paris, he commissioned Sylvain Dubuisson, an architect known for his cerebral designs, to create 15 pieces of furniture.
A curved wood desk, for example, encircled a pale green leather top, which had a secret compartment for pens and papers.
A smaller replica of Mr.
Lang's desk ($10,000) and the matching chair ($8,000), right, will be on exhibit beginning tomorrow at the Neotu gallery in Soho.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Edible Balcony Petals
Q.
I grow flowers on my balcony.
Can you suggest a few that are safe to eat? -- Michele Greenstein, Chicago


Ruling Is Likely to Take Florio Rival Off Ballot
Barely a week after he quit his job as a postal worker and began a long-shot challenge to Gov.
Jim Florio for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination, John Budzash lost a court ruling today that was likely to knock him from the June primary ballot.
Mr.
Budzash, 42, has never held political office but he was propelled into New Jersey politics in 1990, when he telephoned a talk-radio show in a fit of anger over the record $2.8 billion tax increase Mr.
Florio had pushed through a Democratic-controlled Legislature.
When challenged by the hosts to back up his strong words, the Monmouth County resident helped form a group known as Hands Across New Jersey.
A year later, it helped lead the campaign that gave Republicans a two-thirds majority in the Legislature.


Standoff After Clash at Prison
Fifteen inmates and three guards were injured during a disturbance last night at a maximum security prison in Newtown, Conn., that continued into this morning.
Negotiations between prison authorities and about 90 inmates in one of the six cellblocks at the Garner Correctional Institution were continuing, The Associated Press reported early this morning.


G.O.P. Senators Prevail, Sinking Clinton's Economic Stimulus Bill
Senate Republicans killed President Clinton's economic stimulus program today, maintaining their filibuster until Democrats surrendered and agreed to limit the bill to $4 billion for extended unemployment benefits.
Mr.
Clinton's first serious legislative defeat was marked by complaints from Democrats in the Senate and the White House.
But Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, was satisfied that the Republicans had shown that they deserved to be taken seriously.
He avoided gloating, and promised occasional cooperation with the President.


Pick Up the Baby, Hang Up the Buggy
WHO can deny that children's strollers are awkward to store?
Tim Watkins, a sculptor who lives in Brooklyn, has designed a stroller-and-coat rack that solves the problem.
Preschools, day-care centers and ambitious parents could use it as a model to build their own on a smaller scale.
The rack, designed for the cloak room of the Children's Museum of the Arts in SoHo, is 8 feet high and 15 feet long, with a vertical grid to accommodate collapsible strollers and an overhead rack for the nonfolding kind.


5 More Are Arrested in South African Killing
The South African Police arrested five more whites today in connection with the killing of Chris Hani, the popular black South African Communist leader, and said the official theory is that the assassination had been the result of a right-wing conspiracy.
The most prominent figures among those arrested early this morning were the wife of a white separatist already jailed in the case and a right-wing journalist, both well-known figures in the Conservative Party, the main white opposition to President F.W. de Klerk's National Party.


Polish Church Wins Court Fight on School Religion
The Roman Catholic Church won a significant victory here today when a constitutional tribunal dismissed a legal challenge to compulsory religious teaching and prayers in public schools.
The challenge was brought by the Government-appointed ombudsman on human rights, Tadeusz Zielinski, a law professor and prominent liberal Catholic, who argued that the teaching of religion was turning Poland into a theocracy.


Help for Future Clock-Watchers
THE people who make Swatches have also been making children's watches since 1988.
Flik Flak, the children's brand, combines Swiss craftsmanship with up-to-the-nanosecond fashion trends.
Some of the newest styles feature dinosaurs and sea animals.
One watch has a toothy, green Tyrannosaurus rex on the face; the nylon band shows a jungle complete with erupting volcanoes.
With all that going on, who cares what time it is?


Gtech Wins a Big Contract For the California Lottery
The Gtech Corporation walked off with one of the gambling industry's richest jackpots today, a five-year contract estimated to be worth $203 million to upgrade California's lottery.
The award came three weeks after a panel cleared the state's Lottery Commission of wrongdoing in its procurement process.
The panel, appointed by the Governor, concluded on March 30 that allegations of unfairness raised by vendors last year were without merit, even though only Gtech bid for the contract.


For Neighbors, Plan to Replace Shea Hits Home
A day after the Mets disclosed plans to replace Shea Stadium with a new domed stadium and development project, public officials welcomed the initiative, while neighbors expressed dismay.
In discussing what were described as highly tentative plans on Tuesday, a Mets official indicated that a new stadium could be built adjacent to the present stadium in Flushing, Queens, or as part of a more ambitious scheme in the Willets Point neighborhood to the east.
Plans could include hotels, shops and even a convention center.


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail; Victims of Divorce
To the Editor:
You describe Crystal Rossi (front page, April 8) as hardly the sort of child who would fail in school.
Yet her parents are divorced, and she lives with a stepfather.
In "Second Chances," Judith S. Wallerstein and Joan B. Kelly outline the perils of divorce for children.
Contrary to our beliefs, these are many, no matter how amicable the disunion.
You merely reiterate a common popular misconception that divorce makes little difference to children's psyches and motivations.
Also contributing to our youths' easy use of and gravitation toward violence, as well as their reluctance to undertake the hard work of study and learning, is the omnipresence of television and video games.
These breed passivity and inertia, along with presenting constant images of senseless harm toward others.


Warmoth T. Gibbs, 101, Educator Who Backed Civil Rights Protests
Warmoth T. Gibbs, the retired president of a mostly black university in North Carolina who supported his students when they started the lunch-counter sit-ins that helped to overturn segregation, died on Monday at a hospital in his hometown of Greensboro, N.C.
He was 101.
He had had a brief illness, his family said.


Stiffer Terms Sought for Firearms in School
Citing a 29 percent rise in serious crime in New York City schools in one year, city and state law-enforcement officials and educators yesterday called for tougher penalties under state law for drug and weapons violations on school grounds, and for juvenile offenders.
While making the law-and-order appeal, prosecutors conceded that a seven-year-old state law providing harsher punishment for those who sell drugs on or near school grounds has been virtually useless.
The law does not work, they said, because it applies only when a sale is made to a person under age 20, which rules out police officers posing as students.


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail; 'It Was Not Fair'
To the Editor:
Christian was a good guy.
In school he was a great friend and I am so sorry what happen to him by playing basketball with his brother.
It was sad that he got killed just by hitting another guy with the ball.
It was not fair that he was killed, he just was 17 years old.
He came to this country to learn English and to become someone in the future.
At nighttime he would spend time reading with his father.
And is sad dying in his mother arms.
I am sorry to his family.
Is not fair because I lost my father when I was 13 years old.
NANCY RIVERA  New York, April 14, 1993


Muslim Defenders Disarmed, U.N. Says
After hours of tension that threatened new bloodshed, United Nations officers said late today that they had met a deadline for disarming the defenders of Srebrenica, the battered enclave that is one of the last Muslim footholds in eastern Bosnia.
If the announcement proves correct, Srebrenica will have to depend for its safety on a 145-man United Nations contingent from Canada, a prospect that is causing severe anxiety.
The Canadians, who have only machine-guns, assault rifles and sidearms, would be the only buffer between the tens of thousands of civilians and an aggressive force of several thousand Serbian nationalists with tanks and heavy artillery.
A Grim Prospect
A cease-fire signed early Sunday by the town's Government defenders and its Serbian attackers required the United Nations to disarm the Muslim forces within 72 hours.
This was later extended by six hours.


Council Considers Penalties for Abortion Clinic Violence
To combat violence outside abortion clinics, a majority of the New York City Council is sponsoring a bill that would stiffen penalties against people who physically harass women and medical staff members as they try to enter the clinics.
The bill, which was introduced yesterday, would also allow victims to sue their harassers for triple damages in State Supreme Court.
The bill is expected to pass the Council easily because it is sponsored by 29 of the 51 Council members.


Ohio Prison Siege Near End; Last Five Hostages Released
The 11-day siege at Ohio's only maximum-security prison came to a peaceful conclusion tonight, as the last five hostages were released and the 450 rioting inmates surrendered, prison officials said.
The remaining guards who had been held by the inmates were freed about seven hours after an agreement to end the siege was announced by the authorities.
Officials said they walked out under their own power, as a loud cheer rose up from in front of the drab brick institution.


Bridge
In half a century on the professional stage, playing Professor Higgins in "My Fair Lady" among many other roles, Michael Allinson of Larchmont, N.Y., who just completed an Off-Broadway Run in "The Best of Friends," has been in hundreds of previews.
But the one on Monday night was different.
The set, still undergoing last-minute adjustments, was an attractive town house, and he was playing a role in the first of a multitude of Chicago games at Honors Club, which opens today at 42 East 74th Street.
There will be a full range of bridge activities directed by Gail Greenberg and Judy Tucker. (For information, telephone (212) 717-6364.)
As West on the diagramed deal, Allinson ventured a frisky overcall, which pushed his opponents to a precarious three-club contract.
South's reverse of two diamonds served to show strength, but as it also suggested club length a take-out double would have been preferable.


Women Can Choose Not to Be Esthetic Objects
To the Editor:
"Fashion's Waif Look Makes Strong Women Weep" (The Week in Review, April 11) neglects an important point: If women don't like the waiflike image purveyed by the fashion industry, or if they don't like the way the fashion industry treats women's bodies as esthetic and cultural objects, why don't they choose not to follow the industry's dictates?
That women can decide not to model themselves after the latest Calvin Klein ad seems not to be considered in discussions of this topic, which often adopt a tone of victimization: "This only happens to women," you quote Naomi Wolf.
And you state that "the supermodels, too, are struggling to reinvent themselves."


AT HOME WITH: Randy Shilts; Writing Against Time, Valiantly
THESE should be the best of times for Randy Shilts.
His new book, "Conduct Unbecoming," is hitting stores now, a portrait of homosexuals in the military coming as the issue seizes the country's conscience.
A movie based on his first book, "The Mayor of Castro Street," published in 1982, is about to go into production.
An HBO film of his second book, "And the Band Played On," just finished shooting.
He has a 23-year-old boyfriend (Barry Barbieri), a 10-acre retreat in the country, even a trusty dog (Dashiel).
But Mr.
Shilts, 41, who was made famous by his writing on AIDS, has himself developed AIDS, and it is wearing him down.
He comes to the door of his apartment here tethered to an oxygen tank, the legacy of a collapsed lung not yet healed.
One minute he is the old Randy Shilts, a blur of energy and issues and passion, musing over the possibility of a new book, railing against the abuse of gay and lesbian Americans in the military.
The next, he isn't Randy Shilts at all.
He's just another gay man with AIDS, scared and tired, trading gossip about the newest drugs and monitoring the declining level of white blood cells that support his immune system -- his T-cell count.


Accounts
*
Smith/Greenland, New York, was awarded three accounts.
The Loral Corporation, New York, named the agency to handle two divisions: Space Systems/Loral, its telecommunications and weather satellite unit, and Globalstar, its mobile communications unit.
Also, Maurice Villency, a New York furniture retailer, named the agency to handle creative assignments.
Billings were not disclosed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.84
3.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.79
2.77
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
3.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.48
5.48
7.21
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.75
6.75
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.65
7.69
8.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.92
5.92
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Finalists Chosen For Cable Account
The National Cable Television Association said yesterday that it had selected seven agencies to compete for its $5 million account, which has been handled by Bozell New York for the last two years.
Bridgit Blumberg, a spokeswoman for the association in Washington, identified the participants as the incumbent and Cadwell Davis Partners, Chiat/Day and Deutsch/ Dworin, all of New York; Carmichael Lynch and Fallon McElligott, both of Minneapolis, and Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly in Providence, R.I.
Ms.
Blumberg said that a final decision is expected at the end of May.


Children of Shadows Teach How Schools Fail; A Stabbing in Brooklyn
To the Editor:
The youngsters you depict in "Children of the Shadows" are the very youngsters the Y.M.C.A. is determined to reach as part of its goal to serve 1 in 10 New York City kids by the year 2000.
I felt I knew many of them because they reminded me of others I've heard about and seen in my travels around New York City.
It's become my passion to reach out to these kids each time I see them -- even if it's just for a moment, a handshake, a positive thought.
They seem to appreciate so much.
They get so little.
They face a daily struggle against odds that demand development of rare survival skills.
It was therefore devastating to read your April 12 article about Christian Abakpa, the young Nigerian who was stabbed to death in a Brooklyn playground after what was described as a "routine accident." This same young man apparently participated last October in a dance performance in traditional Nigerian dress at a Brooklyn Y.M.C.A. branch.


Sales and Profits Double at Compaq
As a savage industry price war intensifies, the Compaq Computer Corporation provided fresh evidence today that it stands tall, reporting that its net income and sales more than doubled in the first quarter.
Compaq also said that costs as a percentage of sales had fallen to 13.4 percent, while sales per employee -- a key measure of productivity -- had more than doubled from levels in the corresponding period a year ago.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about signs of improvement in the economy misstated the period in which employment growth more than doubled, and the comparative period in 1992.
The economy added 713,000 jobs in the six months ended March 31, compared with 297,000 jobs in the six months ended Sept. 30.


A Greener, Cleaner President
President Clinton's speech commemorating Earth Day calmed the jangled nerves of those who had begun to question his interest in the environment, not least Al Gore.
The Vice President was all smiles on Wednesday when Mr.
Clinton pledged specific steps to address the threat of global warming and promised to sign an international treaty protecting rare and endangered species.
Both pledges reversed the timid policies of his predecessor and signaled that Mr.
Clinton is prepared, at least for now, to assume the mantle of stewardship that George Bush declined.


SALOMON INC. (N)
Salomon Inc. said yesterday that its $102 million first-quarter loss was mostly the result of large losses in trading activities, which it had announced previously.
The loss was a sharp reversal of the $190 million profit in the comparable quarter a year earlier and the $143 million in the fourth quarter of 1992.
As a firm that relies heavily on speculative trading for its own account, Salomon's profits fluctuate widely, and it is not unusual for the concern to report a quarterly loss every year or so.
In early March, Salomon said it expected that trading losses could total $250 million in the first quarter.
Yesterday, Salomon said principal transactions, which includes trading for its own account and trades with customers, resulted in a $50 million loss, compared with gains of $688 million a year earlier.


Munoz May Return
ANTHONY MUNOZ, one of the great offensive lineman in N.F.L. history, who retired from the Bengals after last season, passed a physical and wants to play next season with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Munoz, 34, was an 11-time Pro Bowl selection in 13 years with Cincinnati.
The Buccaneers are coached by the former Bengals coach SAM WYCHE. (AP)


Accountant Is Charged With Bilking Entertainers
If the charges against James Powers are true, he must be quite an actor because most of the people he is said to have fooled are actors.
Over several years he won their confidence, became their friend, took over their financial affairs and, prosecutors say, took their money.
He is charged with stealing more than $50,000 from an actress on "L.A. Law" and more than $150,000 from a star of "The Guiding Light." In perhaps the greatest testament to his skill at illusion, he is accused of successfully impersonating his most famous client, the actress Jane Alexander, over the telephone while bilking her and her husband of more than $1 million.


Review/Dance; Dreams of Love in a Cloister Garden
Sweetness of spirit is not a quality one readily associates with flamenco dancers.
And inspired staging and lighting do not usually seem to be priorities in Spanish dance performances.
But Maria Benitez, whose company opened a two-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) on Tuesday night, has long followed her own road.
The American-born dancer and choreographer is known for her interest in creating new ways of presenting flamenco.
And while the Maria Benitez Teatro Flamenco troupe closed the program with the traditional suite of flamenco dances, the high point of the evening was "El Muro" ("The Wall"), a tale of a nun who dreams of sensuous love.


Mr. Dole's Selfish Strut
"So, how do you think Clinton's doing?" One confronts that question everywhere these days.
Except for his surprisingly worthy speech on the environment, the President has been in a blind stagger for several days.
With Janet Reno's help, he made Waco a synonym for fiasco.
On the economic-stimulus package, Mr.
Clinton and his staff managed to make the Senate Republicans, usually a milling school of minnows, look like a pack of tiger sharks.
But the economic debate deserves a closer look.
Mr.
Clinton's sin was clumsiness.
The Republicans' was one of indifference to the plight of working people and to untangling the economic wreckage left by the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
So it's important to look behind the headlines congratulating Senator Bob Dole and his colleagues on their tactical brilliance in killing this Administration's $19.5 billion package.


Miscellany
*
The Broadcast Marketing Corporation, New York, opened a media buying service affiliate called Eastern Media International Ltd.


Unions Have Worked to Attract Film Makers to New York
To the Editor:
Your April 10 article on the ways Toronto lends itself to making films set in many other cities, including New York (arts pages), states that Toronto, unlike New York, "offers compliant unions."
I'm a motion picture sound mixer and a member of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, Local 52 in New York.


Bold Stroke in Japan's Retailing Art
Takashimaya, the Japanese department store chain, is opening a much-awaited specialty store today on Fifth Avenue in New York City that will challenge American notions of what a store is.
If it succeeds, not only will it change the conventional wisdom about store environments, it will also reverse the poor showing of Japanese retailers in the New York market.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  U.S.
Gets First Victory  Rob Gaudreau of the San Jose Sharks had two goals and three assists as the United States trounced an undermanned French team, 6-1, yesterday in Dortmund, Germany, for its first victory in the world championships.
The Americans, after 1-1 ties with the Czech Republic and Finland, now have 4 points in Pool B and are virtually assured of a berth in the quarterfinals starting next Tuesday in Munich.
Gaudreau's 5-point game was the best individual performance in the tournament.
Adam Burt of the Hartford Whalers also scored two goals.
France played without Franck Pajonkowski, Benoit Laporte and Christophe Ville, who were suspended one game for taking part in a post-game brawl after Wednesday's 5-3 loss to Germany.
Eric Lindros scored three goals and had three assists as Canada routed Austria, 11-0, in Munich for its third straight victory.
Austria has not won.
Canada and Russia have advanced to the quarters from Pool A. Austrian player Christian Perthaler ruptured a blood vessel in his brain during the game against Canada.
He was taken to a hospital, but did not require immediate surgery.
Tournament officials said Perthaler's injury apparently was the result of overexertion, and wasn't caused by a hit. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Wisconsin Wins Medley  With temperatures in the 40's and winds gusting to 20 miles an hour at Franklin Field in Philadelphia, Claire Eichner anchored Wisconsin to victory in the Penn Relays' distance-medley yesterday, in 11 minutes 7.72 seconds.
Eichner, who won the 1,500 and 3,000 meters in last month's National Collegiate Athletic Association indoor championships, ran her 1,600-meter split in 4:39.8, pulling away from Villanova's Cheri Goddard in the final 300 meters.
Among other winners on the first full day of the weekend meet were Lauren Gubicza of Fordham, who outsprinted Molly McClimon of Michigan to score a repeat victory in the 3,000 meters individual race, and Danyel Mitchell of Louisiana State, who won the discus with a throw of 175 feet 7 inches and finished second in the shot put to Stevanie Wadsworth of Texas Christian, whose winning put was 54-0.
In the high school competition, Amanda White, the nation's top schoolgirl distance runner, won the 3,000-meter in 9:46.62.
The 17-year-old senior from Dulaney High in Timonium, Md., sprinted past Kate Landau of Grahamsville, N.Y., on the final lap to win by 15 meters and reverse the outcome of last year's race.
White is the national cross-country champion.
TENNIS


Magic Denies the Reports That He'll Coach Lakers
Magic Johnson, who has Los Angeles Lakers season tickets, has reportedly been asked to sit instead on the team's bench.
A Los Angeles radio station reported today that the Lakers' owner, Jerry Buss, has offered Johnson the Lakers head coaching job.
Johnson, the former all-star point guard who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS, denied that he had been offered the job through his agent, Lon Rosen.


Thomson-Stein Opera
The Mannes Opera Ensemble and Mannes Orchestra are to give three staged performances of the Virgil Thomson-Gertrude Stein opera "Four Saints in Three Acts," tomorrow, Monday and Wednesday at 8 P.M. at Christ Church United Methodist (Park Avenue and 60th Street).
The work, which is based on the stories of 16th-century Spanish saints, is to be staged by Paul Echols and conducted by Michael Charry.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 307-7171.


Perot Steps Up Attack on Clinton and Trade Pact
Sharpening his attacks on the Clinton Administration, Ross Perot told the Senate Banking Committee today that he no longer believed that the North American Free Trade Agreement could be fixed through side agreements, as the Administration plans.
Mr.
Perot also said that he would produce at least one and probably several half-hour television commercials criticizing the pact -- and implicitly, Mr.
Clinton -- to be broadcast in the coming months.


Council Still Holding Report on Commissioner's Role
Contrary to the executive council chairman's expectation, the report that will redefine the role of the commissioner remained with baseball's ruling body today.
The chairman, Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers, said last week that the report would be out of the executive council after today's meeting.
But the council ended a two-hour session still holding on to the report.
The longer the council delays action on the report, the longer it will take baseball's search committee to find a commissioner to succeed Fay Vincent, who resigned under pressure last Sept. 7.


BANKAMERICA CORP. (N)
The BankAmerica Corporation reported a 60 percent rise in its first-quarter earnings, largely reflecting its acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation last April.
Its net income of $484 million included a $12 million charge from accounting changes related to employee benefits.
Still, BankAmerica, which has been plagued by the depressed California economy, is one of the few big banks to report earnings below analysts' expectations.
Net interest income from loans and investments at the nation's second-largest banking company fell 5 percent for the quarter, partly as a result of a modest decrease in loans and interest payments from Brazil in the previous period.
Its trading revenue increased while its fees and commissions fell.


When On Time Was Too Late
The wonder is not that the 1,095 Knicks playoff tickets available to the public for each of the seven potential home games in the first two rounds were snapped up almost as soon as they went on sale at 9 A.M. yesterday, but that some fans actually thought they could show up at Madison Square Garden at 9 A.M. and buy some.
As they discovered, the line had started forming about 6 P.M.
Wednesday, quickly extending all the way to Eighth Avenue.
It had grown so long by midnight that Garden security officials, concerned for the fans' safety and health in the rainy weather, decided to give both the fans and security guards a break.
They issued numbered identification bracelets to those in line and sent them home assured of reclaiming their place after a night's sleep and being able to buy their quota, a total of up to six tickets per person.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Merrill Lynch agreed to pay up to $15 million, plus interest, to thousands of investors it shortchanged when they sold certain securities between 1972 and 1987.
The brokerage firm said investors who sold some of its unit investment trusts, which are pools of bonds, received too little because Merrill Lynch failed to include all the interest that the trust had collected on bonds.  [ Page D1. ]
McDonnell Douglas defended its C-17 cargo plane at a House hearing, but lawmakers expressed reservations about advanced payments the Government made on the project.  [ D1. ]


Diner's Journal
Swiss Festival at L'Acajou
Switzerland may bring to mind fine chocolate and cheese rather than wine, yet its cool, rugged countryside produces some fresh, appealing whites and some surprisingly ripe pinot noirs and merlots.
People interested in sampling some might stop by the French bistro L'Acajou, at 53 West 19th Street, Chelsea, where a Swiss food and wine festival continues through next week.
Aside from wine tastings, by the glass or the bottle, an arresting array of Swiss dishes is available at L'Acajou.
Among the best sampled recently were the zucchini flan with mint ($7), cabbage stuffed with veal and pork along with a sweet onion sauce ($7), braised trout with grapes ($18), cumin-scented lamb stew with leeks and raisins ($18), and braised veal shank in red wine with prunes ($18).


NASA Unsure If Redesigned Space Station Is Viable
The man who headed NASA's effort to redesign the space station said today that it was uncertain whether a design could be found that would meet the budget limits and timetable dictated by the White House as well as the agency's technical requirements.
"Our job is to determine whether or not a station can be brought into being within these constraints," the official, Dr.
Joseph F. Shea, a longtime manager with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, told an agency review committee.


By Pratt &amp; Whitney's Math, Connecticut Costs Too Much
When Pratt &amp; Whitney, Connecticut's largest private employer, said last week that it might have to close most of its state operations, it did more than send a shudder through the state's economy.
It put a specific and startling price tag on just how badly Connecticut's business climate is out of step with its competition.


Environmental Group Assails Electricity Deal With Quebec
Environmentalists in New York State and Quebec are trying to block renewal of a contract in which Consolidated Edison buys hydroelectricity from Quebec every summer, saying the deal helps finance dams that are destroying how Indians around James Bay live.
The environmentalists have proposed that instead of renewing the 15-year-old contract, New York should help Quebec use its electricity more efficiently.
By doing so, they argue, New York would be able to buy the power saved and Hydro-Quebec, the utility owned by the Quebec government, would not have to build more dams.


Suit Is Filed In Shooting Tied to Theft Of an Auto
Howard Caesar, the teen-ager who was shot as he got out of a stolen car last June 9, filed a Federal civil rights suit today seeking $50 million from the city of Newark and the police officers he said were involved in the shooting.
Mr.
Caesar, who suffered massive internal injuries when he was struck by a .45-caliber bullet that an Essex County grand jury believed was fired by a Newark police officer, spent four months in the hospital and underwent 10 operations that removed his spleen and parts of his intestines and repaired damage to his kidneys and liver.
Today, the 17-year-old showed the cloth binder that he wears around his torso to support his abdominal muscles and cover a hole that his lawyers said was not completely closed by a series of skin grafts.


Last Bastion for Foreign Smokers; Appalled by Restrictions, Visitors Take Refuge in Bistros
Shortly after 10 o'clock on a recent morning, a white-and-blue tour bus lumbered up to Caffe Lucca, a popular coffeehouse in Greenwich Village, and disgorged dozens of Portuguese tourists.
More than a few of them had cigarettes dangling from their lips like spare appendages.
The dimly lighted cafe beckons New Yorkers with the promise of dark espresso and deep conversation.
But it is the blue-gray haze of cigarette smoke that makes European tourists feel at home.
The young people are smoking.
The grandmothers are smoking.
Everybody is incessantly puffing in what seems to them, alas, the last bastion for smokers in New York City.


Compound's Ashes Searched for Clues
Amid the charred rubble of the Branch Davidian compound, two dozen workers today picked carefully through twisted wiring, stacks of burst canned goods and many small orange flags fluttering around the site.
The flags marked bodies that investigators have found so far.
"It's rather ominous," Dr.
Nizam Peerwani, the Medical Examiner from neighboring Tarrant County, who is heading the forensic operation under contract with local officials, said of the scene.
Contradicting statements made by Federal officials in Washington on Wednesday, he added, "There is no evidence of any gunshot wounds" in any of the victims discovered so far.


Restaurants
Visiting Peter Luger, Brooklyn's historic steakhouse in the shadow of the Williamsburg Bridge, always induces deja vu.
Since it opened in 1887, before the Williamsburg Bridge, the carnivorous formula has remained immutable.
Peter Luger, perhaps because of its marginal location, attracts a varied crowd: spiffy Manhattanites, many in stretch limousines; voracious families who have been coming for generations, and casually clad packs of young men who look as if they just came down from a Yankee game.


Rachel Everson, 91, Longtime Volunteer And a Civic Leader
Rachel Higgins Everson, a civic leader and volunteer worker in Brooklyn for a half-century, died on Wednesday at the age of 91 at Southport Manor in Southport, Conn.
A longtime resident of Brooklyn Heights, she had lived in Westport, Conn., in recent years.
The cause of death was a stroke, her family said.


BankAmerica Signs A Lease for 8 Floors At the Trade Center
The BankAmerica Corporation announced yesterday that it had signed a 15-year lease to move 1,100 workers to eight floors of Tower One of the World Trade Center.
The move by the nation's second largest bank holding company was portrayed by bank executives and government officials as a vote of confidence in the Twin Towers after the terrorist bombing of Feb. 26.
In the wake of the explosion in lower Manhattan, fears surfaced that security concerns would prompt many companies to move out when their leases were up and others to decide not to move in.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE KING OF CARPETS," Jewish Repertory at Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
A comedy by Joel Hammer about a young man who would rather paint than go into the family carpet business.
Directed by Edward Cohen.
Performances: tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M. and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $28.
Information: (212) 831-2000.
Closing Next Weekend
"CARNIVAL," Theater at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
A revival of the 1961 musical, based on the film "Lili." Directed by Pamela Hunt.
Through May 2.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2:30 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 534-5366.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BANKAMERICA TO MOVE INTO TRADE TOWER
The BankAmerica Corporation announced that it had signed a 15-year lease to move 1,100 workers to eight floors of Tower One of the World Trade Center.
The move by the nation's second largest bank holding company was portrayed by bank executives and government officials as a vote of confidence in the Twin Towers after the terrorist bombing of Feb. 26.
A1.
ACCOUNTANT CHARGED IN BILKING ACTORS
A 56-year-old accountant and financial manager was indicted by a Manhattan grand jury on charges of stealing more than $3 million from nine clients, including an actress on "L.A. Law" and a star of "The Guiding Light." B3.


Penguins Save Best Shots for Last
Twice they fell behind.
They even trailed after two periods.
But the Pittsburgh Penguins still found a way to skate off with another victory tonight, rallying to beat the Devils, 4-3, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Three consecutive goals over the first part of the third period catapulted the Penguins to a 3-0 lead in the Patrick Division semifinal series.
The Penguins, winners of the last two Stanley Cups and 14 straight playoff games, can eliminate the Devils with a victory here Sunday afternoon.


Faculty at U. of Virginia Accepts Limited Sex Ban
The University of Virginia faculty today rejected a proposal that would have barred romance between professors and undergraduates, and instead voted to ban relationships only between professors and the students they supervise.
The proposed ban, which must be approved by the university president, Dr.
John T. Casteen 3d, would forbid professors and graduate teaching assistants from amorous or sexual relationships or overtures involving students whom they teach, coach, evaluate or to whom they allocate money.


Women Ready to Fly for Navy, or Flee It
For Lieut.
Pamela Lyons, one of the Navy's few female fighter-jet pilots, the next several months will tell whether she becomes a part of military history or starts looking for a new job.
The armed services bar women from flying fighter planes in combat, but Lieutenant Lyons is allowed to pilot an FA-18 fighter in an electronic warfare training squadron.
To cut costs, the Navy plans to eliminate her squadron in October, leaving Lieutenant Lyons and many other female fighter pilots with no place in the sky unless the Pentagon changes its combat-exclusion rules.


Patricia Peardon, Performer on Stage And for TV, Was 69
Patricia Peardon, the actress who created the central role in "Junior Miss" on Broadway, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 69.
The cause of death was pneumonia, said her daughter Christine Noel Cameron of Manhattan.


Canseco Not Guilty
Texas Rangers outfielder JOSE CANSECO was found not guilty yesterday on a misdemeanor battery charge filed after he punched a man in a Chicago nightclub last December.
Cook County Judge WILLIAM O'MALLEY rejected claims by STEVEN BASSO of Chicago that Canseco hit him without provocation. (AP)


Critic's Notebook; German Art Still Breathes the Air of Ideas
HOW German is the New York art scene?
At the moment and for the next few weeks, rather more than usual.
After a fall season dominated by Matisse, it's almost as if a collective, unconscious decision had been made to give equal time to French art's traditional rival, German art.
At the Museum of Modern Art, site of the fall's great Matisse retrospective, exhibitions of three important German artists are stacked one on top of another.
A large, intriguing show of early work by the Dadaist-Surrealist Max Ernst is sandwiched between a retrospective of the drawings of Joseph Beuys, paterfamilias of postwar German art, and a survey of the scathing prewar photomontages of John Heartfield, which both chronicle and rail against the rise of Hitler.
With their emphasis on ideas about art and society, their sense of moral imperative and their frequent lack of color, these shows create an esthetic climate far different from the lush if rigorous beauty of Matisse.
Similar conditions prevail in "Photography and Contemporary German Art: 1960 to the Present," a large, often somber exhibition at the Guggenheim SoHo.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Idaho Power Co., Boise, Idaho, is offering $80 million of 6.40 percent noncallable first mortgage bonds due in 2003 at 100, and $80 million of 7 1/2 percent first mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 100 through Salomon Brothers.
All the bonds are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Executive Changes
AMSCO INTERNATIONAL INC., Pittsburgh, appointed Daniel P. Barry chief financial officer and senior vice president for finance and planning.
ARCO INTERNATIONAL OIL AND GAS CO., Plano, Tex., named Thomas W. Velleca senior vice president for exploration.


CHRONICLE
Four years ago this week, JACK KLUGMAN had a vocal chord removed during surgery for cancer of the larynx, so he has been wearing body microphones for his co-starring role in "Three Men and a Horse," now on Broadway in the Lyceum Theater.
"The director, John Tillinger, noticed recently that my voice seemed to be getting stronger," Mr.
Klugman said the other day.
"So, Tony Randall suggested that at the end of the matinee performance on Saturday, we ask the audience if they would like to see a scene from 'The Odd Couple.' Of course, they went crazy."


Move for Abandoned Boy
A handicapped Long Island boy who the police say was abandoned by his father at a bowling alley this week will live in a residence on the grounds of the special school he attends, officials of the school said yesterday.
John Palmer, associate executive director of the Center for Developmental Disabilities in Woodbury, L.I., said the school decided to offer housing to Kristopher Dobkowksi, 9, because of the difficulties that his parents were having in caring for him.
His father, Waclaw Dobkowski, 49, of South Farmingdale, L.I., is being held in Suffolk County Jail on a charge that he abandoned the boy at a bowling alley near his home on Tuesday after telling an employee that the child was "too much trouble."


Critic's Notebook; Making Art of the Holocaust: New Museum, New Works
"To write poetry after Auschwitz is barbaric," said the German philosopher Theodor Adorno, and implicit in his statement was the challenge that has faced every artist who has tried to grapple with the Holocaust.
The four works of art commissioned by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, which opens to the public here on Monday, are attempts to meet that challenge.
They have been chosen by an exceptionally thoughtful committee of curators, scholars and collectors.
The artists have eschewed the "small child clinging to mother's skirt" sort of realism that has turned much memorial imagery into kitsch.
These are serious works of abstraction that nonetheless try to evoke in their forms some of the difficult issues at hand.


Dr. Theodore Cooper, 64, Head Of Upjohn and Ex-U.S. Official
Dr.
Theodore Cooper, a scientist and former senior Government official who headed the Upjohn Company, died yesterday at the University of Virginia Medical Center in Charlottesville where he was being treated for bone marrow cancer.
He was 64 years old.
He was chairman and chief executive of Upjohn, one of the country's largest pharmaceutical companies, since 1987.
Upjohn, based in Kalamazoo, Mich., named Ley S. Smith, acting chief executive last week after Dr.
Cooper entered an intensive care unit for treatment of a lung infection and respiratory failure.
He had received intermittent treatment since the cancer was diagnosed in January.


Aquarium's Expansion Makes It Just Like Home


Review/Film; Reunion at an Old Camp Where Love Flowered
"Indian Summer," written and directed by Mike Binder, is a decently acted, extremely mild romantic comedy that you may think you've seen before, although you haven't.
It's about a group of men and women in their mid-30's who return to Camp Tamakwa, the summer camp where, 20 years before, they learned about life, love and sex.
Jennifer (Elizabeth Perkins) is the pretty, wise-cracking one who lost her first great love to someone else.
Beth (Diane Lane) is a new widow.
Matthew (Vincent Spano) and Kelly (Julie Warner) are married but having problems.
Jack (Bill Paxton), once the group's most glamorous member, is unmarried and at loose ends.
Jamie (Matt Craven) is a tireless womanizer, traveling with his "new fiancee," Gwen (Kimberly Williams), a beauty almost young enough to be his daughter.
Brad (Kevin Pollak) is the boring one.


Some Palestinians See Barrier to Peace Talks
Trudging back from an army checkpoint that had blocked his way to Jerusalem today, Khaled Tarayra said Palestinian leaders had no mandate from the people when they agreed this week to return to the Middle East peace talks.
"This was not a decision for the Palestinian delegation to make, but for the Palestinian people, who are suffering under this siege," he said, referring to an Israeli-imposed closing of the occupied territories that prevents 1.8 million Palestinians from leaving.


Calm Restored After Violence At New Prison Near Danbury
Guards regained control of a high-security prison here early this morning after a seven-hour disturbance by about 90 inmates.
While state officials said that everything was under control, many local residents said the violence confirmed their fears about having a prison in their area.
The prison opened six months ago after a community effort to keep it out of Newtown failed.


Review/Art; A Trove of Collectibles, From Bibles to Letters
Anyone eager to study one of the world's great illuminated manuscripts, to peruse a letter written backward by Jane Austen, to admire a handful of sublime Rembrandt etchings, to linger over the first complete printed edition of the Hebrew Bible, or to encounter a Redoute tulip the size of a grapefruit will have a heyday at "A Great Legacy: Morgan Collections, 1913-1943" at the Pierpont Morgan Library.
This astonishing grab bag of a show, drawn from the Morgan's vast holdings, offers these attractions and close to 300 others as well.
If their chockablock display smacks of the curio-cabinet as much as the treasure chest, the objects themselves attest to a collection of stunning range and quality, one that is itself an artifact of the taste, power and patronage of a bygone day.


Bank Named to Bond Sale After Loan to Holtzman Campaign
Seven months after a bank provided a timely loan to the Senate campaign of the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, the bank's securities branch was named as an underwriter of city bonds on the recommendation of Ms.
Holtzman's office, according to Federal election records and city officials.
The recommendation by Ms.
Holtzman's office was made last month at the same time that Ms.
Holtzman's Senate campaign was trying to renegotiate terms of the loan, which has been only partly repaid.
Her office did not disclose the existence of the loan when it made the recommendation.


Review/Film; A Quiet Hero Lost at End Of the War
Raoul Wallenberg, the subject of Kjell Grede's deeply unsettling film "Good Evening, Mr. Wallenberg," is considered one of the great heroes of World War II.
A mild-mannered, apolitical upper-class Swede who was an importer of luxury foods from Hungary, he was directly responsible for saving thousands of Hungarian Jews from massacre by the Nazis.
In the film's opening scene, Wallenberg is traveling in the luxury dining car of a train speeding through central Europe when it suddenly halts, and policemen run through the cars drawing the shades.
Peeking out his window, Wallenberg watches the bodies of Jewish prisoners being dumped from the cattle car of a freight train across the tracks.
One is a little boy whose father leaps out to be with him and is shot to death clutching the dead child in his arms.


Snubbed Yet Again
Mention the word cup and this country's top tennis players run the other way.
The United States Tennis Association president, J. HOWARD (BUMPY) FRAZER, confirmed yesterday that none of this country's top-ranked women will be representing the United States at the Federation Cup competition in Germany July 19-26.
The veterans PAM SHRIVER and LORI McNEIL, along with newcomers ANN GROSSMAN and 16-year-old LINDSEY DAVENPORT, were named to the Federation Cup team yesterday.
The U.S.T.A. received turndowns from Olympic gold medalist JENNIFER CAPRIATI, MARY JOE FERNANDEZ, GIGI FERNANDEZ, ZINA GARRISON and MARTINA NAVRATILOVA.
Frazer acknowledged that the situation mirrors the first round of 1993 Davis Cup play, in which a makeshift crew of male players lost in Australia in March, costing the defending United States the championship.


Carolco's Films Involved In a Pay-Per-View Deal
Tele-Communications Inc. and Carolco Pictures are negotiating a deal that would allow Tele-Communications, the nation's biggest cable operator, to show new Carolco films on its pay-per-view network at the same time they are released in theaters, several people close to the negotiations said yesterday.
The agreement, which is expected to be announced today, would represent the first pact between a cable operator and a film company to release films simultaneously.
However, one executive close to Carolco said that the deal would apply to only four or five films annually during a four- or five-year period.
He said Tele-Communications would probably charge viewers $20 to $40 a film.
Deal Worth $100 Million
The deal would give Carolco a needed infusion of capital.
Tele-Communications would invest $100 million in Carolco in two parts: an equity stake in the company and a purchase of pay-per-view rights.
However, the initial equity investment would be relatively small, according to another executive familiar with the deal.
In addition, the partners would share in the pay-per-view revenues.


H.I.V. Positive, an Ex-Champion Comes Home
Ruben Dario (the Hurricane) Palacio has become a major Colombian sports figure in more ways than one.
Although the 30-year-old boxer was recently stripped of his world featherweight championship title, he has gained widespread sympathy and attention here after having become infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Palacio is the only boxer to have his title declared vacant for having contracted H.I.V., which was discovered in two blood tests performed in London last week.
Public support here has grown for him.


Look Who's Criticizing Israel Nowadays
To the Editor:
William Safire assures us in "Progress in Ismailiya" (column, April 12), on the meeting between Israel's Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, that democratic leaders like Mr.
Rabin "are tough cookies," that "they can take criticism," and that sometimes this criticism helps.
Presumably, we are offered these assurances because Mr.
Safire's fellow hawks, A. M. Rosenthal, Norman Podhoretz (of Commentary magazine) and their right-wing colleagues, who carried on endlessly about the immorality of American Jewish criticism of Israel's Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, have suddenly and shamelessly discovered the virtues of democratic dissent now that their man is out of office.


Shifting Emphasis in Health Spending
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today unveiled a detailed plan to overhaul the state's health care system, proposing to cut up to $800 million from hospitals over the next three years while putting millions more into programs that encourage preventive and family medicine.
The thrust of Mr.
Cuomo's plan, which is intended to limit costs and to begin shifting health-care responsibility away from hospitals and toward family practitioners, clinics and the like, was laid out by the Governor in a health-care message earlier this month.


TVWeekend; Helpless, as a Premature Baby Fights to Live and Fails
Born three months premature, Emily Butterfield weighed 1 pound 11 ounces.
She died 53 days later.
Emily's story, and that of her anguished parents, was told by her mother, Elizabeth Mehren, in the book "Born Too Soon." Now it has been adapted by Susan Baskin into a movie, also titled "Born Too Soon," that can be seen on Sunday at 9 P.M. on NBC.
Anyone who has ever cared for a hospitalized child over an extended time will vouch for the keen authenticity of the details, physical and emotional.
Ms.
Mehren, an East Coast correspondent for The Los Angeles Times, and her husband, Fox Butterfield, a correspondent for The New York Times, are played with quiet but tough honesty by Pamela Reed and Michael Moriarty.
The story begins with Elizabeth, less than six months pregnant, making an ordinary business trip to Los Angeles.
On the plane back to New York, her water breaks.
Why?
A doctor says sometimes it's just bad luck.
Elizabeth says, "Bad luck is supposed to happen to other people."


On Stage, and Off
'Fools' Logic
The first rumpus about this year's Tony Awards surfaced this week, with the producers of "Fool Moon" protesting a ruling by the Tony administration committee that the show will be eligible in the category of best play.
In a move that seems to defy logic, the producers said they would decline
any
nomination that implied "Fool Moon" -- a wordless series of clown skits performed by David Shiner and Bill Irwin, accompanied by the string-band music of the Red Clay Ramblers -- is a play.
Not that anyone thinks it's a musical.
What the producers (and the performers) want is special dispensation -- either the creation of a new category or a special Tony -- that would make a distinction between the theatrical qualities of "Fool Moon" and those of a conventional play or musical.
Not only does it make unique contributions to the theater, they say, but it's unfair to other eligible playwrights to have a wordless show competing for the best-play award, and unfair to other eligible actors to have them competing with clowns.


Muggings in the Kitchen
Early this week a popular singer's husband was arrested for allegedly kicking her in the face and smashing her with a chair.
The story made headlines because she's famous -- but it is hardly news.
After all, an American woman is beaten by her husband or boyfriend every 15 seconds.
This week the Family Violence Prevention Fund, a 13-year-old nonprofit group, released a study that reveals just how familiar Americans are with domestic violence.
While only 19 percent of those surveyed had witnessed a robbery or mugging, 34 percent had witnessed a battering.


MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP. (NMS)
With a brisk increase in sales and better profit margins, the MCI Communications Corporation reported yesterday that its operating income in the first quarter jumped 22 percent, to $168 million.
The results were somewhat better than Wall Street analysts had predicted for the No. 2 long-distance telephone carrier.
Coming just two daysafter the Sprint Corporation reported strong earnings, the results indicate that both MCI and Sprint are making fresh inroads into A.T.&amp; T.'s market share.


On My Mind; Testimony From Block 13
Name?
"Harold Osmond Le Druillenec."
The witness is sworn and examined by Col. T. M. Backhouse.
"I am a British subject, a schoolmaster by profession and my address is 7 Trinity Road, St. Helier, Jersey.


Long Bond Yield 6.75% for Third Day
The yield on the 30-year bond remained at 6.75 percent for the third day in a row yesterday with most of the trading action in shorter maturities.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 1/32 , to 10428/32 .
The prices of Treasury notes rose from 4/32 for the seven- year note to 1/32 for the two-year note.
The price of the 10-year note was unchanged.


Giants Sign Fullback
The Giants signed VICTOR JONES, a free-agent fullback, yesterday, and if he plays well enough he may keep OTTIS ANDERSON off the team.
Jones, 5 feet 8 inches and 220 pounds, played for the Houston Oilers in 1990 and 1991 and the Denver Broncos last season, mostly on special teams.
Last season, he started the Broncos' final game, against the Kansas City Chiefs.
The Giants have not decided whether to offer Anderson, 36, a contract.


American Express Profit Falls
The American Express Company reported late yesterday that its profits fell 11 percent in the first quarter, dragged down by a series of one-time charges related to divisions it is selling.
Still, the company's core credit card business rebounded on lower credit losses and profits from its IDS Financial Planning unit continued to grow steadily.


Just Dessert
Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Inc. reported a better-than-expected leap in first-quarter earnings yesterday.
Shares of the Oakland, Calif., company, which makes and distributes premium ice cream, have been trading in the $22 range for much of this year.
But they jumped $2.125 each, to $23.25, on the earnings report.


COMPANY NEWS
DOUGLAS &amp; LOMASON CO., Farmington Hills, Mich., has received a contract from the Ford Motor Co. to supply seats for the replacement to the Ford Tempo and Mercury Topaz models to be introduced in 1995.
The contract is expected to generate $74 million in annual revenue.
OFFSHORE PIPELINES INC., Houston, said its domestic and international operating companies and joint ventures had been awarded several offshore construction contracts valued at $76 million.


Atom-Fuel Route Reconsidered
Responding to safety concerns, Long Island Power Authority officials said yesterday that they would reconsider a plan to ship 100 tons of nuclear fuel by rail from the Shoreham power plant through densely populated areas in Long Island and New York City.
Richard M. Kessel, chairman of the authority, said after a meeting with New York City officials that he and his staff would take another look at the option of shipping the radioactive fuel by barge instead of by train, since both Shoreham and the destination point, a power plant in Limerick, Pa., are accessible by water. 33 Rail Trips Planned
"There's no fail-safe option here," Mr.
Kessel said after the meeting.
"But we agreed to take a more concentrated look at the barge alternative."


Alabama Governor Found Guilty Of Ethics Charges and Is Ousted
Guy Hunt, the part-time preacher who became Alabama's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction, was convicted today on a felony charge of violating a state ethics law and was immediately removed from office.
Mr.
Hunt, who rose from obscurity in rural Holly Pond to become Governor in 1987 and was re-elected in 1990, looked ashen but showed no emotion after jurors, who deliberated for only two and a quarter hours, found him guilty of converting $200,000 to personal use from a nonprofit fund set up for his inauguration.


Disputed Goal Saves Canadiens
Canadiens 2, Nordiques 1
Vincent Damphousse scored a disputed goal in overtime as Montreal beat Quebec, 2-1, last night in Montreal.
Quebec now leads the four-of-seven-game Adams Division series by 2-1.
Nordiques goalie Ron Hextall stopped Damphousse's shot on a power play, but the rebound went off the skate of a Quebec defenseman 10 minutes 30 seconds into overtime.





ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES SHIPS 486 CHIP CLONE
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said yesterday that it had begun shipping its clone of the Intel Corporation's 486 microprocessor, effectively ending the Intel monopoly on 486 devices for I.B.M.-compatible personal computers.
Advanced Micro said it would ship thousands of Am486DX devices in May and would increase production later.
Last Friday, a Federal judge overturned a jury verdict that had blocked shipments of the clones.


Intense Struggle Expected as Italian Premier Quits
After nine months of troubled government, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato of Italy formally resigned tonight, opening what is likely to be a period of intense political competition over a successor.
The Prime Minister handed his resignation to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro three days after Italians voted overwhelmingly in a referendum to support changes in the electoral law that could eventually redraw the political map, eliminating fringe groups and narrowing the number of contenders for power.


Clancy Joins the Hunt For Baltimore Orioles
The author TOM CLANCY said he has agreed to join a local group that is attempting to buy the Baltimore Orioles from cash-strapped ELI JACOBS, who has filed for personal bankruptcy.
An Orioles bid would be Clancy's second attempt at becoming an owner of a professional sports franchise in Baltimore.
For more than a year, he has led a group seeking a National Football League for Baltimore.


Dibble Breaks Arm
The Cincinnati Reds yesterday put reliever ROB DIBBLE on the 15-day disabled list and called up right-hander MILTON HILL from Class AAA Indianapolis.
Dibble broke a bone in his left arm in a play at home plate in Wednesday night's victory in Pittsburgh.
Dibble is expected to be out at least four to six weeks. (AP)


Bush's 'Points of Light' Volunteerism Burns On, With Clinton's Aid
George Bush's beloved points of light did not all go out when he did.
In fact, the nonpartisan Point's of Light Foundation, which embodied Mr.
Bush's national service campaign, has expanded and is developing a working relationship with the Clinton Administration.


The Giants Stay Warm by Running Around the Bases
The Mets have found their gear, and it is neutral.
The engine can make noise from night to night, from inning to inning, but to no great purpose.
Idle is what the Mets have done best, and their standing still hasn't always been pretty.


Mired in Mud and Politics, Russian Villagers Debate
In the old days voting was much easier in remote villages like this, the math teacher at the village school recalled.
The Communist Party committee herded everybody together in the social hall, then everybody voted in favor of whatever the Communists wanted and went off satisfied that they had made no difference whatever.


One Speech Led to Demotion, Says Jeffries, Fighting Ouster
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries of City College testified yesterday that the outcry following a 1991 speech in which he said there was a Jewish conspiracy against him, which critics called racist, crushed his academic freedom and right to free expression and said "the weight of the reaction dampened my spirits."
Dr.
Jeffries also said in Federal District Court in Manhattan that the controversial speech was the only reason that university trustees acted in March 1992 to strip him of his title as chairman of the black studies department, a job he had held for almost 20 years.


No Headline
"To forget would mean to kill the victims a second time. We could not prevent their first death; we must not allow them to be killed again." -- ELIE WIESEL, at the dedication of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington.  [ A1:5. ]


Art in Review
Manny Farber  Rosa Esman Gallery 575 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through May 15
In his first New York exhibition in a decade, the California artist Manny Farber presents richly painted works that are like particularly articulate visual diaries.
In each picture, Mr.
Farber combines images of disparate objects, including sunflowers, fruits and vegetables, sketchbooks and iron rods of the sort used to reinforce concrete, and he shows them strewn across the surface of the painting as if across a tabletop.


Editors' Note
An obituary on Tuesday, and in some editions on Monday, reported the death of South Dakota's Governor, George S. Mickelson, in an airplane crash.
The obituary included an account of a 1989 arrest of the Mickelsons' teen-age son after an incident during a party at the Governor's Mansion while the elder Mickelsons were out of town.





Convictions of Garcias in Wedtech Scandal Overturned Again
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan yesterday reversed the extortion conviction of former Representative Robert Garcia of the South Bronx and his wife, Jane Lee.
It was the second time the Garcias' convictions were overturned in a case which was part of the Wedtech scandal and which led to Mr.
Garcia resigning from Congress.
In a unanimous ruling signed by Judge Daniel M. Friedman, the three-member Circuit Court overturned the Garcias' second conviction on the ground that the judge in the case failed to instruct the jury that to convict a defendant of extortion, the prosecution must prove "quid pro quo," or that both sides alleged to have been involved received something in the extortion deal.


Isolated or Not, Jurors Don't Deliberate in a Vacuum
In the week since they convicted two officers and acquitted two others of violating Rodney G. King's civil rights, members of the jury who have spoken publicly have insisted that fear of riots never entered into their deliberations.
"We were instructed to stick to the evidence, and we stuck to the evidence," one juror told a local television station.
Is it possible that the jurors, even when sealed off from the tensions whirling around the case, their anonymity insured, could have ignored the broader consequences of their decision?
Not likely, say trial lawyers and consultants in the rapidly expanding business of helping lawyers pick juries.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.95
3.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.82
2.79
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
3.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.46
5.48
7.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.75
6.75
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.65
7.65
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.92
5.92
6.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CATERPILLAR INC. (N)
Caterpillar Inc. reported first-quarter earnings yesterday that were much better than expected, as the heavy-equipment maker reversed a loss from a year earlier.
The company, based in Peoria, Ill., said the turnaround was a result of a 19 percent increase in sales, especially in the United States; a buildup in dealer inventories; higher prices charged for its products, and lower costs for wages and benefits.


Poppe Typson Wins A Toshiba Account
Toshiba America Information Systems Inc. of Irvine, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Poppe Tyson/ Los Angeles to handle its computer systems division account, previously handled by Chiat/Day of Venice, Calif., for more than two years.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Accounts
*
The California Almond Board, Modesto, Calif., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, to handle its account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million, for the first year.
They are expected to double in 1994. *
Labatt U.S.A.
Inc., Darien, Conn., to Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece, Stamford, Conn., as the first agency to handle its account for Moretti Beer, an Italian import, in the United States.
Rotando Lerch handles other Labatt accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.


If It's Playoff Overtime, It Must Be the Islanders
Patrick Flatley, who had missed part of the game with a scratched eyeball, slammed his body into the corner and forced the puck free.
Benoit Hogue, who had missed part of the game with a swollen and possibly broken knuckle, took the puck, sprang out, froze a Washington defenseman in his tracks and slid a crisp pass in front of the net.
Ray Ferraro, who hadn't missed any time with any injury tonight and hardly remembers the broken leg that kept him out all last winter, stabbed at the puck and drove it past goalie Rick Tabaracci and into the Washington net, triggering a long, loud celebration among the 14,180 fans who watched the first playoff game at Nassau Coliseum in three years.


McDonnell Defends Its C-17 In a Hot Exchange in House
The chairman of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation defended the company's troubled development program for the C-17 cargo plane today under fierce questioning from members of the House about whether he had persuaded the Air Force to make illegal advance payments for the project.
After the testimony by John F. McDonnell before the House Government Operations Committee, Representative John Conyers Jr., the Michigan Democrat who is committee chairman, said he and his colleagues were not convinced that the advance payments were legitimate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  BOSNIA DEBATE SHARPENS IN U.S.
In an unusual action, the State Department's top experts on the Balkans and the United States representative to the United Nations are pressing for military action against the Serbs.
A1  STANDOFF HOLDS IN SREBRENICA  A tense standoff continued in the enclave of Srebrenica, in eastern Bosnia, with Serbian nationalist commanders saying U.N. troops had made "a farce" of their pledge to disarm Muslim defenders.
A12


Roseanne Arnold Says She Will Leave ABC
Roseanne Arnold, who has been waging a war of nerves and words against her television network, stepped up the conflict yesterday, declaring that her relationship with ABC was "absolutely over."
Ms.
Arnold, whose show "Roseanne," which just completed the television season as the second-ranked show in prime time, after CBS's "60 Minutes," said network executives had repeatedly lied to her about when they would decide the future of "The Jackie Thomas Show," another comedy she produces.
That show stars Ms.
Arnold's husband, Tom Arnold.


Intense Burst of Gamma Rays Adds to Puzzle About Origin
An American satellite has detected the most intense flash of gamma radiation observed in the two years of its operation, further mystifying astronomers as to the nature and origin of the extremely powerful phenomenon known as gamma-ray bursts.
Astronomers said yesterday that "the Super Bowl event," so called because it occurred on Jan. 31, the day of this year's National Football League championship game, appeared to produce 10 times more energy than any previously observed gamma-ray burst.
The burst lasted about a second and was more than 100 times brighter at its peak than the brightest steady source of gamma rays in the Milky Way galaxy, and more than 1,000 times brighter than any other known extragalactic source.


Look Who's Criticizing Israel Nowadays; Between Two Cultures
To the Editor:
"Cruelty and Silence," A. M. Rosenthal's column of April 13, uses a discussion of book by Kanan Makiya to attack Prof.
Edward W. Said, characterizing Professor Said as an Arab intellectual who has supported repressive regimes in the Arab world.
In an Op-Ed article on Jan. 11, 1991, Professor Said wrote, "No Arab president or king is accountable to his people; this is just as true of Saddam Hussein as of the others."
Edward Said has been one of the most outspoken critics of Saddam Hussein and has also spoken up with courage against the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's fatwa against Salman Rushdie.
For a Palestinian to take either of these positions is to place himself in real jeopardy.


A Green and Gold Tonic for the Yankees
Suddenly, Oakland did not seem like a problem place to visit anymore.
The memory of a bullpen breakdown no longer lingered, and some Yankees were privately hoping to see Dennis Eckersley again.
They never did today because the score was too lopsided.
Two straight victories can work wonders toward erasing one damaging loss, and the Yankees completed the healing exacta by taking advantage of an outfield misplay and Ron Darling's erratic control to scurry to a 5-1 triumph at the Oakland Coliseum.


Japanese Stocks Up
Stock prices closed higher here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished up 112.84 points, or 0.58 percent, at 19,704.15.
On Thursday, the Nikkei lost 181.70 points.


Sounds Around Town
'Latin Pianos'
"Latin Pianos in Concert '93," Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Bedford Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue, Bedford Park, the Bronx, (212) 960-8833.
This Latin piano shootout, which is to feature Eddie Palmieri, Papo Lucca, Danilo Perez and Edsel Gomez, will bounce between Latin jazz and hard salsa.
Mr.
Palmieri and Mr.
Lucca lead their own bands, and both know their jazz harmony; Mr.
Perez and Mr.
Gomez are on the jazz scene and know their Latin vamps.
They'll all be backed by the young percussionist Giovanni Hidalgo and a big band.
The show on Sunday will start at 3; tickets are $15 to $25.
George Clinton's Band
George Clinton and the P-Funk All-Stars, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 541-8900, and Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
One of the greatest funk and rock bands ever will spend the weekend in town.
George Clinton presides over a sprawling, funky mess of a show, loud, carnivalesque, anarchic and more.
Chants lead into intense guitar solos, which lead into songs; scatology mixes with politics, and when it's over -- even after a few volcanic hours -- the music is always missed.
The show at the Ritz starts tonight at midnight; tickets are $22.
The show at Tramps will start on Sunday at 8 P.M.; tickets are $25.


Holocaust Museum Hailed as Sacred Debt to Dead
Nearly 50 years after the furnaces of Nazi Germany devoured their last victims, survivors and world leaders gathered beneath a bleak, disconsolate sky today to dedicate a museum chronicling man's descent into darkness and the indifference to evil that marked the era.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum was hailed not as the triumph of the human spirit over brutality or survival over genocide, but as a debt to the dead, a warning to future generations of the cost of detachment.


For Children
Queens Zoo
53-51 111th Street  Flushing Meadows-Corona Park  (718) 271-7761  Recommended for all ages
The first thing you come upon at the Queens Zoo is the marsh, where the large pond ripples with the activity of ducks, sandhill cranes, swans, herons, egrets and Canada geese.
The setting makes visitors feel as if they have stumbled into someone's woodsy, teeming backyard.
The zoo's mix of familiar and not-so-familiar animals indigenous to North America make it a comfortable yet exotic visit.


Kendall Emerson, 86, Professor of Medicine
Dr.
Kendall Emerson Jr., clinical professor of medicine emeritus at Harvard University, died on Tuesday at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 86.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.
A native of Worcester, Mass., Professor Emerson graduated from Yale University in 1929 and received his M.D. from Harvard in 1933.
As a young doctor at Johns Hopkins Hospital and Medical School, he conducted research on sulfonamide drugs under Prof.
E.
K.
Marshall and on Addison's disease and adrenal-gland therapy under Dr.
George Thorn.


The Spoken Word
FILM LECTURE, Long Island University, Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Leander Sales and Barry Alexander Brown, film editors, discuss their craft as part of the Spike Lee 40 Acres Film Institute lecture series.
Tomorrow at 11 A.M.
Admission: $25; $15 for students.
Information: (718) 858-9620.
POETRY READING, La Galleria/La Mama, 6 East First Street, East Village.
Edmund Pennant and Barry Wallenstein (with John Fisher, pianist) are to read from their work.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-2476.


Student Badly Hurt in Stabbing at Brooklyn High School
A 17-year-old student was stabbed in the chest yesterday in a dispute with another youth at George W. Wingate High School in Brooklyn, one of New York City's most troubled and violent schools, the police reported.
The assailant, also a student at Wingate, fled on foot.
The police said the victim, Nick Soogrim, of 2015 Foster Avenue, Flatbush, a sophomore who is a native of Trinidad, was stabbed at 3:15 P.M., an hour after dismissal, in a first-floor hallway of the school at 600 Kingston Avenue, at Rutland Road in Flatbush.
Witnesses said he chased the assailant outside, then returned to the school and collapsed.


Despite Big Settlement, Firm Feels Little Pinch
What happens to a law firm when it has to pay more than $50 million -- an eighth of its estimated annual revenue -- to settle a lawsuit by the Government in the savings and loan scandal?
In the case of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue of Cleveland, apparently not very much.


RENO WINS PRAISE AT SENATE HEARING
Attorney General Janet Reno was widely praised today by Democrats and Republicans in Congress for her handling of this week's assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex.
But Stephen E. Higgins, the official who approved the initial raid on the compound in February, came under heavy critical questioning on Capitol Hill, and some lawmakers said the future of his agency was now in doubt.


Merrill Lynch to Repay Clients It Shortchanged
Under the threat of action by the Securities and Exchange Commission, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $10 million to $15 million, plus interest, to tens of thousands of its customers who were shortchanged when they sold certain securities between 1972 and 1987.
Merrill Lynch erred when it calculated too low a price for some of its unit investment trusts, which consist of pools of bonds, usually corporate or municipal issues, that are bundled together and sold to investors in $1,000 units.
Investors who sold the units before maturity received too little because Merrill Lynch failed to include all of the interest that the trust had collected on bonds.


Dow Off 10.27 as Early Gains Wane
A Dow of 3,500, once tantalizingly close, evaded the stock market again yesterday.
After advancing sturdily and consistently by as much as 31 points in early afternoon trading, the Dow Jones industrial average fell in the last few minutes of the session, closing down 10.27 points, to 3,429.17.
Trading volume was relatively heavy, and other major indexes closed down as well, further reinforcing market pessimists.


Review/Film; Pseudonym Comes to Life in a Stephen King Tale
The scene is an operating room, the patient a teen-age boy who has been suffering terrible headaches.
It's a tense moment as the surgeon removes a portion of the skull to reveal the cause of the problem: embedded in the boy's brain are an eye and two fully developed teeth, one of which has a slight cavity.
The attending nurse screams.
"Hilary," someone shouts, "remember where you are!"
Hilary doesn't know it, but she's up to her armpits in Stephen King territory.
It seems that the eye and the teeth are all that remain of the patient's undeveloped twin, absorbed by the stronger fetus when the two were in their mother's womb.


Oksana Baiul: Orphan at 13 and Champion at 15
Oksana Baiul cannot talk about the disappearance of her father, the death of her mother, or the years of uncertainty.
When she tries, fat tears run from her blue eyes and Baiul can only shake her head.
"Why?" she asked, slumped on the sofa of a hotel suite. "It is all in the past."


Standoff for Muslim Enclave in Bosnia
A tense standoff continued today in the Muslim enclave of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia, with Serbian nationalist commanders claiming that United Nations troops had made "a farce" of their pledge to disarm the town's Muslim defenders, collecting only limited numbers of old weapons and allowing thousands of Muslim soldiers to retain their arms.
At one point today, Serbian commanders hinted that they might attack the town and its United Nations defenders, but at nightfall Canadian officers serving in the 145-man United Nations military contingent reported that the town and its immediate vicinity were mostly quiet.


The Art Market
Double Dutch
The Metropolitan Museum of Art came
this
close to making an important purchase recently.
The museum reached an agreement several weeks ago, people in the art world say, to pay $2.3 million for an 18th-century still life of flowers by the Dutch painter Jan van Huysum.
The painting had hung for decades at Sudeley Castle, a stately home in Gloucestershire, England, owned by Lord and Lady Ashcombe.
But at the last minute, in a move that surprised many experts, the Metropolitan changed its mind.


The Reinvention of a Shopping Mall
WITH the words "Born to Shop" printed across her pink pullover, 3-year-old Hillary Carter gazed upward from her stroller at the fountain shooting jets of water 30 feet into the air.
Her mother, Susan, in matching pink pullover and looking a little dazed, said, "I think I'm lost. I don't recognize this place."


Art in Review
Dorothy Norman  International Center Of Photography 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street Through June 27
Over the years, Dorothy Norman, who is now 88, has pursued many projects as an editor, writer and champion of liberal causes.
But she is probably still best known as the assistant and companion of Alfred Stieglitz, the photographer and impresario of Modernist art, in the two decades before his death in 1946.


Review/Theater: Tommy; Capturing Rock-and-Roll and the Passions of 1969
THE Broadway musical has never been the same since rock-and-roll stole its audience and threw it into an identity crisis.
For three decades, from the moment "Meet the Beatles" usurped the supremacy of such Broadway pop as "Hello, Dolly!," the commercial theater has desperately tried to win back the Young (without alienating their elders) by watering down rock music, simulating rock music and ripping off rock music.
A result has been a few scattered hits over the years, typified by "Hair" and "Jesus Christ, Superstar," most of which have tamed the rock-and-roll revolution rather than spread it throughout Times Square.
Until now.


In Southern Africa, Rains' Return Averts Famine
After the worst drought this century ravaged much of southeastern Africa, the first rains began to fall here last November.
Nzombe Munyoro and his wife were so happy they just stood in their empty parched fields and let the water soak them.
And when month after month the rains kept coming, the 54-year-old farmer, who had lost his 18 cattle to starvation and had not even seen seeds sprout in his fields for over a year, planted maize and cotton and watched it grow, finally convinced his family would survive.
In Zimbabwe, one of the countries hardest hit by the drought, the advent of this year's wet season brought more than just a sigh of relief from farmers, cattle ranchers, businessmen and Government officials.
After the year-long drought, which required the importation of millions of tons of food for most of East and Southern Africa, the rain in this largely agricultural country was greeted almost as a miracle, a reprieve from the brink of disaster.


Allstate Plans 25% Cut of Home Policies in Florida
Florida insurance officials said yesterday that they had been notified by the Allstate Insurance Company that it plans not to renew homeowners' policies for about 25 percent of its customers in the state and that it plans rate increases of 40 percent or more.
Allstate and other insurers are cutting back on coverage and raising premiums on property owners in Florida to decrease their risks in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew.
Allstate, which said its latest move affects about 300,000 customers, had said earlier that it was going to cut back on homeowners and automobile coverage in the state by 10 percent.
Move Affects Stock Issue
The issue of how much risk Allstate carries is particularly important.
The company's parent, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, is planning an initial public offering of Allstate shares later this spring, and Allstate's loss exposure will be a significant factor for investors considering buying shares.


The Real Marian Anderson-D.A.R. Story
To the Editor:
I was sorry to read your April 9 obituary of Marian Anderson, but even sorrier that -- for what reason, I can't imagine -- you rehashed the story of the singer and the Daughters of the American Revolution.
I think it's time this tired old legend (for that's what it is) was laid to rest.
The D.A.R. did not deny Miss Anderson the use of Constitution Hall -- she sang there at least eight times.
On the night in question, April 9, 1939, the hall had for some time been annually booked by the National Symphony Orchestra, making it impossible for Miss Anderson to be accommodated.
Alternate choices were offered, but Sol Hurok had booked Miss Anderson very tightly that season, and she was unable to take advantage of them.


Art in Review
Jane Hammond
Jose Freire Fine Art  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
The method behind Jane Hammond's complex use of images is neatly summed up in one of the paintings in this impressive if somewhat unsatisfying show.
In it, a young woman in a bathing suit (the body is Esther Williams's; the face is the artist's, copied from a portrait done by a street painter) climbs out of a swimming pool in which bob a dozen or so unlikely looking male heads: clowns, comic-strip characters, phrenological models and so on.
Above them all float two cartoon balloons full of numbers.


Review/Film; Dialing 911? Don't Bother
"Who's the Man?" is a genial but slow-moving vehicle for Ed Lover and Doctor Dre, hosts of the daily version of "Yo! MTV Raps." Using their familiar names, they appear as two hapless Harlem barbers who are talked into a career change and become rookies on the police force.
Thanks to a collective brainstorm, they pass the entrance exam by answering A-B-R-A-C-A-D-A-B-R-A to a series of multiple-choice questions.
Once in uniform, they amaze their old friends, whose disbelieving cries of "You the man?" help to set up the film's title.
These new recruits don't take their work very seriously.
The stars have a strong, relaxed presence and remain a sullenly funny couple of losers, with each actor the butt of a running joke (about Ed Lover's failures with women and Doctor Dre's prodigious weight).
Unfortunately, the film insists on a coherent story, losing its rambling, jokey tone to a predictable detective plot that centers on the murder of a beloved neighborhood barber (Jim Moody), whose fate is linked to the attendant issue of gentrification.


For Knicks, It's 80 Down And 2 or 3 Scenarios to Go
Pat Riley was asked whether he had begun thinking about Sunday's game against the Chicago Bulls.
"We play Friday," Riley said succinctly. "In Philly."
Riley's point was understood.
He does not want the Knicks (58-22) to look past tonight's game against the Philadelphia 76ers.
And he does not want them to give up the driver's seat in the race for the best record in the Eastern Conference.


Mexico City Journal; Loved Clown Exits Down Memory-Filled Streets
After midnight, culture officials had said, the wake for Cantinflas was to be private: family, old friends and invited guests only.
But the line of people waiting to say goodbye was still almost four blocks long.
It was the second of three wakes, really, sandwiched between one on Wednesday where President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and other important people stood guard at the comic actor's coffin and another today in the marble foyer of the Palace of Fine Arts.
Tens of thousands of Mexicans filed by, and the time was still somehow short.


Abroad at Home; After the Buck Stops
"The buck stops with me," Attorney General Janet Reno said after the Waco disaster.
She projected a plain, earthy responsibility that struck the right note with the public.
There was no official defensiveness or air of superior knowledge.
But what exactly does it mean to say "The buck stops with me"?
In Japan, the person who takes responsibility for a failure resigns.
The head of the airline whose plane crashes did not himself misdirect it, but in a hierarchical culture he takes the fault as his own.


Black State Troopers Plan To File a Bias Complaint
A lawyer for six New Jersey state troopers said today that she would file a Federal complaint on Friday that alleges systematic racial hostility, humiliation and job discrimination against black officers.
The lawyer, Renee Steinhagen of Newark, said she would submit a two-page memorandum to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission here seeking a broad investigation into "policies, patterns, practices and activities which have resulted in disproportionate adverse treatment of persons who are black."


The Holocaust Remembered
The new Holocaust Memorial Museum was dedicated in Washington yesterday; so America, being America, is all tangled up in debate.
Should there be a Holocaust museum in the United States?
Couldn't it cheapen or distort this horrific chapter in history?
Should it focus on the extermination of Jews?
Should it even
be
?
Let the debate continue.
But let it not obscure and confuse.
Too much hair-splitting could obliterate the point of what this and all other memorials to inhumanity are about -- absolute evil.
A Holocaust Museum teaches about evil; it tells those who don't know, or who do not want to know, how people -- weak, ignorant, remarkably unremarkable people led by amoral, twisted demagogues -- tortured, starved, gassed, burned and otherwise murdered millions of people.
Because of their religion and ethnic identity.


Lotus Net Down 41% In Quarter
When the Lotus Development Corporation announced a 41 percent earnings decline yesterday, the news may have said as much about the state of the personal computer software market as it did about the company's finances.
Lotus, despite having sold more desktop spreadsheet software in the last decade than any other company, is struggling to catch up with the personal computer world's rush to the Windows version of the DOS operating system developed by the Microsoft Corporation.
Lotus built its business on the 1-2-3 spreadsheet software that worked with Microsoft's older DOS operating system, which was once the standard for personal computers but has quickly given way to Windows.


Russian Official Links Defense Chief to Illegality
Just three days before a referendum on Boris N. Yeltsin's performance as Russia's President, Russia's top law enforcement officer today accused Mr.
Yeltsin's Defense Minister of involvement in the illegal sale of military property in the former East Germany.
The charges against Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev were made by Valentin G. Stepankov, the Procurator General of Russia, whose job is roughly that of an attorney general in the United States.
They came only days after Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, who has broken with Mr.
Yeltsin, accused various Yeltsin officials of corruption.


At the Bar; With violence invading the courtrooms, Oklahoma weighs letting judges pack pistols.
Some judges undoubtedly carried guns when Oklahoma was a territory.
Now the Oklahoma House of Representatives has passed a bill that would let them pack pistols again.
But this is not a story about the Wild West revisited.
It is about how the Wild West has seemed to encompass the entire country.
Once upon a time, the thought of judges with pistols under their robes would have been shocking.
Any proposal authorizing it would have been hotly debated and intensely publicized.


Market Place; Nintendo's Dominance in Games May Be Waning
The game may finally be over for Nintendo, which reignited the video game boom in the 1980's and used it to become one of the most profitable companies in Japan.
That, at least, is the view of a growing number of analysts, including some longtime supporters of the Nintendo Company who are suddenly switching their recommendations on the company's stock from "buy" to "sell."


Books of The Times; Please, Just Don't Tell Me What to Say or Think or Write
Kindly Inquisitors
The New Attacks  on Free Thought
By Jonathan Rauch
178 pages. The University of Chicago Press. $17.95.
The "Kindly Inquisitors" in Jonathan Rauch's fiercely argued new book are the anti-bigotry and anti-hate speech advocates who have recently begun to call for rules and regulations outlawing verbal harassment and restricting the spread of offensive words and ideas.


INSIDE
U.S. Role in Nuclear Issue
The United States offered to take part in talks to resolve North Korea's refusal to abide by an international treaty on nuclear weapons.
Page A10.
Lawmakers Support Reno
Attorney General Janet Reno was praised in Congress for her handling of the assault on the cult compound in Texas, but the agency involved in the initial raid is under fire.
Page A20.
Germany Cuts Interest Rates
The German central bank again lowered two key interest rates amid signs that Germany's recession had worsened substantially.
Page D1.
Italian Premier Resigns
Prime Minister Giuliano Amato of Italy formally resigned, opening what is likely to be intense political competition over a successor.
Page A9.
Holtzman's Bank Got Job
As the New York City Comptroller was renegotiating a loan, her office recommended a branch of the bank to become a bond underwriter.
Page B1.
Ozone Loss Goes On
The atmospheric ozone layer declined this year in the Northern Hemisphere, scientists say, but the effect may not last.
Page A24.


Yesss . . . and It Counts: Albert's Double Duty
Two hours before Wednesday night's New York Knicks-New Jersey Nets game, MSG Network's Marv Albert and John Andariese sat in a conference room in Madison Square Garden ripping the sophomoric four-man weave executed Tuesday by the Miami Heat against the Knicks on the childish orders of Heat Coach Kevin Loughery.
"Stupid," said Albert, who during the cablecast of the game showed an uncharacteristic lack of humor about the incident.
"Unprofessional."
"Terrible," Andariese said. "Very serious."


2 Bodies Found in Ohio Prison Debris
State troopers threading their way through a possibly booby-trapped cell block discovered the bodies of two more inmates today at Ohio's maximum security prison as state officials organized investigations into 11 days of rioting that left nine prisoners and a guard dead.
Niki Z. Schwartz, the Cleveland lawyer whose role as legal adviser to the more than 400 rioting inmates has been credited with helping end the siege on Wednesday, said he was not certain how he would monitor future compliance by the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Corrections to the 21 demands it had agreed to in negotiations with inmates.


A Book as Honest As the Game Is Long
So we went to Shea, Sam and I, because he read The Book.
I was pleased.
A 24-year-old rocker who watches too much sports on TV.
A whole book.
In the big inning was the Word.
Could lead to Proust.
"I'm past Proust," said Sam, using my binoculars to scan the baseball writers interviewing one another behind the batting cage.
"I'm into Klapisch. You know him?"


CHRONICLE
ELLEN V. FUTTER was a senior at Barnard College in 1971, when the Women's Center was formed there, "very much a part of the emerging women's movement that affected my generation of students profoundly," she recalled yesterday.
Now, Ms.
Futter is president of the college, and this evening she will be among 250 people who will gather to toast the center, now called the Barnard Center for Research on Women, at a dinner on the campus.


DELTA AIR LINES INC. (N)
Delta Air Lines reported a wider-than-expected loss of $133.9 million yesterday for its third quarter, which it attributed largely to a restructuring charge related to the grounding of 21 planes.
Excluding the charge, Delta, the nation's third-largest airline, lost $81.7 million, which was more than analysts had expected.
Delta executives said they were encouraged by certain results in the quarter, in which revenue per available seat mile rose 3 percent from a year earlier.


Look Who's Criticizing Israel Nowadays; Condone No Cruelty
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal, in his column of April 13, heaps praise on my book "Cruelty and Silence" while completely misunderstanding its central point.
No cruelties on one side of a ledger can be used to condone cruelty on the other.
The harsh and brutal realities of Israeli occupation on the West Bank are not justified by the deaths of all those Arabs at the hands of their own dictators.
Pointing to an external threat as a reason for ignoring the injustices being perpetrated by those with whom one identifies -- which is what Mr.
Rosenthal does -- is the very logic employed in the Arab world that I criticize sharply in my book.


Retail Official Quits
John J. Schultz, executive director and president of the retail services division of the National Retail Federation, the nation's largest retail trade association, has resigned effective April 30.
Mr.
Schultz, who has held the position for three years, said in a statement that he was resigning to pursue other career interests, but he did not disclose them.


Indonesian Agency Selects Foote Cone
The Indonesian Tourism Promotion Board said yesterday that it had named Foote, Cone &amp; Belding International as the first agency to handle its worldwide account, with billings estimated by the agency at $100 million, over a three-year period.
Foote Cone in Jakarta, Indonesia, with assistance from the agency's other offices, will handle the daily management of the campaign, which will highlight Indonesia's 50th anniversary as an independent republic in 1995.


Bulls Just Stay in Step In East's Pas de Deux
It was like watching old home movies at Chicago Stadium tonight, with the Detroit Pistons here to block the Bulls' collision course with the Knicks, while making what figured to be their final playoff stand.
Neither plan worked, though the Pistons came frighteningly close, as the Bulls blew a 13-point fourth-quarter lead and had to escape the aging former two-time champions in overtime, 109-103, behind, who else, Michael Jordan.
"You don't count that team out until they're out," Bulls Coach Phil Jackson said of the Pistons.


Andries P. Treurnicht, 72, Leader Of Hard-Line Pro-Apartheid Party
Andries P. Treurnicht, the adamant advocate of apartheid who founded South Africa's Conservative Party, died yesterday at a hospital in Cape Town.
He was 72.
He died after heart bypass surgery, said the party's chief whip, Frank le Roux.


Head Agent Is Haunted, but Unbowed
Bristling at suggestions that the authorities lost patience in the standoff with the Branch Davidian cult, the agent in charge of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's operation said today that he would "live with the horror of this," but that he did not know what could have been done differently.
The agent, Jeffrey Jamar, sat in a Waco hotel room, reading a newspaper editorial that criticized the bureau's action as hasty.
He shook his head and tossed the newspaper across a table.


Transamerica in a Wide Staff Revamping
The Transamerica Corporation said today that it was integrating its operating and staff organizations, promoting a number of operating executives and moving them from Los Angeles to company headquarters in San Francisco.
The move follows the divestiture of Transamerica's property and casualty insurance business in an initial public offering earlier this week and completes the transformation from a conglomerate to a company with just two businesses: life insurance and financial services.


Infiniti Ad Role Goes To Jonathan Pryce
The voice of Michael Douglas will be replaced in Infiniti's commercials by the voice and face of Jonathan Pryce.
Mr.
Pryce, who starred in "Miss Saigon" and "Barbarians at the Gate," will present the new Infiniti Q45 luxury model in the Nissan campaign, which is scheduled to be introduced today.
The campaign is the first for Infiniti by Chiat/Day of Venice, Calif., since Infiniti dismissed Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos of Marina del Ray, Calif., last November.
Chiat/Day also handles the Nissan account.


Mortgage Rates at Low
Home mortgage rates fell this week to their lowest level in more than 20 years.
Builders expect the low rates will help a spring boom in home construction and sales.
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, known as Freddie Mac, said that its latest mortgage market survey found that the average rate for a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage was 7.38 percent.
The rate was 8.85 percent a year earlier.
The 7.38 percent rate is the lowest since Aug. 4, 1972, when rates for the 30-year mortgage averaged 7.35 percent.
The Freddie Mac survey found that the average for a 30-year adjustable-rate mortgage fell to 4.64 percent this week and that the average for a 15-year fixed-rate mortgage fell to 6.86 percent -- both all-time lows.


People
*
Livingston (Tony) Platt was named executive vice president and creative director at the Stenrich Group, Glen Allen, Va., succeeding Joe Krueger, who left to join Response Marketing, Richmond, in a similar capacity.
Mr.
Platt was previously the president of the National Direct Marketing Corporation, Newport Beach, Calif. *
Russell G. Finley was named publisher at Inside Media magazine, New York, succeeding Ellen Flahive, who left to become advertising sales director at Parade magazine, New York.
Mr.
Finley was previously senior vice president and director of media and marketing services at Emmerling Post Advertising, New York.


TEXACO INC. (N)
Texaco Inc. drew on several elements for the improvement in net income that it reported yesterday for the quarter, including higher prices for natural gas and crude oil in the United States; wider profit margins in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and Asia, and lower operating costs over all.
Weak gasoline markets on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts depressed refining profits, and chemical operations also slumped.
Alfred C. DeCrane, chairman and chief executive, said demand for gasoline and other refined products remained weak in many parts of the industrial world.


Not All Bankruptcies End in Failure
To the Editor:
Re "Critics of Bankruptcy Law See Inefficency and Waste" (front page, April 12): Chapter 11 is now used for many different purposes, with varying success.
There have been glaring failures, like Eastern Airlines, which you mention.
But there have been successes as well, like AM International, Baldwin-United and Texaco.
The reforms of Chapter 11 that you discuss are designed with the failures in mind.
Their authors don't attempt to consider how the companies that have fared well in Chapter 11 would do under their schemes.
Too often, we fear, these companies would be sold off early in the process at a low price, depriving creditors of the return they get in successful Chapter 11's.


Ad executives hear an impassioned warning against selling brands solely on their price.
THE program for yesterday's general session of the 75th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies resembled nothing so much as auditions for a revival of "The Music Man" to play on Madison Avenue rather than Broadway.
The three speakers -- who seemed to be trying out for the Robert Preston role of Harold Hill, that consummate charismatic salesman -- alternately cajoled, flattered, provoked and exhorted the audience at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel here with rhythmic cadences and alliterative phrases.


Let Men Get a Chance at Home Careers
To the Editor:
The April 8 letters on Anna Quindlen's column about Take Our Daughters to Work Day seem to omit the facts that few fathers take their sons to work (for that matter, why don't mothers take their sons to work?) and that, though few of the mothers of the present generation of women worked outside the home, many of this generation work.
It also seems strange that some of the writers think it is impossible to have a strong self-image unless one indentures oneself to some wage slavery, rather than being the linchpin of a family.


Art in Review
'Drawing Into Film' 'Directors' Drawings'  Pace Gallery 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
A movie buff's delight, "Drawing Into Film" presents sketches and drawings that well-known directors, from Sergei Eisenstein and Orson Welles to David Lynch and Martin Scorsese, have made in preparing some of their most famous films.
Among the treats here are Federico Fellini's hilarious caricatures of bulbous women for his "City of Women" (1980), Tim Burton's pen-and-ink ghouls for "Beetlejuice" (1988) and two sketches by John Huston for "Moby-Dick" (1956), showing Ahab, crop in hand, riding the whale as if it were a stallion.


Sports of the Times; On Track and Off, Advancing a Stride at a Time
A COLD wind was rippling flags from somewhere beyond 33d Street, making Thursday at the relays even more raw than the very first Thursday, 15 years ago.
That was when the Penn Relays expanded to include an afternoon of events devoted entirely to females, giving high school girls and college women the chance to experience something they had only heard about from the boys and men -- the glory of Franklin Field when the flags ripple gently on a warm, spring afternoon.
O.K., so sometimes those flags are pushed out straight and the afternoon brings a post-winter freeze.
No matter.
The occasion is memorable enough that for those who usually compete away from the crowds, the setting is more important than the temperature.


A Museum Hall That Celebrates Human Evolution
FEW things are so endlessly fascinating as the human body: its beauty of form, its maze of intricate mechanisms, its evolutionary origins, its place in the animal world.
A new permanent exhibition opening today at the American Museum of Natural History celebrates the human body, and visitors will not be disappointed.
The new Hall of Human Biology and Evolution, combining spectacular dioramas with models, animated displays and lucid explanations, seems destined to become one of the most popular museum exhibitions New York City has seen.
Eight years and $6.7 million in the making, the hall brightens the intrinsic attraction of its subject with eye-catching technologies, including holograms, fiber optics and stereo-photographic reproduction of ice-age cave walls, among other things.


7 EGYPT MILITANTS SENTENCED TO DIE
In its first trial of Islamic militants charged with attacks on foreign tourists, an Egyptian military court today sentenced 7 of 49 defendents to death.
Seventeen of the men were acquitted, 3 were handed 25-year prison sentences and the others between 2 to 15 years at hard labor.


Sounds Around Town
Jews and Arabs
Bustan Abraham, Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street, (212) 864-5400.
The group Bustan Abraham, composed of Jews and Arabs from Israel, was founded two years ago and made its debut in June at the Israel International Arts Festival.
The eight musicians combine their diverse backgrounds as composers, soloists and leaders of ensembles in classical Middle Eastern and European music, American folk, jazz and flamenco into an original sound that blends Eastern and Western styles.
Their appearance at Symphony Space will be their American debut.
Show time is Sunday at 7:30 P.M.; tickets are $15.
From South India
Ranganayaki Rajagopalan, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 545-7536.
A South Indian musician making her first New York appearance, Ranganayaki Rajagopalan is a virtuoso of the veena, a multi-stringed instrument for solos and accompaniment.
The principal disciple of Karalkudi Sambasiva, a legendary South Indian musician, she is a leading exponent of the traditional Karalkudi style.
She is to be accompanied by David Nelson on the mrdangam, a double-headed, barrel-shaped drum.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $12.


Review/Opera; 'Iphigenie en Tauride' at the Manhattan School of Music
The matters at stake in many operas are not only what happens to the characters, but also what happens to the nature of opera itself; esthetic battles have accompanied staged ones.
One of the masters of both forms of conflict was Christoph Willibald Gluck, whose 1779 opera "Iphigenie en Tauride" was performed on Wednesday night at the Manhattan School of Music.
This production, directed by James Robinson, also yearns to take a role in contemporary debates about operatic presentation, though it does so with far less coherence than did Gluck.
Gluck's impact on the evolution of opera was immense, and he made the issues clear from the very beginning of this elegantly dramatic work.
He was opposed to the Italian style in which florid display of a singer's abilities could become an ornament to mythic tales.
He wished, in his words, to "restrict music to its true office of serving poetry by means of expression."


Secret Link To D'Amato Is Alleged
A Long Island military contractor turned to Armand P. D'Amato to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, after the Senator refused to help the company because it had failed to support his 1980 election bid, a former executive of the company testified today.
The former executive, Charles F. Gardner, is the Government's main witness against Armand D'Amato, who is on trial in Federal District Court here on charges of defrauding the military contractor, Unisys Corporation.


Germany Cuts Two Key Rates
Answering calls from France and elsewhere to try to stimulate the sagging European economy, the German central bank again lowered two of its key interest rates today amid signs that Germany's recession had worsened substantially in recent months.
Symbolically at least, the Bundesbank's rate cuts, the second round in about a month, amounted to a German gesture of economic solidarity with France, its most important European partner, whose new Government has been bringing down its own interest rates and calling for the Bundesbank to cut its rates further.


Young Hit Books, Not Ceiling, During His Demotion
Steve Young, demoted for 48 hours, has been reinstated as the 49ers starting quarterback.
It is not the textbook way to treat the league's reigning most valuable player, but Young fortunately had a sizable distraction both those days: law school exams.
"My head was in the books," said Young, who needs 14 more credits at Brigham Young University and to pass a bar exam to become a lawyer.


12 IN STATE DEPT. ASK MILITARY MOVE AGAINST THE SERBS
In an unusual revolt against American policy in the Balkans, the State Department's top experts on the Balkans have sent Secretary of State Warren Christopher an impassioned letter that calls Western diplomacy a failure and recommends military action against the Serbs.
The experts, career diplomats serving in Washington, said in a petition to Mr.
Christopher that the United States had a moral obligation to save the Muslims from "genocide" at the hands of Serbian nationalist forces in Bosnia.


Mr. Smith, Independent of Ohio, Enters N.F.L. Draft
Robert Smith. The name evokes intense emotions and opinions here in Buckeyes land.
Take your pick.


U.S. Agrees to Discuss Arms Directly With North Korea
Bowing to Chinese entreaties, the United States offered today for the first time to take part in high-level talks with North Korea to help resolve a crisis caused by North Korea's refusal to honor a treaty on nuclear weapons.
The offer, a substantial easing of the Administration's stance, was made largely at the behest of China, officials said.
Until now, the Administration had urged that the standoff be resolved by the United Nations, and had warned of sanctions against North Korea.


Officers Cleared in Slaying of Fleeing Man
A Manhattan grand jury has voted not to indict two police officers in the fatal shooting of an armed man who ran from the scene of a brawl outside a 24-hour diner last month, the Manhattan District Attorney's office said yesterday.
The man, Bekim Ahmeti, 20, of 83 Continental Place in Mariners Harbor on Staten Island, was struck by four bullets -- one in the hand and three in the back of his body -- as he ran from the front of the Moonstruck Diner at 23d Street and Ninth Avenue in Manhattan at 5 A.M.
March 20.


Review/Film; Love Recaptured, Far From the Alaskan Tundra
Even by Mr.
Ward's own high standards in the area of idiosyncrasy, this is a daringly peculiar tale.
With its many recurring motifs and symbolic elements -- maps, flames, flying machines -- "Map of the Human Heart" surely sounds fascinating, at least on paper.
It tells of Avik (Jason Scott Lee), who is first seen in 1965 as a dissipated wreck living on the fringes of an Alaskan oil settlement and telling his story to a stranger named Clark (John Cusack).
The narrative moves backward to 1931, when Avik is a boy (Robert Joamie) bouncing on an Eskimo-style trampoline.
As he hurls himself skyward, a biplane appears.
"Every time Avik is thrown up in the sky, he brings down an airplane," someone later says.


U.S. Examining Ways to Protect Nuclear Plants Against Terrorists
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that it had begun analyzing potential precautions to protect reactors against a truck-bomb attack like the one at the World Trade Center two months ago.
But commission members said they were concerned that the cost would be very high at some plants, and that a new requirement for defenses against truck or car bombs would lead to additional requirements to protect against bombs in boats and airplanes.


What Could Be Better Than Pure Muscle Power?


Review/Theater; Temple Of Dendur As Setting For Noh
In a stunning collaboration between theater and architecture and between diverse cultures over a period of centuries, the Temple of Dendur is being used as an environment for the presentation of Noh drama.
The special three-performance series, which began on Thursday and ends this evening, is a remarkable event for both the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Japanese theater.
In previous engagements in New York, Noh has been seen on a traditional proscenium or concert stage.
Performed in the open on a raised platform in front of this Egyptian temple (built in the first century B.C.), the plays gain theatrical and historical relevance.
What might have seemed exotic turns out to be the most natural linkage.
In this setting, the Kanze Noh Theater conjures a feeling close to Noh's spiritual source in the 14th and 15th centuries when plays were performed at shrines.


Heads Bowed to a Mighty (and Fickle) Mother Nature


Review/City Ballet; A 'Sleeping Beauty' Fast and Trim
By opening its spring season at the New York State Theater on Thursday night with "The Sleeping Beauty," the New York City Ballet simultaneously honored the past, faced the future and proudly lived in its own special artistic present.
"The Sleeping Beauty," which is blessed with a sumptuous score by Tchaikovsky, received its premiere in St.
Petersburg in 1890.
It is widely considered to be the masterpiece of Marius Petipa, the choreographer who dominated 19th-century Russian ballet and was responsible for shaping Russian Classical style.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the relationship between the New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, and Fleet Bank, which lent her Senate campaign $450,000 in August, misstated the form of the city's announcement of a bond issuance that involved institutions including Fleet Securities.
Ms.
Holtzman was quoted in a news release announcing the selection; no news conference was held.


CONTINENTAL AIRLINES HOLDINGS INC.
Continental Airlines Holdings, which is expected to emerge next week from bankruptcy protection, reported a first-quarter loss of $109.5 million yesterday.
The carrier added that its operating loss was $55.2 million in the quarter.
That compares with an operating loss of $3.7 million a year earlier, when the company posted net income of $17.4 million.


Observer; Could Be A Long Season
President Clinton's bad week at the Capitol brings to mind Casey Stengel, Franklin Roosevelt and Lyndon Johnson.
"Can't anybody here play this game?" asked Stengel when he was put in charge of a major league baseball team on which nobody could.
It was the New York Mets, a brand-new expansion team, that provoked Stengel's cry of anguish.
The Clinton Administration is also brand-new.
What's worse, it is beginning to look like a typical baseball expansion team.


EXXON CORP. (N)
The Exxon Corporation reported yesterday that net income for the quarter declined slightly but that earnings from operations were unchanged.
Like Texaco and Amoco, which reported gains in operating income earlier this week, Exxon said that lower operating costs helped its operating earnings.
The companies were among several oil giants that reduced employment and pared operations in North America last year.


Air Strikes? Not Yet.
The Bosnian situation is critical, the peace process remains stalled and opportunities for reaching agreement are receding.
The world is horrified by the scenes of helpless refugees and the evidence of mass killings and forced expulsions.
As frustration mounts in America and elsewhere, President Clinton is reviewing his policy and is under intense pressure -- even from State Department officers -- to take other steps, including military strikes.
While it is important to keep military choices under review, we need a clear idea where they lead and what they will accomplish.
The Administration has correctly ruled out unilateral deployment of U.S. ground forces.
Such action has little public support.
Because we can't resolve the crisis alone, we have been committed to a multinational approach.
But action on that front has been slow and halting.
Today, we would not be able to obtain U.N.
Security Council approval for any international military operation to force a settlement.


No Headline
We have no quarrel with the music in the productions in Europe.
It's what you have to look at: the costuming, the staging.
I'm not hidebound to the 19th century, but we have a hard time with Mozart in blue jeans or Wagner as heavy metal. -- DAVID JOHNSTON, an Austrian visiting New York to attend the "Ring" cycle at the Met.  [ 1:3. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7 CLINTON SPEAKS OF AIR STRIKES
President Clinton, explaining that other nations are also reassessing their options, said that he was giving "serious consideration" to air strikes against Serbian positions in Bosnia.
If there is to be any intervention, air strikes are likely to be most acceptable to the allies.  1 OFFERING SERBS A COMPROMISE
In a new twist to the Vance-Owen peace plan for Bosnia, Bosnian Serbs who rejected the original plan are being offered a wedge of territory that would connect areas populated by ethnic Serbs.  6 TRYING TO HEAL THE HOPELESS
Operating without experience, without anesthesia, without blood supplies and without rest, a 32-year-old pathologist became a practiced surgeon in Bosnia's killing fields.
He was the only hope of the dying, and after a brief respite from the horrors, he is returning.  6 A VOTE FOR ERITREA
Residents of the region of Ethiopia known as Eritrea are making a bid for secession, and analysts say that the cohesiveness of the people and their organized approach adds up to what should be an overwhelming victory.  3 FROM COMRADE TO OPPONENT
Aleksandr V. Rutskoi has been transformed from President Yeltsin's running mate to the leader of the forces who oppose him.  4 WORLD BANK TO AID RUSSIA
The World Bank has agreed to help finance a $1 billion project to increase Russia's oil output by reopening 1,200 oil wells that have been closed because of a lack of parts, inadequate maintenance and other problems.  4 CONTROL FOR PALESTINIANS
Israel said it would offer Palestinians greater control over their lives, including their own police force, an announcement pounced upon by the right-wing opposition and by Jewish settlers in the territories.  3 Dili Journal: Living in fear.  2 National 8-11 THE TAILHOOK REPORT
A Pentagon report on the notorious Tailhook convention in 1991 gives a detailed account of drinking, debauchery and sexual abuse and says that as many as 175 officers may be punished.  1 A JURY'S AGONY
The jurors deciding the fate of the four Los Angeles police officers in the Rodney King beating recall a grueling week of deliberations.  1 RISE IN DRUG PROBLEM
Even as casual drug use has dropped, the latest Government statistics on emergency room visits indicate a sharp rise in drug problems among heavy users, especially abusers of heroin.  8 BODIES WITHOUT NAMES
For medical workers, a grisly task: trying to identify the bodies found in the Branch Davidian compound.
The fire and its intense heat have made the job difficult.  8 LAW ON DOMESTIC WORKERS
President Clinton says he will seek to amend the Social Security tax law that doomed Zoe Baird's nomination as Attorney General.  8 MARCHING WITH A FROWN
Some homosexuals are voicing disappointment that Clinton will not appear via videotape or audio hook-ups at the gay-rights march in Washington.  10 A TIME OF TRIUMPH
Torie Osborn, the executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, is flying high after brokering a meeting between the President and leaders of national homosexual groups.  10 Should reporters be allowed to participate in the march?  10 CAMPAIGN FINANCE PACKAGE
Clinton is expected to announce a campaign finance package next week that calls for Government financing of Congressional races.
But officials acknowledge that the plan is not as ambitious as Clinton promised in his Presidential campaign.  8 Religion Notes: When is a cult a cult?  11  Metro Digest 25 SENTENCES IN ABUSE CASE
Three Glen Ridge, N.J., men who were found guilty of sexually assaulting a retarded schoolmate were sentenced to serve time in a campuslike complex for youthful offenders.
Though they were sentenced to up to 15 years, they could be released after as little as 22 months.
And the three were allowed to remain free on bail until exhausting their legal appeals, which could take years.  1 WEB OF DECEIT IN YONKERS
The Yonkers Police Department dismissed two officers for fabricating a story about an assault on an officer by a black man, when he was actually beaten by a fellow officer.
Three other officers who played a part in the episode were suspended and a sixth resigned.
The Westchester County District Attorney's office is investigating for the possibility of criminal violations.  1 4 NIGHTS OF VALHALLA
Hundreds of veteran Wagnerites have flocked to the Met this week from Germany, France, Japan and Indonesia to see the four-opera cycle of Wagner's "Ring of the Nibelung." The Metropolitan Opera is presenting "The Ring" the way Wagner wanted: all in the same week.  1 Obituaries 28-29 CESAR CHAVEZ IS DEAD
Cesar Chavez, the migrant worker who founded America's first successful union of farm workers, was found dead in San Luis, Ariz.
He was 66.  1 Oliver R. Tambo, former president of the African National Congress.  1 Business Digest 37 Arts/Entertainment 13-17 Debated Lincolniana is sold.  13 Theater: Noh at Met Museum.  13 Dance: "The Sleeping Beauty" 13 Japanese company in debut.  17 Sports 30-34 Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23 Editorials Russia's reform, on the line.
What about the first Waco raid?
The face of the gay march.
Italy's voting system flunks.
Letters Russell Baker: Could be a long season.
Melor Sturua: Russia will win if neither side does.
Lee H. Hamilton: Air strikes?
Not yet.
Jeff Hall: My brother's killer.


Emergency Hospital Visits Rise Among Drug Abusers
Though casual drug use in America has been dropping, the latest Government statistics on emergency-room visits show that problems among the heaviest users have risen to record levels.
The emergency-room statistics released yesterday show that drugs are taking an increasing toll on poor inner-city neighborhoods whose hospital emergency rooms are already stretched to the limit.
They also show that heroin is causing an increasing proportion of the health problems that bring people to the hospital.


3 Varied Investments With No Sales Charge
The new Benham Utilities Income Fund is designed to provide capital growth and monthly income from high-paying utilities stocks plus some bonds.
The fund yields a hefty 4.52 percent, but should be held only by people who plan to invest for five years or more.
Because of the heavy income component, share prices should fluctuate less than nondividend-paying stock funds.
But utilities are susceptible to inflation.
Benham is one of only a handful of no-load utilities funds.
Conservative stock fund investors might consider the new T. Rowe Price Dividend Growth fund, which invests mainly in high-quality dividend-paying stocks.
The fund, riding a trend toward conservative stock funds, differs from the Price Equity-Income and Growth-and-Income Funds by focusing more on dividend growth.
Companies with rising dividends tend to be more established.


Western-Style Campaigning for Russian Referendum


Yanks Come Unglued In Front of an Old Pal
The problem in Jim Abbott's first three starts had been run support.
The Yankees have scored only six during that span.
When Abbott took the mound tonight he did not think his infield defense would fail him, but he was wrong.
Never mind the frigid bats.
Tonight, Abbott could curse the forgettable gloves.
Clinging to a 3-2 lead in the seventh inning, Abbott saw a possible victory disappear when the Yankee infield disintegrated around him and failed to make two plays that produced three unearned runs and four over all.
The first miscue prevented Abbott from escaping with a lead and the second prevented him from even hanging on to a tie as the Seattle Mariners burst to a 6-3 victory at the Kingdome.


Yeltsin Foes Find an Ally in His Camp
Less than two years ago, casting around for a ticket-balancer in his run for the Russian presidency, Boris N. Yeltsin asked an Afghan War hero and reform Communist, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, to be his running mate.
Mr.
Rutskoi, Mr.
Yeltsin's third choice, has not proved to have been a wise one.
Long ignored by Mr.
Yeltsin and his inner circle, Mr.
Rutskoi has moved from being a nettlesome critic of economic change to being, in the run-up to the crucial referendum on Sunday, the chief spokesman for the opposition to Mr.
Yeltsin.


Mondavi Winery Offering
The Robert Mondavi Winery said today that it intended to go public with an initial offering of 3.7 million shares.
According to a registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the company will have about 13 million outstanding shares of common stock, giving the company a valuation of $169 million to $208 million if the deal is completed in the proposed range of $13 to $16 a share.


Science Tries to Restore Identities Erased by Fire
Cloaked in darkness, a refrigerated trailer truck bearing the remains of 40 Branch Davidians in body bags pulled up to the Tarrant County Medical Examiner's Office here Thursday night.
Workers in combat fatigues carried the bags inside, where forensic experts will try to identify the cult members and determine how they died.
But the experts here say that all the wonders of science may not provide answers as to the identity or cause of death of the victims, who were cremated in a fire hot enough to explode heads and teeth.
So far, none of the 44 bodies collected have been identified.


Cesar Chavez, 66, Organizer of Union For Migrants, Dies
Cesar Chavez, the migrant worker who emerged from the poverty of an agricultural valley in Arizona to found America's first successful union of farm workers, was found dead yesterday in San Luis, Ariz.
He was 66.
Mr.
Chavez, who lived in Keene, Calif., and was in Arizona on union business, died in his sleep, the local police said.
An autopsy is planned.


Travelers in Accord to Pay $80 Million to Pension Funds
In an aftershock from the collapse of the real estate market, the Travelers Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to pay more than $80 million to settle a lawsuit filed by pension funds over Travelers' management of a real estate investment account.
Travelers, based in Hartford, and several pension funds that brought suit against it have tentatively agreed that the $80 million will be paid to all the 140 pension funds that have interests in the account, the company said.
Some legal fees will also be reimbursed by Travelers.


Harris Promotes Executive to President
The Harris Corporation said yesterday that it had named Phillip W. Farmer president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Farmer, most recently executive vice president at Harris, was responsible for resuscitating its money-losing semiconductor business.


Nance Fractures Finger
The Cleveland Cavaliers' All-Star forward, LARRY NANCE, will miss the end of the regular season.
Nance, 34 years old, was examined yesterday at the Cleveland Clinic for a fractured left index finger broken during Wednesday night's 111-95 victory over Indiana.
The Cavaliers said Nance will be fitted for a splint he can wear while playing.
But Nance -- who is averaging 16.5 points and 8.7 rebounds in 77 games this season -- missed last night's game at Boston and will sit out the final regular-season game tomorrow against Philadelphia.
Nance's status for Cleveland's first two playoff games, to be held April 29 and May 1 at the Coliseum, is undetermined. (AP)


An Issue of Bonds From Albany Is Given Moody's Highest Rating
Saying that it was heartened by New York State's improved financial position, an important Wall Street credit agency today gave its highest rating on a relatively small, but closely monitored, portion of the state's debt.
The agency, Moody's Investors Service Inc., said that the improved rating, MIG1, the highest for the state since 1990, reflected the fact that New York ended the most recent fiscal year with a surplus of $671 million and that it was borrowing far less than in previous years to cover its spring expenses.
The higher ratings could translate into lower interest payments on the state's debt.


Armenia Has No Forces in Azerbaijan
To the Editor:
Two articles April 7 recklessly misrepresent the content and direction of statements made by Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher and the Security Council in response to a new outbreak of fighting in the Kelbajar district of the Republic of Azerbaijan.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article Saturday about pollution misstated the status of the Long Island Lighting Company's sulfur dioxide emission allowances.
Lilco and Amax Energy have entered into an option agreement for Amax to buy some of them.


Jeffries Warned of Unrest If Demoted, Official Recalls
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries of City College warned two college officials in 1991 that if they forced him to resign as chairman of the black studies department, they would face "massive community resistance that would make Crown Heights pale in comparison," one of the officials testified yesterday.
Jeffrey Rosen, dean of the social sciences division at City College, said that Dr.
Jeffries's response came during a meeting in which he and Robert Pfeffer, the college's provost, asked him to step down as chairman.


Transactions
American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Mike LaValliere, catcher, to a minor-league contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed James Austin, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Ignasiak, pitcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.


Judge Rules Zoning Code Can't Block Group Homes
In a ruling that could make it easier to set up group homes for handicapped people in residential neighborhoods on Long Island, a Federal judge has barred Babylon Town officials from shutting down a home for recovering alcoholics and addicts.
Judge Leonard D. Wexler of Federal District Court in Hauppauge ruled this week that Babylon zoning ordinances blocking the group home violated the Federal Fair Housing Act of 1988 by discriminating against handicapped people, a group that under the law includes recovering alcoholics and addicts.


A View of the Bosnia War From the Srebrenica Hospital's O.R.
Dr.
Nedret Mujkanovic never did more than assist in a surgery before he trudged for seven nights through miles of hostile, Serbian-held territory and walked into the hospital in the besieged Muslim town of Srebrenica last Aug. 5.
By the time Dr.
Mujkanovic, a pathologist by training, returned here in a United Nations helicopter Wednesday evening with the last of Srebrenica's wounded men, his surgical experience amounted to 1,390 operations, including 100 amputations carried out with no anesthetics and four Caesarean sections he learned how to perform by perusing a textbook.


It's a Table for 6 Owners
The new guys on baseball's block may be forming a bloc within the group of 28 major league club owners.
Before a meeting of all 28 owners today, the eighth in eight months, the six newest owners in the major leagues gathered for dinner Thursday to discuss issues confronting baseball.


Israel Set to Let Palestinians Have A Police Force and Other Powers
As the various parties prepared to resume Middle East peace talks in a few days, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said today that Israel would offer Palestinians greater control over their lives, including their own police force, even before agreement was reached on self-rule in the occupied territories.
Mr.
Peres's remarks on a Palestinian police force were swiftly denounced by the right-wing opposition and by Jewish settlers in the territories, some of whom said that the result would be to put guns in the hands of terrorists and then dress them in uniforms.


Treasures in the Attic: Stalking the Good Stuff
A TINPLATE Mickey Mouse was sold for the equivalent of $18,400 at Christie's in London this month, setting a world record for a Disney toy.
"A woman found the 1931 toy, which features Mickey as an organ grinder, in her attic two months ago," The Economist magazine reported.
Treasures in the attic.
It sounds like a dream, but items of value are not actually that rare, experts say.
The tough part is identifying them and getting an idea of their worth.


U.N. Agency Says Rise in TB Is Global Crisis
The World Health Organization today described a surge in tuberculosis as a global emergency and said more money was needed to curb the disease's spread.
Scientists at a conference here said that 9,000 people die worldwide from TB every day, and they predicted that the disease would kill more than 30 million people in the next decade unless better control programs were set up in the developing world.


Washington at Work; Gay Official Has the Look of Apple Pie and the Outlook of a Revolutionary
She looks a bit like Doris Day, the relentlessly upbeat, freckle-faced blonde of 1950's happy-talk movies.
But Torie Osborn, the executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, is closer to tougher cinematic heroines, like those played by Sigourney Weaver.
Intensely committed to the cause of gay and lesbian rights, the 42-year-old Ms.
Osborn is flying high after brokering a meeting between President Clinton and leaders of national gay and lesbian groups.
At one point during the meeting, Ms.
Osborn welcomed Mr.
Clinton to the "Gay 90's."


Q &amp; A
Returning Co-op Shares
Q Can we return shares in a co-op corporation and walk away by not paying monthly co-op fees?
There is no mortgage on the apartment.
MARION LOHMAN, Cranbury, N.J.
A Most proprietary leases for co-op apartments contain a provision that allows the shareholder to surrender the lease and be released from further liability.
Such a provision usually contains a date each year at which time this privilege can be exercised and provides a procedure that must be strictly followed.


Emil Synek, 89, Writer Who Fled From Prague
Emil Synek, a Czech author and playwright who opposed Hitler and Communism, died on April 12 at the Hopital Bichat in Paris.
He was 89 and lived in exile in Paris since 1947.
He died after a brief illness, said F. Malcolm Graff Jr., his son-in-law, in New York.


Eritreans Voting on Independence From Ethiopia
In what is expected to be a resounding yes for independence, residents of the region called Eritrea began voting today to secede from Ethiopia.
Although Eritrea's three million people have had de facto independence and a provisional government since the overthrow of the Marxist Government in Ethiopia in May 1991, this referendum represents the final legitimization of more than 30 years of separatist insurgency.


A 'Tommy' Record
The rock musical "Tommy," which opened on Thursday, broke a Broadway record yesterday.
At 5:15 P.M., ticket sales from the box office and from Tele-Charge, the phone-order service, went over the $396,709 day-after-opening total that was recorded last April by "Guys and Dolls." The day's total receipts for "Tommy," a representative of the Adrian Bryan Brown press office said at midnight, were $494,897.50.
The line at the St.
James Theater numbered between 60 and 80 people most of the day.


Gardner Museum Took More Than Money
To the Editor:
I read with sadness and dismay "How Mrs. Gardner's Museum Got That Way" (letter, April 10), E. M. Engelman's slighting and fantastic appraisal of Isabella Stewart Gardner and the peerless collection she assembled at Boston's Fenway Court.


Classical Music in Review
St. Paul Chamber Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Challenger to Florio Removed From Ballot
Secretary of State Daniel Dalton ruled today that John Budzash cannot run as a Democrat against Gov.
Jim Florio in the gubernatorial primary.
Mr.
Dalton, a Florio appointee, agreed with the administrative law judge who ruled earlier this week that Mr.
Budzash did not submit enough valid signatures from registered Democrats to get his name on the ballot.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about rabies in New York City included an erroneous location, supplied by the city Health Department, for the discovery of a rabid bat in Brooklyn.
It occurred at Brooklyn College, not Kingsborough Community College.


Executive Changes
BALLY GAMING INTERNATIONAL INC., Las Vegas, Nev., appointed Hans Kloss, managing director of the company's Bally Wulff subsidiary in Germany, to the additional position of president and chief operating officer.
R.
R.
DONNELLEY &amp; SONS CO., Chicago, named Janet Morrison Clarke senior vice president of United States manufacturing for its financial printing services group.


Penguins-Devils: Invincible vs. the Invisible
There is no disputing the superiority of the Penguins in their matchup with the Devils, who are on the brink of being swept in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
New Jersey has been found lacking in many areas, but none may be more telling than the lack of offense from the players the Devils have been counting on most.
Going into Game 3 of this Patrick Division series, even Tom Barrasso, the towering goaltender of the Penguins, had outscored the top two lines of the Devils.


Covering Gay Rights: Can Journalists Be Marchers?
The gay-rights march in Washington tomorrow has prompted many news organizations to re-examine the line between journalists' professional conduct and their private lives.
In preparation for the rally, many newspapers and television networks have reviewed or reissued their policies governing reporters' participation in activities with political overtones.


Not a Dunk, a Grand Slam


METRO DIGEST
15-YEAR TERMS FOR 3 IN GLEN RIDGE CASE
Three young men from Glen Ridge, N.J., who were found guilty of sexually assaulting a retarded schoolmate were sentenced to up to 15 years as youthful offenders.
They may remain free on bail until exhausting their legal appeals, which could take years.
Page 1.
OFFICERS INVENTED BLACK ASSAILANT
After a bloody fight sent a policeman to the hospital, a police radio alert sent officers hunting for a black assailant.
But the officer's wounds had been inflicted by a colleague, in a fistfight over who should bear the nuisance of writing the report on a burning car.
Page 1.
WAGNER, HIS WAY, PULLS FOREIGN FAITHFUL
Without having to walk through fire (which Wotan, the ruler of the gods, places around Brunnhilde in "Die Walkure") or climb mountains (as Donner, the god of thunder, does in "Das Rheingold"), hundreds of veteran Wagnerians have flocked to the Met this week from Germany, France, Japan and Indonesia, to see the first of two four-opera cycles the Met is presenting the way Wagner wanted: all in one week.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
LINKING CORRUPTION TO POLICE 'CULTURE'
Trying to address corruption as he faces what could be an attack on his Internal Affairs system by a mayoral panel, New York City's Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, is creating a committee for an unusual task: to explore how the "culture" of police work causes some officers to turn bad.
Page 27.
DINKINS STANDS BY HOLTZMAN'S BANK DEAL
Mayor Dinkins stood by the selection of Fleet Securities as a city bond underwriter, even though the City Comptroller's United States Senate campaign owed a quarter of a million dollars to the company's parent bank.
Page 27.
SCALPING ON CREDIT (OTHER PEOPLE'S)
Two Queens men were arrested Thursday night outside the Shubert Theater on West 44th Street, where "Crazy for You" is playing, and charged with ticket speculation -- better known as scalping -- with a twist.
The twist, according to investigators, was that the tickets -- $70,000 worth of them -- were purchased with pilfered credit cards or credit card numbers.
Page 27.
CCNY OFFICIAL RECALLS JEFFRIES WARNING
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries of City College told two college officials in 1991 that if they forced him to resign as chairman of the black studies department, they would face "massive community resistance that would make Crown Heights pale in comparison," one of the officials testified in a trial to determine if the City University of New York violated Dr.
Jeffries' First Amendement rights.
Page 26.
REGION
RULING PROTECTS L.I. GROUP HOME
In a ruling that could make it easier to open group homes for handicapped people in residential neighborhoods on Long Island, a Federal judge has barred Babylon officials from shutting down a home for recovering alcoholics and addicts in the hamlet of East Farmingdale.
Page 28.
RATING ON PART OF NEW YORK'S DEBT
Saying that it was heartened by New York State's improved financial position, an important Wall Street credit agency upgraded its rating on a relatively small, but closely monitored, portion of the state's debt.
Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Fast Time but a Losing Result for Keino  Bob Keino, a junior at Ridgewood High School in New Jersey and son of the legendary Kenyan runner Kip Keino, turned in one of the fastest schoolboy 1,600-meter splits at the Penn Relays yesterday in Philadelphia.
But his time of 4 minutes 8.2 seconds came in a losing effort as Ridgewood finished third in the high school boys' distance-medley championship at Franklin Field.
Starting in last place in the 15-school field, Keino made up over 100 meters on St.
Elizabeth of Jamaica, which won in 10:18.31.
Mepham of Bellmore, L.I., was second.
Vere Tech of Jamaica continued its mastery in the girls' championships with three titles: its eighth straight in the 1,600-meter in 3:42.58; its sixth in a row in the 3,200 in 9:00.76, and its fourth straight in the distance medley.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Bosnia Peace Plan Altered To Create Corridor for Serbs; BOSNIAN SEES COLLUSION
As Bosnian Government forces continued to battle Serbian and Croatian nationalist forces in different parts of the country today, the Bosnian President said there was growing evidence that Serbia and Croatia were colluding in an attempt to divide most of Bosnia and Herzegovina between them.
Alija Izetbegovic, the 68-year-old Muslim who heads the Sarajevo Government, spoke as he prepared for talks on Saturday with Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian president, in Zagreb, the Croatian capital.
Mr.
Izetbegovic said he intended to confront Mr.
Tudjman over the recent fighting between Croatian forces and the Muslim-led Bosnian Army in central Bosnia.


Investment In Carolco
Tele-Communications Inc. said today that as expected it would invest $90 million in ailing Carolco Pictures Inc. in return for rights to show the studio's movies on a pay-per-view basis.
The giant cable company will become the fifth company to invest in the studio, which has flirted with bankruptcy for some time.


Regulation on Sweeping Deserves Repeal
To the Editor:
Your April 14 report that Mayor David N. Dinkins has eased regulations on New York City businesses to sweep the streets within 18 inches of the curb in front of their stores also discusses the Mayor's new policy toward street vendors.
The Mayor's initiative, while certainly a move in the right direction, is just the first step in what is needed to help businesses survive and to protect them from being taxed out of existence.


Brooklyn Pupils Give Redistricting Failing Grade
A GROUP of seventh graders from a special-education school in Brooklyn returned home yesterday from Atlanta, where they met former President Jimmy Carter, learned about the glories of room service and picked up their $15,000 prize in a nationwide geography contest sponsored by American Express.
The youngsters, who attend Public School 370 in Brighton Beach but are from all over the borough, triumphed over entries from all over the country with a project that examined a City Council district whose boundaries were redrawn to provide minorities with a greater chance for representation.
Though the pupils phrased their findings slightly more circumspectly, what they concluded was that the redistricting was nutty and that building an ethnic power base had not produced neighborly common purpose.


Support for Police Is the Price of Civilization
To the Editor:
According to Mayor David N. Dinkins, crime is down in New York City (news article, April 6).
He often cites Federal Bureau of Investigation statistics to support him even after a cop is shot or some other particularly heinous crime has occurred.
I wonder why he is adding all kinds of extra security and alarms to City Hall.
Is he afraid that cops will storm City Hall again and he'll be overrun or taken hostage?


Wagnerites' 4 Nights of Valhalla at the Met
So far, David Johnston has spent 13 hours this week in Row G of the Grand Tier at the Metropolitan Opera, watching Wagner's "Ring of the Nibelung." He logged two and a half hours on Monday, five on Tuesday and five and a half on Thursday.
He faces another five and a half tonight at "Gotterdammerung."
For this marathon, he flew 4,000 miles from his home in Graz, Austria, which is only a couple of hours from Vienna and is not all that far from the opera house Wagner himself had built in Bayreuth, Germany.
This raises the question: Why go so far for operas he could attend there?


Somogyi Picks Rutgers
KRISTEN SOMOGYI, New Jersey's leading career scholastic scorer, is transferring from Virginia to Rutgers, said the Lady Knights' coach, THERESA GRENTZ.
Somogyi played in 31 games as freshman and averaged 4.0 points per game.
According to National Collegaite Atheltic Association rules, she will have to sit out the 1993-94 season, but will have three years of eligibility remaining.


I.B.M. Gives Adstar Storage Unit More Autonomy
The International Business Machines Corporation said today that it had established Adstar, its information storage unit, as a wholly owned subsidiary and named Ed Zschau, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur and a former United States Congressman, as the operation's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Zschau was also named a vice president of the parent company.
I.B.M. said the move was intended to give Adstar more autonomy, and analysts said the action would enable the unit to increase its sales to other computer manufacturers.
Based in San Jose, Adstar is the largest information-storage business in the world, with revenues of about $6 billion, but the vast majority of its sales have been to I.B.M.


Dinkins Sees No Conflict In Actions By Holtzman
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday stood by the decision to select Fleet Securities as a city bond underwriter, even though the City Comptroller's United States Senate campaign owed a quarter of a million dollars to the company's parent bank at the time.
The Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, who decides with the Mayor on the companies that will receive the city's bond underwriting business, has said that her deputy, Darcy Bradbury, recommended Fleet without consulting her, as is common practice in her office.
The Comptroller has said that she was unaware of the recommendation and Ms.
Bradbury has said she was unaware of the loan, which has been only partly repaid.


Bridge
For those who make guidelines for bridge players, the best rule is "never say never," even if that appears to invalidate itself.
There are indeed many "never" rules that are almost true.
An example in the area of opening leads is "never underlead an ace against a suit contract," and the exceptions are interesting.
One occurs when the leader has neither king, queen nor jack and hopes that dummy has the king.
If the leader's partner has the queen but not the jack, the declarer will have a guess and is likely to do the wrong thing.


Gold Shares Surge While Market Falls
The stock market continued its melancholy decline yesterday, its fifth losing session in a row.
Even the most notable gainers, the gold stocks, seemed to reflect some of the gloom.
Their rise indicated that many traders were bracing for political trouble in Moscow after tomorrow's referendum on President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.
Several gold-mining stocks rose to new highs during yesterday's trading.
Gold bullion also surged, with the spot price jumping $6.50 an ounce, to $346.50, its highest level since early October.  [ Page 48. ]


3 Are Sentenced to Youth Center Over Sex Abuse of Retarded Girl
Three Glen Ridge, N.J., men who were found guilty of sexually assaulting a retarded schoolmate were sentenced today to serve time in a campuslike complex for young offenders.
Though they were sentenced to up to 15 years, they could be released after as little as 22 months.
And the three were allowed to remain free on bail until exhausting their legal appeals, which could take years.


Suns' Johnson Injured
Phoenix Suns guard KEVIN JOHNSON will be sidelined an estimated two weeks with an injured left knee and likely will miss the first two games of the National Basketball Association playoffs.
Johnson hurt the knee during Thursday night's 115-114 victory at Portland.
Tests done yesterday showed Johnson has a first-degree sprain of the medial collateral ligament in his left knee.


Hearst May Prove to Be a Bulldog Beyond Compare
For the last 10 years, there has been but one standard by which running backs coming out of the University of Georgia are measured: Herschel Walker.
Lars Tate, Tim Worley and Rodney Hampton have all been held up to the Walker standard before entering the National Football League.
It's inescapable because Walker is still an icon at Georgia.


Dili Journal; A Voice, Often Silenced, Tells of East Timor's Fear
The Roman Catholic Bishop of East Timor says that the Indonesian Army routinely tortures political prisoners and that Government troops killed several people captured at the time of a November 1991 massacre, when soldiers gunned down scores of Timorese.
The Bishop, Carlos Ximenes Belo, said in an interview that "people are living in fear in East Timor," despite the Indonesian Government's insistence that the human rights situation in the province has improved.
Political prisoners are tortured by Indonesian troops "just like two plus two is four," he said.


World Bank to Help Russia Increase Its Oil Output
In one of the biggest Western efforts to assist Russia's oil industry, the World Bank announced today that it had reached an agreement to help finance a $1 billion project to increase Russia's oil output.
The World Bank said it would provide more than $500 million in loans for the plan, which aims to boost output by $1.5 billion a year by reopening 1,200 oil wells that have been closed because of a lack of spare parts, inadequate maintenance and other problems.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GERANT INDUSTRIES, Beverly Hills, Calif., purchased United Realty Group L.P., making the real estate limited partnership its fifth acquisition this year.
USG CORP.,Chicago, received approval for its Chapter 11 reorganization plan from a Federal bankruptcy judge.
Under the plan, which goes into effect on May 6, USG hopes to reduce its debt by $1.4 billion and annual interest requirements by $210 million.


Don't Teach Nature About Barrier Beaches; Beyond the Dunes
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's task force on coastal erosion is wrong in its conclusions on restoring Long Island's coastline (news article, April 14).
By its very use of the term "beach" protection it misses the point.
The areas needing protection lie well behind the devastated dunes.
They are the bays and shoreline of mainland Long Island.
Those who will be injured by this decision are taxpayers: business people and workers, homeowners and fishermen.


Proportional Representation Flunks
Methods of voting can bolster or undermine popular government, as the Italian electorate has learned to its dismay.
Italian elections have mostly been based on proportional representation, a system that guarantees minority parties legislative seats in proportion to their popular vote.
By contrast, other nations use a system in which the winner takes all, meaning those who finish second and third in a race for Congress or Parliament are just out of luck and office.
Proportional representation sounds like the ultimate in democracy -- no voice too small to be heard.
But its great defect is that it can spawn too many splinter parties.
It tends also to create a permanent class of power brokers, since national parties choose lists of candidates and winners owe nothing to their constituency, providing less accountability than in other systems.


CHRONICLE
It's the season to bestow honors -- for good works, for scientific discoveries, for theatrical performances -- and for inventing a new card trick.
Tonight, at the Society of American Magicians "Salute to Magic" show at Manhattan Community College, the organization will tap Dr.
KEN KRENZEL as its "Magician of the Year."


Dibble Faces Surgery
Cincinnati Reds reliever ROB DIBBLE will undergo surgery today to repair his broken left forearm and will be sidelined six weeks.
The Reds initially thought Dibble would just need a cast on the arm.
But Dr.
RICHARD JOLSON, the club's orthopedic consultant, decided surgery was necessary after he examined Dibble yesterday.
Dibble broke his arm Wednesday in Pittsburgh in a collision at home with the Pirates' KEVIN YOUNG. (AP)


Putting Old Materials to New Uses
Two years ago, Joe and Katie Capuano bought a two-story clapboard house on an overgrown half acre in Stony Brook, L.I.
Believing that the house was about 60 years old and in need of modest restoration, they negotiated the price from $224,000 to $150,000, expecting that Mr.
Capuano would do the renovation work himself.


Transamerica Draws Fire on Cancer Test
An unorthodox cancer test used since 1990 by the Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Company to screen some applicants has come under increasing fire.
The California Insurance Department has criticized the Transamerica insurance unit for failing to disclose to applicants that the Tumor Associated Antigen test is a test for cancer and is not always reliable.
This week, the company, the nation's eighth-largest life insurer, agreed to give applicants a separate brochure describing its medical evaluation in greater detail.


INSIDE
Plan to Alter Tax Law
President Clinton is seeking a change in Social Security tax laws on household workers, the rules that doomed Zoe Baird's nomination.
Page 8.
Letter for Gay Marchers
The President will use a letter, not a video or audio message, to address a gay march in Washington.
Page 10.


Discount Brands Flex Their Muscles
As the economy continues crawling toward recovery and job security is worrying an increasing number of families, consumers are buying even the most modest of products with the same discretion once shown only big-ticket items like air fares, computers and designer clothes.
The result: a growing popularity of cheaper private label products and the likelihood that price wars among consumer goods could lead to the kind of consolidation that occurred in the airline and electronics industries.


Religion Notes
A Loaded Word?
The tragic conclusion of the siege of the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Tex., this week revived a debate in religious circles over the use of the word "cult."


Grace L. Lambert, 93, Benefactor and Breeder
Grace Lansing Lambert, a philanthropist and breeder of champion dogs and horses, died on Thursday at The Medical Center at Princeton, in Princeton, N.J.
A resident of Princeton, she was 93.
The cause of death was pneumonia and advanced Parkinson's disease, according to the death certificate.


Government Plan Said to Call For Wider U.S. Campaign Aid
After months of drawn-out negotiations with Democratic lawmakers, President Clinton is expected to announce a campaign financing package next week that would call for the Government to help finance races for Congress for the first time.
White House officials said the proposal would restrict the influence of special interests and the surging costs of running for office.
The plan could still be changed before its release, they said, but they acknowledged that it was not as ambitious as the changes Mr.
Clinton promised during the Presidential campaign.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Orders for big-ticket factory goods slumped 3.7 percent in March, a widespread decline that was the biggest in 15 months, the Commerce Department said.
The report further dampened analysts' hopes for stepped-up economic expansion.  [ Page 37. ]
Vehicle sales continued to strengthen in mid-April, with domestic auto makers reporting a healthy 19.5 percent gain.  [ 39. ]


Banks Are Trying Hard To Peddle Mutual Funds
PRODUCT glut, the bane of supermarket shoppers, has hit the neighborhood bank full force.
The choices among detergents and dry cereals are simple compared with the range of mutual funds that many banks are brandishing.
Chase Manhattan customers are now confronted with more than 600 mutual funds.
Vista, Putnam, Alliance, Massachusetts Financial, Franklin, Nuveen, Colonial, GNA . . .
"I could go on," said Mitchell Ratliff, a Chase marketing manager.


Family Tragedy in Baltimore Fire


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the sentencing of a former Bolivian military dictator referred incorrectly to Klaus Barbie, a German who was extradited from Bolivia to France in 1983 to face trial for crimes against humanity.
Mr.
Barbie served from 1942 to 1944 as the Gestapo chief in Lyons, France, not as a doctor at Auschwitz.


Tough Matriarch, Easy Touch, and Good Listener; Women Doing Hard Time Find a Warden With Her Own Way of Keeping the Lid On
Their keepers say that female convicts tend to talk more than males, the murderesses here more than the murderers elsewhere.
And Elaine A. Lord never fails to stop and listen to the women in the cellblocks, to take notes on a tiny pad and get back to them.
"No suicides here," says Ms.
Lord, seriously looking for wood to knock on, for she is superintendent of Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women in northern Westchester County, the home of the state's hardest-time, hardest-luck female felons, where the riptide of despair and hope, regret and rage never ceases.


For the Knicks, Sunday Will Just Be for Icing
When the news came, the normally cool Pat Riley broke out in a huge grin.
Doc Rivers, John Starks, Anthony Mason and Charles Smith exchanged high-fives in the locker room.
And after 81 games and 59 hard-earned victories, the Knicks finally allowed themselves a moment of satisfaction.
The Knicks (59-22) won the regular-season championship of the Eastern Conference by beating the Philadelphia 76ers, 99-84, tonight while the Chicago Bulls lost to the Charlotte Hornets, 104-103, in Charlotte.
New York's triumph coupled with the Bulls' loss gave New York the No. 1 seeding in the Eastern Conference for the playoffs and the home-court advantage that goes with it.
Not only that, but the Knicks will also have an easier path to the conference finals than the Bulls (57-24), who are likely to face the Cleveland Cavaliers in the conference semifinals.


CLINTON CONSIDERS BOSNIA AIR STRIKES; SEES ALLIED ACCORD
President Clinton said today that he was giving "serious consideration" to air strikes against Serbian positions in Bosnia and Herzegovina amid indications that Britain and France were softening their opposition to military intervention.
Asserting that "other nations involved are also genuinely reassessing their position," Mr.
Clinton said that he would complete his policy review on the Balkans within the next several days and that agreement among the allies was likely.
"I do not think we should act alone, unilaterally, nor do I think we will have to," he said at a news conference.  [ Excerpts, page 7. ]


Pentagon Report Tells of Aviators' 'Debauchery'
In a devastatingly detailed account of drinking, debauchery and sexual abuse within the military, a Pentagon report released today said that as many as 175 officers may face disciplinary action as a result of their involvement in a drunken revel two years ago in a Las Vegas hotel.
The report, by the Pentagon's inspector general, makes it clear that the scope and nature of the abuses at the Tailhook Association convention of top Navy fliers in 1991 were even worse than they appeared in previous news and official accounts.


Classical Music in Review
New Mozart Ensemble Walter Reade Theater Lincoln Center


Review/Dance; Eclecticism in Japanese Company's Debut
A group called Watanabe's Dance Company Dios made its New York debut on Tuesday night at the Theater of the Riverside Church.
Anyone unfamiliar with the company might assume that it took its name from the Spanish word for God.
But as a program note explained, "Dios" in this case derives from the first letters of the English words "dynamism, infinity, originality, sensuality."
Dios was certainly dynamic and sensual but real choreographic originality was less in evidence, and the earthy works offered seemed to have little to do with such a lofty concept as infinity.
Takashi Watanabe, the director of this Japanese troupe from Kyoto, has studied dance both in Japan and at the Boston Conservatory of Music, and his choreography is deliberately eclectic.


Russia's Reform, on the Line
Russians go to the polls tomorrow to choose sides in President Boris Yeltsin's fight with the legislature.
For Americans, the referendum is one vital sign that democracy is taking hold in harsh Russian soil.
For Mr.
Yeltsin, it's a chance to renew his shrinking popular mandate.
But unless voters rally to him in unexpectedly large numbers, it won't be easy to translate that mandate into new momentum for economic and constitutional reform.
The ballot drawn up by the Congress of People's Deputies puts four questions to voters: whether they have confidence in President Yeltsin, whether they approve of his social and economic policies, whether they want early elections for president and early elections for Parliament.


The Bulls Blink First, Falling To Hornets
Darrell Walker has always had the guts and hands of a burglar.
Tonight, in the final seconds of a game the Chicago Bulls were desperate to win, Walker got caught with his hands in the wrong place at the wrong time.
The penalty was a stunning non-shooting foul and the result was sudden (and painful, for NBC) death for the nationally televised showdown between the Knicks and Chicago, as the Bulls were beaten by the Hornets, 104-103, when Walker fouled Larry Johnson, who made two free throws with 2.9 seconds left in the game.


Young Children Celebrate a Week of Their Own


With Tanana and Bonilla, Who Needs a Franco for the Night?
At times, Frank Tanana, 39 years old, appeared in danger of being whipped off the mound by a gust at Shea Stadium last night.
At times, he had San Diego batters contorting their bodies to chase some of his oh-so-tempting pitches.
The Mets' left-hander was in command at all times, though, from the opening batter, when Ricky Gutierrez looked at strike three in a bemused way that suggested: "The old man's going to be trouble."


Classical Music in Review
Riverside Symphony Alice Tully Hall


Corrections
The real estate column yesterday, about the growing popularity of condominiums in Manhattan, misstated the average prices of condominiums and co-ops.
The prices given were per room, not per apartment.


U.S. Steps Up the Pressure in Tokyo
Saying that no other approach will work, Ronald H. Brown, the United States Secretary of Commerce, pressed Japan today to agree to measurable goals for increasing its purchases of American products.
But he also said that the targets need not always be a specific share of the Japanese market.
Mr.
Brown is on a three-day trip here only a week after President Clinton met with Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa in Washington and told him that the United States wanted Japan to accept specific targets for opening its markets.


Scalping on Stolen Credit; 2 Arrested and 1,428 Tickets Seized in a Pure-Profit Scheme
It was a sure-fire, pure profit venture: selling tickets for the biggest Broadway hits, more often than not at face value, because there simply was no overhead.
Then the police got a tip.
Two Queens men were arrested Thursday night outside the Shubert Theater on West 44th Street, where "Crazy for You" is playing, and charged with ticket speculation -- better known as scalping -- with a twist.


Bosnia Peace Plan Altered To Create Corridor for Serbs
In a major revision to the peace plan proposed for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord Owen is proposing the creation of a six-mile-wide demilitarized transit corridor to link Serbian areas in eastern Bosnia with an enclave of Serbs in the western part of the country.
The corridor would have United Nations checkpoints at either end with the right to inspect all vehicles and would be patrolled by United Nations forces along its length of 50 to 70 miles.
No weapons, ammunition or military equipment of any kind would be allowed to move along the road.


Durables Orders Post 3.7% Drop
Orders for big-ticket factory goods slumped 3.7 percent in March, a widespread decline that was the biggest in 15 months, the Commerce Department reported today.
The report was more negative than expected and further dampened analysts' hopes for stepped-up economic expansion, although the East Coast blizzard was once again cited as contributing to a poor or lackluster March statistic.


To Gay Marchers' Anger, Clinton Plans to Be Absent
President Clinton will mark the gay rights march here this weekend by sending a letter to be read by a member of Congress.
The decision angered some homosexuals who had expected Mr.
Clinton to make an appearance via audio hook-up or television satellite.
Both Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush addressed anti-abortion marches through telephone link-ups from the Oval Office.
Their speeches were broadcast to protesters over loud speakers.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
2.97
3.63
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.83
2.82
3.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.91
3.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.48
5.46
7.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.79
6.74
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.65
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.93
5.92
6.73
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Court Declines to Dismiss Marriott Bondholders' Suit
A Federal judge has refused to dismiss a bondholders' suit aimed at blocking a restructuring plan by the Marriott Corporation that would split it into two companies.
Lawyers for the bondholders called the ruling Thursday by United States District Judge Alexander Harvey 2d in Baltimore "a major setback to the company's spinoff plan." Marriott officers countered that the next stage in the suit would find that the bondholders' claims were "without substance."


Oliver Tambo, 75, Former Leader Of the A.N.C., Dies After a Stroke
Oliver R. Tambo, leader of the African National Congress for decades when it was banned and he was in exile, died early today from a stroke, the congress said in Johannesburg.
He was 75 years old.
In 1967 Mr.
Tambo, a bespectacled, self-effacing man, became the leader of the largest South African organization opposed to apartheid and white minority rule and Africa's oldest national liberation movement.
He suffered a previous stroke four years ago in Sweden.


LaValliere Catches On
The Chicago White Sox paid a bargain price for insurance behind the plate yesterday, signing MIKE LAVALLIERE to a minor league contract.
The Pittsburgh Pirates released him earlier this month.
The White Sox have been going with RON KARKOVICE, and they also have 45-year-old CARLTON FISK.
The Pirates are still responsible for most of LaValliere's guaranteed $4.05 million salary through next year.
The White Sox have to pay the 32-year-old veteran only the minimum salary of $109,000. (AP)


CHRONICLE
The button that former Senator J. WILLIAM FULBRIGHT wore to a dinner in his honor on Thursday read "Aged to Perfection," and no one in the assemblage of 120 guests disputed that assessment.
The occasion was a dinner given in the Russell Senate Office Building by the Institute for Policy Studies, a Washington research group, to honor the former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, who initiated the Fulbright fellowships.
Now 88, he still goes to work every day at the Washington law firm of Hogan &amp; Hartson, where he is of counsel.


Home Radon Curbs Need Not Be Costly
To the Editor:
The Environmental Protection Agency recently released two documents on indoor radon, a radioactive gas found in many homes.
Your April 7 report, whose headline states we urge radon curbs in new homes, needs clarification.


The Face of the Gay March
It doesn't really matter whether a million demonstrators show up for tomorrow's rally in Washington in support of gay and lesbian rights, as some planners have predicted.
Nor does it matter whether a few marchers are dressed in drag or heavy leather, the better to shock middle-class America and grab TV time.
Even President Clinton's absence is only a minor setback.
The march will serve a vital purpose if it simply puts a broad and varied human face on a civil rights struggle that is all too often painted in caricatures.


Memorial Honors Workers Killed in 1987


Sports of The Times; The Meaning Of Freedom In the N.F.L.
FREEMAN McNEIL wept earlier this week as he announced his retirement from professional football.
After 12 seasons of ducking and dodging, the Jets' 34-year-old running back decided that he'd had enough, and that he'd given enough.


Magic Wants to Own An N.B.A. Franchise
MAGIC JOHNSON's desire is to trade players, not coach them.
On Thursday, the former All-Star guard denied that he had been offered the Los Angeles Lakers' head coaching job, and yesterday his business manager said that Johnson is instead part of a Toronto group bidding for a National Basketball Association expansion team.


Islanders Are Working Overtime to Overcome Injuries
As he left the Islanders' locker room en route to a doctor's office this afternoon, Benoit Hogue showed off his bare hand.
The knuckle on the index finger showed no swelling, no cut, no scar, no evidence whatsoever of the two-handed slash by Washington's Kevin Hatcher that forced Hogue to miss part of Thursday night's first-round playoff game.
Remarkable!
Did this mean that Hogue sustained no lingering injury and that he is fully fit to play in Game 4 Saturday night, when the Islanders try to improve on their two-games-to-one lead in the Patrick Division semifinal series?


Sheik Slipped Into Canada, Witnesses Say
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, an Islamic fundamentalist cleric whom the United States is seeking to deport, was seen in Ottawa late last year, months after his green card was rescinded and while he was fighting Federal efforts to remove him from the United States.
The move would mark the third time he managed to elude Federal immigration authorities despite being on an official State Department watch list of terrorists and other undesirables.
If he had been caught at the border, United States officials could have prevented him from entering the country.


Don't Teach Nature About Barrier Beaches
To the Editor:
You report that a New York State task force on coastal erosion has recommended quick restoration at public expense of major Long Island beaches damaged in last winter's storms (April 14 article).
You accept as a matter of fact the claim that the Westhampton Beach breaches in the barrier beach (actually one, as the other has since closed) "could cause more erosion on other beaches and serious ecological damage to Moriches Bay" if not repaired.


Corrections
A chart in the Market Place column of Business Day on Thursday, about Wall Street analysts' estimates of earnings for 14 pollution control companies, included erroneous data supplied by I.B.E.S.
Inc., a financial research company, for Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.
The data omitted reference to Wheelabrator's 2-for-1 stock split in January.
Estimates for Wheelabrator have increased 1.9 percent since December.


Exploring What Causes Corruption
Trying to address corruption as he faces a potential attack on his Internal Affairs system by a mayoral panel, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly is creating a committee for an unusual task: to explore how the culture of police work causes some officers to turn bad.
In a department that has traditionally functioned in paramilitary style, officers will be asked to open up.
They will be brought together in seminars and encounter groups to share their feelings about whether the impenetrable Blue Wall -- officers refusing to turn one another in -- is myth.


Nets and Basket Fall As Magic Stay Alive
When Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal is in town be afraid, be very afraid.
At the least, hide your baskets.
Another day, another teeth-jarring dunk by O'Neal and another basket on its way to basket heaven.
Earlier this season against the Phoenix Suns, O'Neal dunked the ball so hard the basket simply withered and fell.
This time it was the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, and when O'Neal slipped in front of Dwayne Schintzius he had just enough room to make a dunk so powerful the 300-pound center snapped the metal support in half.


Detective Indicted in Fatal Shooting of Doctor
A 37-year-old Mount Vernon police detective was indicted by a Westchester County grand jury yesterday in the fatal shooting of a doctor who apparently made a wrong turn on a dark Mount Vernon street one night last February and was confronted by two plainclothes officers on a narcotics patrol.
In a bizarre series of events, the officers said they approached a car that was idling in midstreet to see if the driver was sick or drunk and said he suddenly tried to run them down.
Friends of the doctor said he had become lost on his way to a date in nearby Yonkers, apparently mistook the officers for muggers, tried to get away and was shot needlessly in an ensuing struggle.


Review/Music; American Operas in Progress
American Opera Projects regularly presents excerpts from commissioned operas in progress.
On Wednesday night at 463 Broome Street, Greenwich Village, the works were Robert Miller's "Cat in the Box," Ken Valitsky's "Embrace the Monster" and Carson Kievman's "California Mystery Park."
Mr.
Miller makes his living as a composer for commercials; "Cat in the Box," commissioned by Opera Projects' "OP-TV" (opera on television), is conceived as a sort of meta-commercial: two couples watching television -- one in a coffee commercial, the other at home -- are bewildered as the barrier between them breaks down.
The music interestingly distorts the medium's banalities, although the premise itself seems a bit weak.
Many commercials now on television play tricks of perception, and Anthony and Nicholas Keene's libretto ought to venture a little further.


Stories of the Lincolns From Their Laundress
The origins and details of an oral history from a laundress who worked for Mary and Abraham Lincoln in the decade before he became President have divided American historians.
Now it has been sold to William Morrow &amp; Company, reportedly for $1 million -- but with an escape clause.
No one involved would confirm that such a large sum would be paid for the manuscript, but it has been learned that the agreement allows Morrow to engage independent historians to try to verify the authenticity of the material, after which it can reconsider the purchase and decide against it.


What About the First Waco Raid?
Search warrants and other documents now reveal what Treasury Department officials have denied or obfuscated about the disastrous Federal raids on the Branch Davidian compound outside Waco, Tex.: The first raid, on Feb. 28, was even more misguided than Monday's F.B.I. gas attack.
The February raid was launched by agents of the Treasury's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, who tried to execute warrants to search for illegal weapons.
That raid cost the lives of four agents, gunned down by the heavily armed cultists.
Thus began a 51-day standoff that ended in flames and more deaths, this time of cultists and their children.


Classical Music in Review
Young Concert Artists Diamond Concert 92d Street Y


Andre Oliver, 61, Clothing Designer For Pierre Cardin
Andre Oliver, Pierre Cardin's main assistant for more than 40 years, died at the Laennec Hospital in Paris on Thursday.
He was 61 and lived in Paris.
His friends said he died of AIDS.


In Macy's Executive Search, A Small Pool of Retail Talent
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, which has been a training ground for legions of young merchants, is now searching for an expert merchandiser itself, and executive recruiters say the company's task will not be easy.
As it seeks a replacement for Mark S. Handler, who has announced he will give up his titles of co-chairman and co-chief executive on Aug. 1, Macy is likely to take a close look at merchants working for several department store chains.
But recruiters say it might also go foraging among specialty stores, which have bred retailing renegades like Mickey Drexler of the Gap and Michael Weiss of the Express division of the Limited Inc.


Corrections
A front-page Critic's Notebook article yesterday about art at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington was truncated in some copies, leaving the writer's arguments incomplete.
Readers wishing copies of the complete article may write to the Cultural News Department, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036-3659.


After Fistfight, Yonkers Officers Invented Tale of Black Assailant
In the early morning hours, the police alert had shattered the quiet: A tall black man in a blue jacket and sneakers had assaulted a white officer, leaving him bloodied.
The radio message touched off a feverish search for the suspect through the streets of a racially mixed neighborhood in the southwest part of Yonkers, a city that has had more than its share of racial divisions.
At least one black man was stopped and questioned in the vestibule of a building.


Clinton Seeks Change in Tax Rule That Scuttled Baird Nomination
President Clinton is seeking a change in the decades-old Social Security tax laws that were a factor in dooming Zoe Baird's nomination as Attorney General.
In a letter that the White House made public today, Mr.
Clinton told Joseph R. Biden Jr., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, that he had asked officials from the Treasury Department to examine alternative proposals.


Giants Lose Thompson To Parcells's Patriots
The Giants lost perhaps the best punt coverage man in pro football last night when Reyna Thompson agreed to a two-year, $1.5-million contract with the New England Patriots.
The 29-year-old Thompson, an unrestricted free agent, played for the Miami Dolphins from 1985 through 1988.
The Giants signed him in 1989 as a Plan B free agent, and in 1990 he was chosen for the Pro Bowl.
John Madden, the television analyst and a former pro coach, has called him the best special-teams player ever.


Excerpts From the Pentagon Report
Following are excerpts from the report issued today by the Pentagon inspector general about sexual misconduct at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention in Las Vegas, Nev.
The subheadings are the titles of the main sections of the report.
Executive Summary
. . .
Many attendees viewed the annual conference as a type of "free-fire zone" wherein they could act indiscriminately and without fear of censure or retribution in matters of sexual conduct and drunkenness.
Some of the Navy's most senior officers were knowledgeable as to the excesses practiced at Tailhook '91 and, by their inaction, those officers served to condone and even encourage the type of behavior that occurred there.


Hiring an Adjuster for Damage Claims
After the ocean crashed into their waterfront home in Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., during December's storms, soaking and crushing the furniture, smashing the windows and staining the walls, Judith and Victor Lolli faced a complex and costly insurance claim.
Their losses, which also included damage from last month's storms, exceeded $100,000 and were settled partly in February and finally on Thursday.
They had to press their claims on two fronts: the National Flood Insurance Program, a federally chartered agency, for water damage, and Allstate Insurance for losses like roof damage from high winds covered under their regular homeowners' policy.


'Stopit!' She Said. 'Nomore!'
GENIE
An Abused Child's Flight From Silence.
By Russ Rymer. 221 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE NOVELLAS OF MARTHA GELLHORN Knopf, $27.50.


Inexpensive to Own, Easy to Move and Unwelcome; Low-Income Mobile Home Owners Face Substandard Conditions and Scarcity of Sites
Fred and Beulah Finch have lived in six different mobile homes in the last 18 months.
They have been evicted three times -- in each case, they say, after calling in building inspectors who cited code violations.
And they moved out of a 1958 model with no furnace, which they bought for $500, and a rented camping trailer where Mrs.
Finch says "it rained just as hard inside as outside."
"This one's solid yet," Mr.
Finch said of his family's newest home, a 1973 model that he and his wife, who share a newspaper delivery route, recently bought for $6,900.
But it took them three months to find a lot to rent, in a trailer park behind Charlie's Bar on Route 415 in Steuben County, in the Finger Lakes region.


10 Children and Their Challenges; SHAWN HUNT, 17
Usually, people I interview don't ask me about myself, which is fine.
But Shawn was full of questions.
"What do you think of black people?" he asked me one day during a boring computer class at Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Brooklyn, where he has become an honor student, bound for college.
"What did your parents tell you about black people?"


Wall Street; Here Come the Muni Funds -- Caveat Investor
MUTUAL funds that purport to profit from baby booming and other trends are apparently out.
What's in?
New issues of small-stock funds, bond funds that promise high yields -- and particularly municipal bond funds tailored to residents of individual states.
Forty-eight such funds registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission in January and February alone, said Patricia Ciccoretti, editor of Mutual Fund Monthly, a Washington-based newsletter.
"Munis are out of control," she said with a laugh.
If the January-February rate were to last through 1993, there would be 288 muni funds, up from 161 in 1992, and 116 in 1991, Ms.
Ciccoretti pointed out.


A CALMING OF THE MIND
I cringed when I read the words "concentration" and "focus" ascribed to the technique of Transcendental Meditation in Goleman's article.
Indeed, the central teaching of T.M. is that control is opposed to the nature of the mind.
It is natural for the mind to flow in the direction of greater charm, greater happiness.
If the proper conditions are set up to allow this flow to occur, then the mind will move effortlessly in this direction.


Adoption Is Getting Some Harder Looks
THE protracted battle over who will be the parents of 2-year-old Jessica DeBoer continued last week, as the Michigan couple she calls Mommy and Daddy filed yet another appeal in their efforts to prevent her from being sent to Iowa to live with her biological parents.
The two couples have been fighting for custody of the child since she was a month old.
This and other high-profile custody cases have increased fears of a backlash against adoption and laid bare how much courts remain stymied when they have to decide whether the bonds of biology or psychology should prevail.


Changing Course at American Airlines
He spreads his hands in frustration.
He openly admits that he does not have the answers.
He is impatient with strategies that have worked before.
Only now and again, as when he talks about a new route to London, does the old confident, ebullient Robert L. Crandall burst through.
Mr.
Crandall, the hard-charging chairman of American Airlines, led his industry on an expansionary binge in the 1980's that has now come back to haunt him and the industry.
He was the one who pioneered the frequent-flyer program, innovative discount fares and a two-tier wage system that enabled the airline to cut costs while it expanded.
And he was the one who built a dominant computer reservation system that often made his airline the first choice of travel agents.


Federal Agencies Mishandled Waco From Start
To the Editor:
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and any other Government agency involved with the handling of the cult in Waco, Tex., misunderstood and mismanaged the situation there and needlessly cost the lives of some 86 moderately emotionally disturbed, innocent Americans.


Q and A
Refinancing Small Co-ops Question: I serve on the board of a small co-op that finds itself in a bind.
Though we are sponsor-free, only 6 of our 15 units are owner-occupied, causing lenders to turn us down for refinancing our building loan.


Carol E. Davis, Robert Fiske 3d
Carol Elizabeth Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Davis of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Bishop Fiske 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fiske Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
John G. B. Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Fiske, 32, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is of counsel to the New York law firm of Blicker, Futterman &amp; Stein.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice chairman of C. R. Bard, a hospital-supply company in Murray Hill, N.J.


Clock-Watcher


By Day, It's Representative Sellers; By Night, Officer Sellers.
NORWALK's newest State Representative has seen several legislators doze off from time to time since he took office in late February.
But so far, Donnie Sellers says, that has not happened to him.
If it did, though, it would be understandable.
That's because Mr.
Sellers is living a dual life, working full time as a police officer in Norwalk, as he has for the last 26 years, and serving in the General Assembly in Hartford.
In addition, he is serving his second term on the Norwalk Common Council, is in his sixth year as a member of the city's Fair Rent Commission and is in the Army Reserve.
That all leaves Mr.
Sellers, 48, with little time for sleep.
"Fortunately I'm able to get by with very little sleep," he said in an interview at Norwalk police headquarters.
"I'm also fortunate in that I have a tremendous amount of energy."
Mr.
Sellers is one of two police officers in the General Assembly.
The other, Edwin Garcia, a sergeant in the Hartford Police Deparment, is also a freshman State Representative and, like Mr.
Sellers, has to work an all-night shift in order to serve in the legislature.
But, as Mr.
Garcia pointed out, "When I'm at the State Capitol, I'm only five minutes from home and five minutes from work." By contrast, Mr.
Sellers lives 65 miles from the Capitol and the trip, made almost daily, takes him about an hour and 15 minutes.
Only one other police officer has served in the General Assembly, Joseph Raia of New Britain.
A Democrat, as are Mr.
Sellers and Mr.
Garcia, Mr.
Raia served three terms before he was defeated in a primary in his city last May.
Indeed, Mr.
Raia let his State Senator know that he supported a bill to permit police officers and other municipal officials to run for office.
"I had wanted to run for the legislature for some time, since I felt that police officers in the state were being treated by the legislature as second-class citizens," Mr.
Raia said.
"But I couldn't because municipal workers were prohibited from running in Connecticut. So I told State Senator Joe Harper of New Britain that I was all for the bill."
The bill passed in October 1984.
And two years later, Mr.
Raia, who has been a police officer for 23 years, was elected to the General Assembly.
But unlike Mr.
Sellers and Mr.
Garcia, Mr.
Raia took off days without pay when he had to be at the State Capitol.
"It cost me about $10,000 a year, plus about $6,000 in overtime," he said.
That adds up to $16,000, which is what state legislators are paid, so Mr.
Raia, in effect, broke even.
Before running for a vacant seat in the General Assembly in a special election last January, Mr.
Sellers sought the advice of Mr.
Raia and Mr.
Garcia as to the feasibility of being a combination police officer and State Representative.
"They both encouraged me," he said with a smile.
"But then they don't live 65 miles from Hartford."  A Typical Day
On a typical day, Mr.
Sellers, who is divorced and the father of three sons, works from 11 P.M. to 7 A.M. in the complaint bureau of the Norwalk Police Department, then goes home to get a few hours sleep before driving to Hartford.
There, he spends up to eight hours attending legislative sessions, public hearings or meetings of the House Education and Labor and Employees Committees of which he is a member.
Then Mr.
Sellers drives home, catches a few more hours of sleep and is back at his desk in uniform at 11 P.M.
"Fortunately, I often have my days off during the week, which makes it easier for me in Hartford," said Mr.
Sellers, who won his seat in the special election by a 2-to-1 margin while running with the endorsements of the Democratic Party and A Connecticut Party.
"When I do and I'm tied up late, I often stay over in Hartford with friends."
But on other days, neither snow, nor rain nor lack of sleep keeps Mr.
Sellers from making his rounds as a state legislator and police officer.
For instance, during the March 12 blizzard, Mr.
Sellers, rather than drive, took a bus from Norwalk to Hartford because of the storm forecast.
Then at the end of his legislative day, he hitched a ride with another Fairfield County legislator in order to get back home in time for the start of his 11 P.M. shift.
"It was kind of a rough day," he recalled.
"But everything worked out all right." Not to Mention Other Commitments
Still, at times Mr.
Sellers has found himself wondering just what in the world he is doing, serving two masters, the legislature and the police department, not to mention his other municipal commitments and the Army Reserves (with whom he spent a recent weekend at Camp Smith, N.Y., near Peekskill).
"There've been some doubts from time to time, but I'm sure it's going to work out just fine," said Mr.
Sellers, who has walked a beat, ridden in a radio car and served as a community relations officer since joining the Norwalk Police Department in 1966.
"But I don't think I'm going to seek a third term in the Council this fall and I'll probably resign from the Fair Rent Commission."
No one will hold that against Mr.
Sellers, whose councilmanic district includes a black and Hispanic section of South Norwalk where he still lives.
That is primarily because of Mr.
Sellers's popularity and visibility.
Over the years, he has made it a point to come to know just about everyone in his neighborhood and, it seems, thousands of other people in Norwalk.
Now he is determined to become acquainted with more people in the 140th legislative district, which includes most of South Norwalk but extends as far north as the Merritt Parkway.
Directing Traffic With Flair
Given his style, that should not be too difficult.
Few, if any, public figures in Norwalk are as recognizable as Mr.
Sellers who has a penchant for flamboyant behavior, whether directing traffic or strolling the streets.
The question arises as to how Mr.
Sellers got to know so many people in Norwalk.
"It's because I've been a people's kind of cop, and I've always made it a point to reach out," he said.
"And I go out of my way to get to know people. I even have my phone number listed, and I always have. Not many cops do."
Mr.
Sellers's entry into politics came about indirectly.
"I was talking with Nick DePalma, who was then running for mayor as an independent and campaigning in South Norwalk in 1983," Mr.
Sellers recalled.
"After a while, he said to me, 'Have you ever considered getting into politics?' I told him no, and he said, 'Do you realize people have been honking their horns at you nonstop since we started to talk?' It hadn't even dawned on me."
Later that year, Mr.
Sellers received the Independent Party's nomination for the Common Council in his district.
But no one had bothered to check the Police Department's manual, which then prohibited officers from seeking public office.
"So I went to Mayor Frank Esposito and asked him if he would please appoint me to some board because I wanted to serve the people," Mr.
Sellers said.
Subsequently, Mr.
Esposito appointed Mr.
Sellers to the Fair Rent Commission.
"I called the local newspaper about it and had them take my picture and put it in the paper," Mr.
Sellers said unabashedly.
"I wanted people to know that I was on the commission." Critics Take Attendance
In 1989, after the legislature changed the law, Mr.
Sellers became the first police officer ever elected to the Norwalk Common Council when, running on the Democratic ticket, he won in a three-way race.
"When I was approached to run, I asked myself, 'Donnie, do you have a future in politics?' And I realized I was a very powerful black candidate. So I thought, go for the gusto. Nothing ventured, nothing gained, and opportunity knocks only once."
Mr.
Sellers was re-elected to the Common Council in 1991.
But since taking his Council seat, he has been criticized, mainly by Republicans, for missing too many committee meetings.
Mr.
Sellers does not deny that, saying it has been because of other priorities, including his three sons.
"Missing committee meetings hasn't affected my work as a councilman, and I never miss the actual Council meetings," he said.
Holding down two jobs is hardly new for Mr.
Sellers, who is a graduate of the University of New Haven with a degree in political science.
For six years he spent five hours a day teaching troubled middle and high school students in a special program at the Benjamin Franklin School in Norwalk.
And during three of those years he also directed traffic outside of Pitney Bowes on Main Avenue in Norwalk from 3 to 6 P.M. five days a week.
In addition, Mr.
Sellers had started a boxing club for teen-agers and established a youth organization for young people from middle-class neighborhoods.
"Norwalk's been good to me, and I want to give something back," Mr.
Sellers said.
"And I think I understand people because I'm a grass-roots type of person. For instance, people in my Council district aren't issue-oriented. But they're petrified because of all of the crime. When they vote, they vote for me, Donnie Sellers, not the issues." 'My Own Mother Was Mugged'
Occasionally Mr.
Sellers patrols his neighborhood in his car or on foot on his own time, in and out of uniform.
It is a low-income area, riddled by drug-trafficking and crime, much of it violent.
"My own mother was mugged in my driveway at 5:30 in the morning as she was walking toward her car to go to work," Mr.
Sellers said.
But he remains upbeat, waving and calling out to residents.
"It's bad, but I do my best to try to make things better."
Even one of Mr.
Sellers's sons has been scarred by illicit drugs.
His son Earl, who is 21, has been arrested several times on drug charges and was shot and wounded in an apparent drug dispute in Stamford last September.
He has spent time in prison and at several drug rehabilitation units.
"I even locked Earl up myself," Mr.
Sellers said.
"Once, he even stole my gun and sold it to get money for drugs. My reaction to all of that? To get him help. It's a disease. I love Earl, and we have a good relationship."
Mr.
Sellers recalled how stories about him and Earl appeared in the same edition of the local newspaper in February.
"My victory in the special election was on page one," he recalled.
"And on page 3 there was a story about Earl being arrested. It shows that these things can happen to anybody."


Racism Is Only Part Of the Story
The recent death of the distinguished black alto Marian Anderson has inspired many encomiums, praising her artistry and courage in the face of racism.
As is well known, her persistence opened the floodgates for black American vocal talent, including artists like Leontyne Price, Jessye Norman, George Shirley, Vinson Cole, Kathleen Battle, Betty Allen and Shirley Verrett.
But Anderson's career may be worth considering in the context of the contemporary scene.
For as the old racial restrictions have dissolved, the issue of race has actually grown in American consciousness.
And for all the success of blacks in the opera house, in other forms of art music black presence is minimal and a cause of anxiety among concert presenters, foundations and political activists.
That absence was the subject of a conference last weekend in Winston-Salem, N.C., at which Mendelssohn's Violin Concerto was played by the black nationalist Louis Farrakhan.
The more mundane facts: fewer than 2 percent of professional orchestra musicians are black.
Classical black instrumentalists can be counted on the fingers of one hand.
Black composers of note are still more rare.
Only in popular music have black musicians become prominent, even dominant.


Jamaican String Is Broken
T.
C.
Williams High School of Alexandria, Va., today snapped an eight-year winning streak in the 400-meter relay by Jamaica schools at the Penn Relays.
But St.
Elizabeth Tech of Jamaica came back from that defeat to give the Caribbean schools their eighth straight victory in the 3,200-meter relay in 7 minutes 44.38 seconds.
And in the last schoolboy event of the 99th annual edition at Franklin Field, Jamaica College High School took home a 3:12.22 triumph in the 1,600-meter relay.


Working With Nature, Not Against It
IN case gardeners have not noticed, attitudes are changing.
Methods of plant care and insect control are not the same as they used to be.
Product labels are being read.
The result is that gardeners are beginning to do environmentally safe tending.
They are learning to work with nature, not against it.
In response, retailers report that chemical gardening trends are down, while organic gardening trends are up.
Manufacturers are eagerly capitalizing on these trends as rapidly as they can.
Products are now labeled "environmentally safe," "nonchemical," "nonpolluting," "organic." These pitches are beginning to have their effect because consumer behavior is changing.


Suspensions Don't Slow Drivers Down; And Many Get Behind the Wheel With Suspended Licenses or None at All
On April 16, Jonathan Medina, 8 years old, stepped into the crosswalk on Caton Avenue in Brooklyn on his way to join his Bible class in the Parade Grounds, made all the more enticing by the early spring afternoon.
At the same intersection, Mordechai Levy, 23, found himself stuck in traffic behind a bus.
Within moments the two would become emblematic -- as victim and villain -- of what officials describe as one of the most intractable problems of traffic safety in New York City: the virtual impossibility of keeping reckless drivers off the streets even after their licenses have been taken away.


APRIL 18-24: Talking About Talking; Middle East Delegates Plan to Resume Negotiations
The stage was set last week for the Middle East peace talks to resume, even though the Palestinian delegation did not attain its principal aim in a four-month boycott -- the return of some 400 Palestinians deported to Lebanon last December after Israel accused them of involvement in Islamic fundamentalist violence.
Nevertheless, the Palestinian delegation will not be returning empty-handed.
Israel has acquiesced to seeing the delegation led by Faisal al-Husseini, a resident of East Jerusalem.
And the Palestinian turnaround follows an apparent decision by Saudi Arabia to resume financial aid to the Palestine Liberation Organization that was cut off in 1990.


Patching and Cleaning Spruces Up Siding
VINYL and aluminum siding do not require regular maintenance, but annual washing can keep both looking new.
The simplest way to wash siding is by hand with a sponge or soft-bristled brush, preferably one with a long handle that can be attached to a garden hose.
Mix a half-cup of any heavy duty nonabrasive household detergent with a gallon of water and use that as a washing solution.
Washing from the ground up yields the best results, but rinse the areas frequently with plain water to prevent streaks.
They occur if washed siding dries before it is rinsed.
Another method is to use a pressure washer, which can be rented.
It consists of a gasoline-powered compressor and a variety of spray nozzles that can be attached to a garden hose.
Before pressure-washing use plastic sheeting to cover electrical outlets, light fixtures, poorly sealed windows and doors and other areas that have to remain dry.
Seal around the edges of the plastic with duct tape.
Also cover plants and shrubs.


U.S. Saw Waco Assault as Best Option
Federal law-enforcement officials considered alternatives to the assault Monday on the Branch Davidian compound in Texas with tank-borne battering rams and tear gas.
But they discarded other options, concluding, in a disastrous miscalculation, that the assault represented the best way to resolve the standoff without catastrophic loss of life.
In interviews, officials who planned the operation at the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Justice Department said they had analyzed other approaches, like using specially trained agents to seize the compound by force or directing snipers to shoot David Koresh, the leader of the cult.


Staying Cool For a Cause
An auction of fans to aid the New York Philharmonic, April 20.


POSTINGS: 2 Adjacent Buildings; Of Fathers and Sons And Business Deals
It's not just the sins of the fathers that are visited on the sons; it is the potential business deals as well.
While Edwin Roos and his partners owned 38 East 19th Street, they ran it as a multi-tenant office building.
And when Jerry Weinrib was running ABC Carpets, he ran it as a carpet store.


Mark and Misha


BENEFITS
New Museum Auction
TONIGHT -- A 16th-anniversary benefit gala for the New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, at Prince Street, will open with cocktails at 5 P.M. and a silent auction of art at the museum.
A dinner-dance and an open auction of art follow at 7:30 P.M. at the Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Plaza.
A bus will provide transportation between the museum and the Rainbow Room.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, or $100 for the silent auction and reception alone, from (212) 219-1222.


Corrections
Because of a laboratory error, a front-page picture last Sunday showing the demolition of the upper floors of 108 East 96th Street was printed in mirror image.
The railroad tracks shown in the lower right should have been on the left.


American Wicker Puts On a Show of Shapeliness
Wicker cradled moses on the Nile, formed Peregrine White's first bed on the Mayflower, covered Charles Lindbergh's seat to Paris on the Spirit of St.
Louis and framed a table in Billy Baldwin's living room.
Necessity and fashion have determined the evolution of wicker.
Some of the more outrageous and innovative expressions in this medium are assembled here in "Just American Wicker," an exhibition at the Smithsonian's Renwick Gallery through Aug. 1.


Mobster With AIDS Gets Special Sentence
A reputed member of the Colombo crime family who is dying of AIDS agreed to a plea-bargain arrangement on Friday that will allow him to spend the last months of his life in a special ward for AIDS patients on Rikers Island, the authorities said.
The mobster, Gregory Scarpa, pleaded guilty in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn to attempted criminal possession of a weapon in connection with an arrest last year, said Patrick Clark, a spokesman for the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office.


Form 1040? The Question Is Not Literacy
To the Editor:
I doubt that there is any correlation between tax literacy and support for President Clinton's economic program as Alan Siegel and Kenneth Morris suggest in"Form 1040? What's a Form 1040?" (Viewpoints, April 11).
In fact, I suspect just the opposite is true -- i.e., the more people know about our "progressive" tax system, the more they tend to oppose it for its stifling effects on investment, savings and entrepreneurial activity.


Conflict in the Balkans; Bosnia Muslims and Croats Agree to Truce
Lord Owen, the European Community's peace negotiator in the Balkans, won agreement today from Bosnian Croats and Muslims to halt their fighting.
"I hope we achieved a small step of bringing together people determined to stop the appalling humanitarian abuses we've seen," Lord Owen said after the two sides agreed to the truce.


As U.S. Policy Makers Debate, States Move Ahead on Health Care Overhaul
The governors and legislatures of the 50 states are not waiting for the Clinton Administration to find a fresh approach to health care.
Squeezed between rising demands for care and soaring costs, and fearful that Congress will act too slowly or wrongheadedly on whatever the President finally recommends next month, states are determined to go ahead on their own to improve matters.


Sex Survey May Say Most About Society's Attitudes to Gays
To the Editor:
A sex survey from the Battelle Human Affairs Research Center (front page, April 15) finds that only 1 percent of men 20 to 39 years old describe themselves as exclusively homosexual, and 2 percent report a homosexual experience in the last decade.
Neither homosexual behavior nor self-acknowledgement is an accurate indicator of who is homosexual in our society.
We need a definition that takes into account that homosexuality is probably constitutional, and that in our society it may be difficult or impossible for many to behave in sexual and affectionate ways that are consonant with their inherent homosexual orientation.
Such a definition would consider homosexual a man who has a predominant attraction to other men and whose sexual fantasies and desires have been directed toward other men since childhood.


A New Overhaul For Voter Districts
THE County Board of Legislators is literally back at the drawing board, attempting to comply with a recent court order requiring the Board to draw new legislative district lines as quickly as possible.
The Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, in a ruling earlier this month, declared the county's 1991 legislative districting plan unconstitutional because it did not rely on Federal census data to determine population.
The Board plan that was struck down was faulted because it used population estimates in election districts instead of full census tracts to draw certain district lines.


'Who's Who Of Animals'
WHAT: The new "Who's Who of Animals: Biographies of Great Animal Companions" (Companion Books, $32).
A classy addition to your home reference library -- faux morocco-bound in red, with gold title and gray end papers.
Contains pithy profiles of more than 1,200 dogs, cats and other so-called animal companions.
CORRECT LANGUAGE LINEUP: "Animal companion" replaces "pet" (seen as patronizing).
"Human companion" goes in for "owner" (connotes hierarchy).
In extreme cases, human companions (they wrote the profiles) speak of animals as their owners (sounds sappy).


STOP BLAMING BASEBALL
Major-league baseball may resemble Broadway or Hollywood, but minor-league baseball continues to represent the passions and the pace of the small towns and cities where it is played and loved.
In upstate New York, where I live, the game is still the summer focus and entertainment of farmers, shopkeepers and 10-year-olds.


It Might Be News, but It's Not 'MacNeil/Lehrer'
The late-night newscast on WSVN, the Fox network's "South Florida's News Station," has just begun, and the stories are zooming across the screen at a dizzying speed, accompanied by graphics and sound bigger, brighter and bolder than anything Miami viewers can find elsewhere.
A stalker, a drive-by shooting, the trial of a hit-and-run driver, the confessions of a murderer for hire.
On and on, the cavalcade of mayhem continues, and only when the first commercial comes, 23 minutes into the hourlong newscast, does the pace momentarily slow.
Reporters at rival stations here like to joke that "if it bleeds, it leads" on WSVN, whose eight hours of news programming is designed to shock and to entertain.
The station's glitzy, hyperkinetic style borrows heavily from MTV and tabloid shows, hoping to attract young viewers who have resisted traditional news programs.
Since adopting the rambunctious approach in 1989, WSVN has run a strong second to the ABC affiliate, and, according to some ratings, its newscasts occasionally are the most popular in the Miami-Fort Lauderdale area.


The C.I.A.'s Old Friends Come Around, Menacingly
EVER since the Director of Central Intelligence warned President John F. Kennedy in 1961 that the Cuban exiles training for the Bay of Pigs invasion could become a "disposal problem," America has learned repeatedly that covert support of foreign armies often fuels passions and bears consequences that the American patrons never intended.
Cubans trained by the Central Intelligence Agency to attack the Castro regime later turned up as Watergate burglars and as the bombers of Miami homes and offices of those they suspected favored contact with the Cuban Government.
In Nicaragua, the hard-core leftovers of the contra rebels continue to wage war against President Violeta Chamorro, even though her Government was elected and has United States support.


High Fashion Is Better Late Than Never
IT was the Metropolitan Museum of Art that started Roberto Mitrotti thinking about celebrity castoffs.
"I got a letter last year from the Costume Institute saying so-and-so donated a tie-dyed bell-bottom suit by Cerutti that he said he'd bought at your boutique in the early 70's," Mr.
Mitrotti recalled.
The museum wanted Mr.
Mitrotti, who once owned the Madonna boutiques in Manhattan and Beverly Hills, Calif., which were frequented by the likes of John Lennon and Andy Warhol, to validate its provenance.
"I began wondering what people were doing with their old clothes," he said.
So, he and a friend, Linda Stein, conceived of Transfer, a new East Side boutique that sells used apparel by many of the world's top designers.
Many of the clothes were once worn by rock stars and sundry celebrities, and they typically sell for about a quarter the original price.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 10 MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $267,000
244 West 23d Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a loft building; dining room, fireplace, sauna; maintenance $541, 18% tax-deductible (Broker: Silverman Group)  Madison Square  $199,000
5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, health club, Madison Square Park view; common charge $283, taxes $2,632 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Sutton Place  $1.1 million
25 Sutton Place  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, East River view; maintenance $4,747, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  TriBeCa  $419,500
55 White Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,989-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 13-ft.-ceilings, fireplace, Corinthian columns, c/a, 3 exposures; common charge $434, taxes $4,536 (Brokers: Eychner Associates-Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $205,000
202 West 85th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 11-ft.-ceilings, original oak trim, 3 exposures; maintenance $874, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Kathleen Perkins Real Estate)  West Village  $180,000
92 Horatio Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a prewar building; renovated kitchen and bath, fireplace, skylight, private roof deck; maintenance $885, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher &amp; Co.)  BRONX  Fordham  $160,000
2606 Grand Avenue  7-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,944 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Wakefield  $228,000
631 East 237th Street  2-family frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit, 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: ERA/Best Match)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope  $400,000
433 4th Street  2-family, 3-story limestone; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths, double parlor, dining room, marble mantels in duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,660 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  Sheepshead Bay  $275,000
2057 East 24th Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,759 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  QUEENS  Forest Hills  $49,000
99-45 67th Road  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, remodeled kitchen and bath, 2 exposures; maintenance $357, 44% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  Whitestone  $490,000
144-20 South Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family detached split-level; dining room, remodeled kitchen, marble baths, 2 fireplaces, den, finished basement, c/a, 80- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,700 (Broker: Value Lane Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Grant City  $183,000
164 Otis Avenue  2-family detached brick and wood-frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen in each; full basement, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,631 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  New Springville  $115,000
48 Stone Lane  (The Oaks)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar duplex condo; dining room, pool, health club; common charge $177, taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Paul Suttman, 59, Sculptor, Dies; Known for Impressionistic Works
Paul Suttman, a sculptor best known for Impressionistic figurative works in bronze, died on Wednesday at his home in South Kent, Conn.
He was 59.
The cause was heart failure, said Jacques Kaplan, an art dealer in Kent who represented Mr.
Suttman.


U.N. Study Says Site In County Is Best Deal
A UNITED NATIONS budgetary committee has called on Unicef to reconsider its rejection of a proposal by New Rochelle to build a new headquarters for the agency, known as the Children's Fund, as part of a projected United Nations community district.
Unicef's executive director, James P. Grant, recommended earlier this year that the international agency, which is running out of space in a building adjacent to United Nations headquarters, expand its offices in Manhattan.


Conflict in the Balkans; Bosnia Muslims and Croats Agree to Truce
Lord Owen, the European Community's peace negotiator in the Balkans, won agreement today from Bosnian Croats and Muslims to halt their fighting.
"I hope we achieved a small step of bringing together people determined to stop the appalling humanitarian abuses we've seen," Lord Owen said after the two sides agreed to the truce.


As Gay Marchers Gather, Mood Is Serious and Festive
From the Lincoln Memorial to the United States Capitol, thousands of homosexuals virtually transformed this city today, demanding more spending on AIDS, honoring their military dead and just plain having a good time.
In a prelude to Sunday's big march on Washington, which has drawn lesbian and gay Americans and their supporters from throughout the country, the capital's streets were caught up in a mix of solidarity, protest and celebration.


How to Keep Sight of Health Plan Costs; Save on Processing
To the Editor:
Your April 13 discussion of a national health plan with the same coverage for all omits a major reason for supporting a uniform comprehensive package of prevention and treatment -- the cost saving.


A Juried Show by 28 Artists and a Solo Show by Their Judge
IT is a day's work judging a show, sifting through the submissions and selecting, on average, a quarter of them.
Some choices are spontaneous, but most are the result of long deliberation.
Then there are the awards, which include "Best in Show" -- surely the most absurd category ever devised for art.
Their work completed, the judges are free to slink away, unjudged themselves, for who is to see the works that got away?
They can get hate mail, however.


The G.O.P. Can Win, But It Can't Gloat
THERE is something President Clinton and Senate Republicans seem to agree on.
Both say it's not all that important that the Republicans killed his economic stimulus bill last week.
From the President, it was normal enough to say, as he did Friday, that "Everything has been passed except the stimulus program, so I think we're doing fine." Anybody who loses likes to think it didn't matter all that much.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Feb. 93
Jan. 93
Feb. 92
New York
1,313
1,652
1,661
New Jersey
1,070
514
1,323
Connecticut
781
367
502
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.62
7.69
8.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.79
4.85
6.18
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.49
7.54
8.80
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.66
4.70
5.91
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.52
7.58
8.82
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.45
4.48
6.06
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.73
7.80
9.06
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.36
5.40
6.56
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.21
3.31
4.14
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.28
7.28
8.15
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


A French Soldier of Fortune Tries on the Mantle of Patriot and Finds It Fits
Wandering past the Cafe de la Paix near the Paris Opera wearing a blue blazer, collar and tie, Bob Denard looked like any other respectable Parisian returning to work after lunch.
"One can be a mercenary and a gentleman, you know," he said with a smile.
The dapper 64-year-old had good reason to feel relaxed.
After 30 years of adventure, war and politics across Africa, this country's most famous soldier of fortune has at last come in from the heat, surprised to be alive, even more surprised to find France ready to embrace him as a patriot.


Musical Mirages Via Pakistan
It is rare for non-Western pop musicians, no matter how gifted, to make an album, even a masterpiece, suited to an American audience.
This is especially true of stars from the Middle East and Asia, with their music's unfamiliar time signatures and daunting scales.
But Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and Party's new album, "Devotional and Love Songs" (RealWorld Carol 2300-2; CD and cassette), could introduce thousands to Pakistan's qawwali music.
Mr.
Khan is the foremost living singer of qawwali (pronounced Kwa-WAL-li), which began as Muslim religious songs in Persia and Pakistan around the 12th century.
Sufi performers transferred the epic devotional poems recited at shrines into extended vocal concerts accompanied by hand clapping and multiple drums.
Over time, secular love songs entered into the qawwali repertory.


E. A. Cavanaugh, James A. Kerr
Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Cavanaugh of Devon, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anne Cavanaugh, to James Alexander Kerr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kerr of Riverside, Ill.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Cavanaugh, 27, is the office manager for the Armand Group Inc., an investment banking firm in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the president of the Healthcare Investment Corporation, a health-care venture capital concern in Edison, N.J.
He was the deputy chief of the White House staff during the Administration of President Gerald R. Ford.


Talking: Agents; For Buyers, Brokers of Their Own
CHANGES are taking place over the way real-estate brokers handle their clients, with one affecting buyers all over the country and another involving sellers of two- and three-bedroom apartments in Manhattan.
Traditionally, brokers have signed up sellers rather than buyers and taken their customary 6 percent commission from them.
Although such brokers also work closely with buyers, they have never had any fiduciary responsibility to them, something that often comes as a shock.


Hiking Trails and More, Just Waiting for Takers
WESTCHESTER COUNTY has more than 16,000 acres of public parks and preserves and 212 miles of paved and unpaved trails, but most residents have never set a hiking boot on any of them.
In a county that often seems choked with development, where crowds await their turn to use public golf courses, boat-launching ramps and Playland Amusement Park, the county's more rugged parks appear empty.


10 Children and Their Challenges; NICHOLAS WHITIKER, 10
Nicholas rarely gets to leave his neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago.
For a change of pace, I took him and his brother, Willie, to the Auto Show.
They bounced from car to car, until a white salesman ordered them out of a Range Rover.
"We've had some vandalism," the salesman said, hurrying the boys out.
The children ran to a Jaguar where three whites were sitting inside.
A salesman rolled down the window and said, "You are not getting in."
They hurried to the trucks, where a crowd watched a dance act.
Blocked by adult shoulders, the boys climbed on a truck bed to see.
Before they could straighten themselves, a white police officer ordered them down.


Laura R. Persky, Richard Holzberg
Laura Rachel Persky, the daughter of Robert S. Persky of New York and Maram Persky Schuster of Sarasota, Fla., was married last evening to Richard Michael Holzberg, a son of Ernest Holzberg of Larchmont, N.Y. and the late Rose Holzberg.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman officiated at the Columbia University faculty house in New York.
Mrs.
Holzberg, an account executive at Ketchum Advertising in New York, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


Ms. Taormina, Mr. Armstrong
Katherine Felicity Taormina, the daughter of Vincent Taormina of Palos Verdes, Calif., and Felicity Taormina of Irving, N.Y., was married in New York yesterday to William Henry Armstrong 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Armstrong Jr. of Denver.
The Rev.
Canon Joel A. Gibson performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Mrs.
Armstrong, 26, is a media supervisor at DDB Needham Worldwide, the advertising agency, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father is a financial consultant at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Los Angeles.
Her mother is a cookbook writer.


Basic Black, For Uptown Or Downtown
High fashion loses some of its seriousness when it can be had for a fraction of the original price.
Consider this uptown/downtown look from the racks at Transfer: a previously owned shoulder-baring, wasp-waisted black cotton minidress from Claude Montana's 1991 spring collection ($300, originally $1,800), and an unworn black tulle skirt with a jagged hem, from the New York designer Tracey Carpino ($100, originally $400).


Bomb Shatters Heart of London's Financial District


Lost in a City He Calls Home
Bobby Bonilla sank into the deepest corner of the white Lincoln stretch limousine, and stared intently through the smoked windows.
Beyond the heaps of trash -- coffee cups, diapers, sheets of newsprint -- swept up by the wind and blown across across the Grand Central Parkway, Bonilla could see the skyline of Manhattan.
"New York City, after being away for 12 years, looks like a place with a lot of problems," Bonilla confessed.
"But that doesn't make it foreign to me. Growing up was hard. Even baseball has been very hard and confusing to me."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed John Franco, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 17.
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Matched the New York Jets' offer sheet for Derrick Fenner, running back.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Matched Tampa Bay's offer sheet for Pat Newman, wide receiver.


PLEAS FOR ASYLUM INUNDATE SYSTEM FOR IMMIGRATION
Barely two years after it was altered to abolish harsh and arbitrary procedures, the American system of political asylum cannot cope with the growing crowds of people at the nation's gates, immigration officials say.
Nationwide, more than 250,000 foreigners are waiting in line to see one of only 150 asylum officers.
Some have been waiting for years.
All say they fear persecution at home, and immigration officials estimate that tens of thousands really are running for their lives.
Under the law, most are allowed into the United States immediately, physically on free soil, but legally in limbo.


Viewpoints; Rationing Care? Let the Patient Do It
WHATEVER health reforms come out of Washington, they won't succeed unless they recognize that our resources are finite and rationing of care is necessary.
One powerful way to do that is a new kind of insurance allowing policyholders to choose in advance the medical services they want and do not want.
These policies, which might be called discretionary health insurance, would incorporate a person's advance directives about health care, much as living wills do.
Offered by private insurers and Medicare, the policies would vary in coverage and premiums and, like living wills, would reflect people's preferences about resuscitation, intensive care and other kinds of medical treatment typically given during serious illnesses.
Decisions regarding discretionary care would be reaffirmed each year, when the policies are renewed.


Free Radicals; The Price We Pay For Breathing
IN THIS AGE OF THE moderate triumphant, all things radical bear a bad connotation.
Radical capitalists are greedy, radical leftists are passe, radical anarchists seem merely confused.
But surely nothing can match the ill repute of free radicals.
These molecular brigands, generated by each cell in the body by the tens of thousands every day, barrel into whatever component of the cell they are nearest when born -- protein, DNA, the gentle membrane that girdles the cell in defensive embrace.
They can deform and corrode any partner they touch, and they have lately been blamed for chronic degenerative disorders like cancer and heart disease, acute problems like the massive nerve death that follows spinal cord injury, even the creeping depredations of age.
Among fitness mavens and longevity seekers, the favored talismans du jour are the antioxidant nutrients -- vitamins E and C and beta carotene, the precursor to vitamin A -- which can sponge up or neutralize free radicals.


Tough Sell
When a Democratic Congress received a proposed annual budget from a Republican President, a hospital emergency-room term was invariably used to describe its reception: "Dead on Arrival," D.O.A. for short.
This year, with one party in control of both Congress and the White House, the famous phrase was the basis of a pun: "While the Clinton budget will not be Dead on Arrival," said John Kasich, ranking Republican on the House Budget Committee, "there's no question that it's Debt on Arrival." (Punsters instantly recalled the panning of a Clifford Odets drama: "Odets, where is thy sting?")
All agreed, however, that the tax provisions in the President's budget would be a
tough sell
. This phrase, which can denote the
hard sell
delivered with
tough love
, has become the spring entry for cliche of the year.


'Grand Illusions' in Chicago
The Chicago Historical Society is celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Chicago World's Fair with a new exhibition, "Grand Illusions: Chicago's World's Fair of 1893," which will open on May 1.
Also called the World's Columbian Exposition, in commemoration of Columbus's arrival in the Americas, the fair was conceived as a showcase for progress in the New World.
It was, in some respects, "an early version of a trade show," according to a spokeswoman for the society.


Medical Report Supports Claims Of Torture by Bombing Suspect
A defendant in the World Trade Center bombing who said he was tortured during an interrogation in Egypt last month had burns on his groin and a bruise on his head when he arrived in the United States days later, according to a medical report filed in court documents.
The report on Mahmud Abouhalima, who said he was burned with cigarettes and beaten during questioning by Egyptian officials, was the result of an examination by a Government-appointed doctor on March 24, the same day the 34-year-old cabdriver was flown from Egypt to New York by the F.B.I.


No Headline
Our national philosophy is to accept people fleeing persecution.
We don't want to turn them away.
There are good people who deserve asylum, no question about it.
But it's so easy to defeat the system, a 10-year-old could do it.
VERNE JERVIS, a spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service.  [ 1:6. ]


U.S. Is Asked to Control Prices of Drugs It Develops
With health costs continuing to soar, some economists and health-care experts think the Government should try to restrain prices on a costly group of drugs over which it has some nominal authority.
These are drugs developed by Federal researchers but marketed by pharmaceutical companies.
These experts argue that the companies, in marketing drugs the Government discovers, should be required to charge no more than a "fair" price, as called for in contracts they sign.
And they say that when the Government pays for research on drugs owned by private companies, the price of the drugs should reflect the public's investment.
A thorny issue, however, is who should determine what a fair price is and how.


Nature Takes Its Course On the Beaches
"Beach Access Could Be Cut Up to Half"  [ March 28 ]  and previous articles regarding the erosion of Long Island's coastline is to what this refers.
Eons ago, during the Ice Age, when the glaciers were forming our mountains, lakes, rivers and islands, there was no Army Corps of Engineers.
Nature took its course.
Now we have the Army Corps of Engineers trying to protect Long Island and its barrier beaches from erosion and floods caused by hurricanes and other Nor'easters.
Nature will take its course, no matter whose efforts.


Awards Going to 20 Westchester Writers
THE things writers most often hear:
"If only I had the time, I'd write."


Loss, Mourning and Prayers for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina


GUNSHOTS KILLED 2 MEMBERS OF CULT
Officials at the Tarrant County Medical Examiner's office confirmed tonight that at least two members of the Branch Davidian cult had died from bullet wounds.
The two had both been shot in the head, said Dr.
Nizan Peerwani, the county's chief medical examiner.


The Different Types Of Special Interests
The pro-development bleeding hearts distort the terms Nimby and special interest for their own purposes.
Nimbyism is properly defined as residents opposed to a socially desirable project such as a drug-treatment facility or a school, for example.
They acknowledge the need, but say, "Not in my backyard."


America's Cup to Scuttle Spy Tactics for 1995
The astronomical costs of the 1992 America's Cup yachting campaigns, as well as the dissension caused during the competition by technological espionage, have prompted organizers to consider stricter rules for the 1995 event.
Among the proposals is a plan to limit each campaign to two new boats.
Syndicates constructed as many as five of the 75-foot sailing yachts for the 1992 race series at a cost about $5 million per boat to build and equip.


Conflict in the Balkans; Serbs Again Reject Vance-Owen Peace Proposals
Courting the risk of allied air strikes and virtually assuring that new international sanctions will descend on Yugoslavia on Monday, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs said today that a proposal to link Serbian enclaves in Bosnia with a demilitarized corridor was not acceptable.
After meeting for three hours with Lord Owen, who is trying to mediate an end to the Bosnian war, the Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic, said the latest version of the peace plan "is absolutely anti-Serb" and "didn't meet a single Serbian need."


Conflict in the Balkans; War Is an Icy Undercurrent In Blooming Belgrade Spring
In the basement restaurant of the Writers Club, a late-night den of smoke and drink and heated talk among Belgrade intellectuals, it was obvious just looking at the waiter's face that something had gone terribly wrong.
He reddened and sputtered and put his hand over his heart.
Then he confessed: The jar of caviar that the hostess had brought for her table of guests had fallen and broken.
The caviar was inedible.
The hostess's face clouded over.
Then she threw her hands up in the air and laughed.
"How can I be angry over a broken jar of caviar after what I've seen in this country?" The other diners relaxed.


A New Club Rises From Another's Ashes
IN nearly all activities of a competitive or entrepreneurial nature, there are far more losers than winners.
This generalization applies not only to bridge but also to bridge clubs, for in Manhattan in the last 30 years, many have started but few have stayed the course.
For most of that period there were four major clubs: the Beverly, at 130 East 57th Street; the Manhattan, at 27 West 72d Street; the Regency Whist, at 15 East 67th Street, and the Cavendish, at 105 East 73d Street.
Many players left homeless by the demise of the Cavendish two years ago have played at the Young Men's Philanthropic League at 4 East 80th Street, or the Town Club at 9 East 86th Street.


On Sunday; Have Camera, Will Travel The Subway
IT was 6:30 A.M. when Paul Fleuranges, subway reporter for New York 1 News, left the two-family house where he lives in Corona, Queens, carrying a backpack and his 15-pound TV camera.
Just like most reporters for the New York City all-news cable station, he's a one-person crew, and on this day he was off to rate the N train in Brooklyn.
Would it rank with the Q train ride, the one he awarded four tokens?
You don't get many 4-token rides in a lifetime.
Or would it be like the L train?
"I gave it one token, lowest yet," he recalled.
That Oct. 27 morning he arrived in Brooklyn at the Lorimer stop just as passengers learned that someone had jumped in front of a train several stations ahead, shutting everything down.
Riders were tearing out their hair.
When service resumed, it was so crowded he had to wait for four trains before he could squeeze on.
"That was fun," he says.


Selfless Devotion Or Misguided Zeal?
Prof.
Harold Hongju Koh and his students at Yale Law School are demonstrating a spirit of selfless devotion to a cause that bodes well for the legal profession in the future, but I believe that their present cause is misguided ("Yale Law School Team Takes on an Alumnus," April 11).
In their zeal to gain admission to the United States for 264 H.I.V.-positive Haitians presently detained at Guantanamo, they choose to ignore the enormous cost (264 x $100,000, on average) to the American taxpayer once these people become ill (some already are), and the fact that there are an increasingly large number of Americans with AIDS for whom we are unable to provide adequate care.
There is also the likelihood that these particular Haitians will swell our already over-burdened welfare rolls.


'Inside American Education'
To the Editor:
John Brademas's review of Thomas Sowell's "Inside American Education" seems to miss the point in at least two areas.


The Later Life Of a Detective's Son
The March 14 "Jerseyanna," about "a renowned detective who fell from grace," was of great interest in me because I was born in Mount Holly and lived there during the time of this incident.
Ellis Parker Sr. was held in esteem in our community and held in awe by the younger generation.
I knew his children, Jane and Eddie, who were in high school with me.
I cannot argue the reasons for Mr.
Parker's behavior, nor that of his son, Ellis Jr.
However, perhaps out of loyalty to his father, Ellis Jr. corroborated with him.


Blasts Pop Manhole Covers
Underground explosions blew two 200-pound manhole covers into the air on a street in Morningside Heights in Manhattan yesterday afternoon, injuring one pedestrian and shattering windows along the block, the police said.
The first blast occurred at 12:33 P.M. outside an apartment building at 610 West 112th Street near Broadway, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.
A woman walking nearby, whom the police would not identify, was slightly injured.
Minutes later, down the block, another manhole cover was blown into the air.
A spokesman for Consolidated Edison Company, Richard Mulieri, said a secondary cable under the street had sparked and burned.
He said during the winter, salt seeps into the manhole, which erodes cable insulation.
"This forms a gas inside the manhole," he said.
"With the insulation eaten away, you can get a spark that ignites the gas."


World Markets; Can Tokyo Shake Off a Soaring Yen?
INVESTMENT analysts here have come up with their own version of a classic joke to describe the stock market's latest gyrations.
How do you invest in Japanese stocks when the yen is rocketing out of control?
Answer: very carefully.
The soaring value of the yen last week, to a postwar high against the dollar, took some of the steam out of the stock market's first convincing bull run in a year.
With lingering memories of the market's many failed attempts at recovery since 1990, there was something of a collective groan as investors confronted a new set of scenarios and counted the stronger yen's toll on the economy.


A Forged Visa, but a Legitimate Case
Critics of the asylum system say it has become a crooked avenue for illegal immigration.
They point to thousands of asylum-seekers who come to the United States bearing bogus visas and passports purchased from smugglers, embassy officials or airline employees.
But Federal and international laws deliberately create a loophole for such people.
The principle is straightforward: the state authorities who control legitimate travel documents are the same people from whom asylum-seekers are fleeing.


The Show's 'Dirty Premise'
To the Editor:
I'm pretty sure I know the answer to the question posed by James Gorman's article.
I think most parents feel at some level an intense sorrow for bringing children into this horribly flawed world and feel inadequate to the task of raising them.
Barney's secret mission is to program children to take responsibility for making their world a nice, safe place -- something that I would argue is impossible.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Weston, Conn.  $318,000
105 Blue Spruce Circle  5-bedroom, 2,700-square-foot, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; screened porch, hardwood floors, 2 acres; taxes $4,624.
West Simsbury, Conn.  $280,000
1 The Mews  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; sunken living room, separate guest wing, c/ a, 1.9 acres; taxes $6,168.
Wilton, Conn.  $459,900  37 Black Alder Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old Tudor; central vacuum, security system, period details, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,027.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $170,000
68 Stewart Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, flagstone patio, cathedral ceiling, 1-car garage; taxes $2,796.
Harrison, N.Y.  $46,000
74 Underhill Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old garden apartment co-op; hardwood floors, modern kitchen, outdoor pool; maintenance $445.
White Plains, N.Y.  $244,000
116 Topland Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-baths, 44-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, screened-in porch; taxes $4,864.
OTHER AREAS Brightwaters, L.I.  $218,000
89 South Bay Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 1-car detached garage; taxes $6,200.
New Hyde Park, L.I.  $203,000
125 North 11th Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,300.
Fords, N.J.  $115,000
448 Crows Mill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath duplex; new garage with workshop, deck, remodeled bath with skylight; taxes $2,578.


On a Night for Starters, Yanks Finish on Top
It was magnificent, marvelous and magical.
Melido Perez and Erik Hanson duplicated each other inning after swift inning tonight, and the result was a steady stream of zeros on the scoreboard.
Two evenings after Seattle's Chris Bosio pitched a no-hitter at the Kingdome, two pitchers were exemplary in this game.
Neither Perez nor Hanson had a no-hitter beyond the first inning, but both still put on a wonderful display that had Yankee and Mariners batters in a funk.
The Mariners did not have a runner reach third base in the game and mustered two singles off Perez while the Yankees twice pushed a runner to third.
It was a night for the starters.
At least until the ninth inning when the Yankees threatened and Hanson was removed.
The unlucky Perez was removed to start the 10th.
Neither notched a decision.


Blair Thomas's Potential: Is It Waiting or Wasted
The last time the Jets had a pick as high as their No. 3 selection in the first round of this afternoon's National Football League college draft, they used the No. 2 choice to get running back Blair Thomas in 1990.
You don't have to remind the Jets' general manager, Dick Steinberg.
He pulled the trigger on the pick.
And for goodness' sake, don't mention that Thomas hasn't lived up to the expectations that generally accompany a No. 2 pick, unless you want to see him go into orbit.


Cost of Car Rentals Is Going Up
People who plan to rent cars in Manhattan this summer will find them more expensive and generally older.
But reservations will not be any harder to get than they were last summer, despite the threats of the car rental companies, which lost a battle in the New York State Legislature last spring over liability rules.
Rates are up in New York, as they are around the country, mostly because the auto manufacturers have discontinued the discounts they formerly gave rental companies.
Hertz and Avis say their costs are up sharply and as a result they are keeping the cars on the road a few months longer.


Intolerably False
To the Editor:
What a pleasure to hear an adult admit that not only does he hate Barney but he hates the messages Barney and his robotic friends force-feed our children.
Barney's insipid world is so unnerving and false that I cannot tolerate even a few minutes of the program.
Maybe children wouldn't be so enthralled with a goofy purple eggplant if there were something to take its place.
EMILY STERN New York


ASTHMA KILLS
I have spent 33 years battling asthma, have come close to death several times and, until just a few years ago, spent my life on a wide variety of drug therapies.
I refuse to believe that I can't be cured.
I have been on a quest for that cure via chiropractors, vitamin supplements, acupuncture, homeopathy and myriad other types of holistic medicine, including Chinese herbs.
On this journey, I discovered that I had food allergies and sensitivities too numerous to mention.
Medical doctors had pooh-poohed me for years during checkups.
"No, your diet has nothing to do with your lungs," said one.
But three things have worked miracles for me: a complete overhaul of my diet, pranayama (yogic breathing exercises) and homeopathic remedies.
I also can't live without vitamin C and cardiovascular exercise.


Holy Cow!
To the Editor:
I enjoyed Robert Pinsky's encomium to "O Holy Cow! The Selected Verse of Phil Rizzuto" (April 4).
At the same time, I was struck by the irony that because Mr.
Rizzuto is a well-known sports personality, his found poems are likely to outsell Mr.
Pinsky's own skillful verse by one to two orders of magnitude.
I was reminded of Ogden Nash's mordant observation that fame is a much more important factor than quality in the marketing of literature:
A regular poet published a book,  And an excellent book it was,  But nobody gave it a second look,  As nobody often does.
D. A. FEINFELD Scarsdale, N.Y.


Jeffrey D. Klearman, Nicola Fritz
Nicola Maria Fritz, a vice president in the foreign-investment group at J. P. Morgan Securities Inc., was married yesterday to Jeffrey David Klearman, a vice president in the interest-rate derivatives group at Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Charles Weiser, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Klearman, 27, graduated from Princeton.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bertold Fritz of Coffee Springs, Ala.
Her father, now retired, was the president of the Texaco Development Corporation, a subsidiary of the Texaco Corporation in White Plains.
Her mother, Bea Fritz, taught foreign languages at Albert Einstein High School in Buchholz, Germany.
Mr.
Klearman, 32, graduated from Purdue University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Klearman of St.
Louis.
His father, now retired, was a real-estate investor and manager in St.
Louis.


Correction
A picture caption on April 11 with an article about a community seder at Manhattanville College misidentified the sponsors.
They were the Westchester-Putnam B'nai B'rith and the Manhattanville Jewish Students Association.


Count to 10 and Pet The Dog
If every negative emotion given a name -- fear, depression, loneliness, dread, anxiety, resentment and more -- sets in motion some physiological disturbance, it cannot bode well for those chronically afflicted by any of them.
One in particular is suspect, though, implicated especially in heart disease, and that is anger.
Of all the emotional facets that heart patients might show, this one appears most prominent.
Their anger tends to be unusually frequent and unusually intense.
Such findings have led researchers not just to conclude that the angry are more vulnerable to sickness of various sorts, but also to prescribe ways of harnessing, dispelling and even banishing the emotion.
While the "fight or flight" response might have been a survival tool in the Stone Age, the tendency to see threats all around has outlived its usefulness.


A sampling of American-run tours and cruises to Indochina
American tour and cruise operators are responding to the growing tourist industry in Vietnam with a slew of new offerings.
Despite current interest by some American veterans of the Vietnam War in returning to the country, the tours do not focus in particular on the war, although many include the Cu Chi tunnels outside Ho Chi Minh City used by the Viet Cong.
Most companies will tailor tours to the customers' needs.
Many also offer broader tours that include the bordering countries of Laos and Cambodia, although the State Department has recently issued an advisory on Cambodia warning of banditry and sporadic military fighting outside Phnompenh.
And the capital itself has seen some violence in the last few weeks.
Prices are based on two people sharing a room or cabin.
A selective sampling follows.
Absolute Asia, 155 West 68th Street, New York, N.Y. 10023, (800) 736-8187, offers a variety of tours of Vietnam, from the four-day Ho Chi Minh City Stopover, departing daily from Bangkok, which includes two days in Ho Chi Minh City and a day trip to the Cu Chi tunnels in the outlying hills known as the Iron Triangle, because they were so strongly fortified during the war, to the 12-day Vietnam Explorer tour.
Departing every day except Monday from Bangkok, it begins in Hanoi and continues on to Danang, Hue, Nahtrang and Dalat, ending in Ho Chi Minh City.
The first class Ho Chi Minh City Stopover package price a person is $1,080 to $1,355.
The Vietnam Explorer package price is $2,955 to $3,365.
Both include air fare from Bangkok.
More unusual tours include a 10-day trekking and sailing safari through the central highlands and on the South China Sea ($1,850 a person, air fare from Bangkok not included).


Conversations/Mark Winston Griffith; Into the World of Banking Comes a Hip-Hop Credit Union
AS the president of the newest Federally chartered lending institution in New York City, Mark Winston Griffith cuts a striking figure across the gray and gritty blocks of central Brooklyn.
Sporting natty dreadlocks and a loan officer's bright tie, the 30-year-old is a poet among community activists and an iconoclast among bankers.
"Bring the noise! We're 'bout to take it to ya face," he said concluding his speech at the April 17 opening of the Central Brooklyn Federal Credit Union in the Bedford Stuyvesant community.


Jeff Greenfield and Karen Gannett
Karen Anne Gannett, a television news producer in New York, was married last evening to Jeff Greenfield, the political and media analyst for ABC News.
Judge Kimba Wood of the United States District Court for the Southern District officiated at the Sign of the Dove restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Gannett, who is keeping her name, is also a consultant to the Museum of Television and Radio in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Remembrance In Liverpool
To commemorate the Battle of the Atlantic, the longest-running campaign of World War II, the British Royal Navy and Merseyside civic and tourism authorities are planning an ambitious program of events from May 26 to 31.
Veterans from the battle, including German veterans, have been invited to participate in the commemoration in Liverpool, about 200 miles north of London.
The battle ran from the beginning of the war in Europe in 1939 to its end in 1945.
For much of that time, the Germans' Atlantic navy had the upper hand until May 1943, when the tide of the conflict began to turn in favor of the Allies.
Liverpool was Britain's main convoy port throughout the war years and headquarters for the Western Approaches Command.


Beijing
THE best thing about visiting Beijing used to be the travelers' horror stories you accumulated.
There was the time I was awakened in the middle of the night at the Jianguo Hotel by a cockroach strolling across my cheek, and the time a British friend had his contact lens case thoughtfully cleaned out by the hotel maid, who sent the lenses down the drain, and then there were the toilets . . .
These days, however, travelers can easily find a comfortable hotel and good meals.
They can be met at the airport by an English-speaking representative of their hotel, who can arrange for a car.
In their hotel they can watch MTV, order a bagel, book a squash court and direct-dial New York.


Suspect Firm Said to Prompt Report in '90
The New York City Transportation Commissioner, Lucius J. Riccio, told the city's Commissioner of Investigation two years ago that he believed he was under extraordinary pressure from lobbyists and a senior mayoral aide to grant a lucrative contract to a data processing company that had been caught up in the municipal scandals of the mid-1980's, a city official says.
But the Investigation Commissioner, Susan E. Shepard, apparently did not start a full investigation into Mr.
Riccio's complaint.
Ms.
Shepard did start an inquiry into the contract last month, apparently after learning that The Village Voice was preparing an article critical of the city's actions in formulating and awarding the contract.


Allison B. Sher, Daniel S. Arkin
Allison Beth Sher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan L. Sher of Santa Monica, Calif., was married yesterday evening to Daniel Scott Arkin, a son of Renee Arkin of Miami and the late Jerome Arkin.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk performed the ceremony at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Arkin, 29, is an associate at Rosenman &amp; Colin, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father retired as the chairman and chief executive of Bateman Eichler Hill Richards, a securities firm in Los Angeles.


'Inside American Education'
To the Editor:
As a regular recipient of alumni publications from Princeton and Harvard who also follows events on other "elite campuses," I find nothing extravagant in Thomas Sowell's references to "left-wing storm-trooper power" and "cultural gauleiters in the dormitories." Indeed, these passages quoted in John Brademas's review of "Inside American Education" (March 28) are no less "on target" than many of Mr.
Sowell's other criticisms of contemporary American education in which Mr.
Brademas reluctantly concurs.


Baltimore
To the Editor: I enjoyed Susan Katz Miller's article, "What's Doing in Baltimore" (March 7).
Because I rarely travel with a camera, it is through such articles that I relive enjoyable visits as it seems that our trips often precede your What's Doing articles.
Doubtless the article will attract many to visit Baltimore so I want a recommend a visit to the Baltimore &amp; Ohio Railroad Museum, a walking distance from Inner Harbor.


When Is a Fact Not a Fact? When It's a Statistic.
The Democratic mayoral primary is still five months off, but accusations -- accompanied by statistical jousting -- are already flying up.
Mayor David N. Dinkins and his chief Democratic opponent, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, squared off last week on a point that Mr.
Stein has been pressing for months: his contention that the Mayor has cut more than $700 million from the city's schools over the last four years.
Mr.
Stein has argued often that Mr.
Dinkins has let down the city's students, and perhaps even imperiled the city's future, by underfinancing the school system.
"This administration has cut more than $700 million from the Board of Education," Mr.
Stein said at a Democratic candidates forum last week in Brooklyn.
"That's a fact."


Hong Kong Is Booking Now For June 30, 1997
Hong Kong is the most popular travel destination in Asia, drawing more international visitors than China or Japan and eclipsing such exotic spots as Bangkok.
Last year the territory counted seven million visitor arrivals -- a remarkable increase of one million over the year before.
And the Hong Kong Tourist Association, a Government-financed body, estimates the number of visitor arrivals will increase 6 to 9 percent this year.
This growth comes at a time when the future of the British colony has never been more precarious.
In 1997 Britain will return the freewheeling territory to China, which has one of the most repressive regimes in the world.
While China has promised to leave life here relatively untouched, no one can be certain how the territory will fare.


Technology; Toting Computers Without Tethers
THE telecommunications industry's oft-whispered promise is that soon, very soon, it will unite telephones, television and computers into a single wireless go-anywhere device.
But the industry must first figure out how to send electronic mail, spreadsheets and other data through the air as easily as through phone wires.
Companies have been making determined, if shambling, progress in this field, which is known as wireless data transfer.
The idea is to use radio waves to free traveling executives and other people on the go from having to plug laptop computers and other data devices into telephone lines.


Lakers' Peeler Is Out
The playoff-bound Lakers have placed rookie guard ANTHONY PEELER on the injured list because of an injured foot.
He is expected to miss a minimum of four to six weeks, said a team spokesman, JOHN BLACK.
Peeler, the Lakers' leading scorer off the bench with 10.4 points, was injured during Wednesday's loss at Salt Lake City, when he collided with Utah's TYRONE CORBIN.


Conflict in the Balkins; War Is an Icy Undercurrent In Blooming Belgrade Spring
In the basement restaurant of the Writers Club, a late-night den of smoke and drink and heated talk among Belgrade intellectuals, it was obvious just looking at the waiter's face that something had gone terribly wrong.
He reddened and sputtered and put his hand over his heart.
Then he confessed: The jar of caviar that the hostess had brought for her table of guests had fallen and broken.
The caviar was inedible.
The hostess's face clouded over.
Then she threw her hands up in the air and laughed.
"How can I be angry over a broken jar of caviar after what I've seen in this country?" The other diners relaxed.


New York Lofts Gain as Home of Choice
LOFTS have long had a raffish reputation in the New York real estate world.
To some, they offer large, light-filled, gallery-like spaces with soaring Italianate windows, cast-iron Corinthian columns and artists for neighbors.
To others, they have all the warmth and homeyness of a warehouse -- loading docks, freight elevators, graffiti-stained front doors, desolate streets.
In recent years, though, loft living has become less Bohemian and more bourgeois as more and more people, particularly families, seek out large flexible spaces, one-floor room configurations and more casual neighborhoods.


Coping With Uncertainties in Child Care
FOR Judith S. Lederman, a public relations and marketing specialist, her decision to give up the fast track followed "too many years of worrying" about her young children.
There were a series of unsatisfactory day-care situations and a string of nannies who came and left.
And even though Ms.
Lederman's career was advancing, she found herself at an uncomfortable crossroads.
After years of juggling child-care arrangements, Ms.
Lederman and her husband, Harold, who have three children, agreed that one parent needed to stay home.


10 Children and Their Challenges; LADEETA SMITH, 18
We had sobbed together one afternoon when Ladeeta told me that her mother no longer recognized her.
For days, my heart jumped when the phone rang, expecting the call that would tell me that Mrs.
Smith had died of AIDS.
I sat with her and her family at the kitchen table in their Crown Heights apartment days after her mother's funeral, poring over photographs and listening to them relive memories.
Ladeeta and I talked about intimate, painful things -- being lonely, wanting to leave the world a different place, what you do to keep going on those days when you want to bury your head under the pillow.


Julie R. Coltoff and Aaron M. Adler
Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Coltoff of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Julie Ruth Coltoff, to Aaron Mark Adler, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Adler of Clark, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Coltoff, 25, is completing graduate studies in social work at Hunter College and is an intern at the Actors' Fund of America.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is the executive director of the Children's Aid Society of New York.
Her mother, Kay Coltoff, is a professional development counselor at the Hunter College School of Social Work.


A Woman's Quest for Her 3d World Championship in Karate
WHEN Debra Bressaw aims a deadly kick at her husband's head, he doesn't seem to mind it at all.
For Bill Bressaw, it's all in an evening's work.
His days are spent practicing law in Woodbridge, but he's also the owner and operator of Bressaw's Middlesex Karate School here.
As for Ms.
Bressaw, she has a black belt and has twice won the world championship in the women's lightweight division of a karate style called shukokai.
On Saturday in Coimbra, Portugal, she is scheduled to start another quest for the championship, held every two years.


In Italy, Even Machiavelli Is Honored in the Breach
AFTER Italy's voters chose in a referendum last week to turn their backs on the way they had let themselves be governed for almost a half-century, many here were tempted to say that the old Machiavellian style of the nation's politics was finally giving way.
If "Machiavellian" means rule by deceit and dissembling, that might well turn out to be the case.
More than 80 percent of the voters endorsed direct elections of most Senators, a move away from the system of proportional representation based on overall party vote that would weaken the power of party bosses discredited in a 14-month-old corruption scandal.
Once enacted as law, electoral reform, and other fundamental changes anticipated in response to the scandal, could introduce a dramatic new sense of accountability into the relationship between voters and politicians.


The View From: Mansfield; With the Loss of an Anchor, a Mall Looks for a Life Preserver
THE announcement that the 104-year-old Sage-Allen Department Store chain would be closing all its stores over the next several weeks will probably have its greatest impact at the East Brook Mall in Mansfield.
The mall already has several empty storefronts, and the closing of the 37,000-square-foot Sage-Allen store, which occupies about 15 percent of the mall's space, will create one of the highest vacancy rates in a Connecticut mall.


Kimber A. Lewis, Harry Yerkes 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Lewis Jr. of Newport News, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kimber Atwill Lewis, to Harry Estile Yerkes 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yerkes 3d of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Lewis, 29, is a teacher at the Episcopal School in New York.
She graduated from Radford University.
Her father is a marine engineer at John J. McMullen, a naval marine architectural concern in Newport News.


POSTINGS: Sonny Mae Mortgages; New Rate Is 5.75%, The Lowest Ever
The steady drop in mortgage interest rates over the last several years has been a boon to The State of New York Mortgage Agency, which through subsidized mortgages has paved the way to home ownership for more than 49,000 moderate-income families throughout the state.
Now the agency, also known as Sonny Mae, is offering the lowest interest rate ever, 5.75 percent for its Low Interest Rate mortgage program.
The previous rate was 6.50 percent.


The Nation's Capital Eagerly Awaits Urban Remedies
THE week before his inauguration, then President-elect Bill Clinton took a walk up Georgia Avenue, a stroll many saw as a symbolic outreach to the city of Washington and to its black population in particular.
The symbols have continued.
Last week Janet Reno, the new head of the Justice Department, comforted students in a school in a Northwest Washington neighborhood plagued by a drive-by gunman.
And Mr.
Clinton named a native Washingtonian, Loretta Avent, as liaison to the local regional government council.


For Artists Of All Ages
A benefit for the Pediatric AIDS Foundation drew supporters to the Industria Super Studio, April 18.


Lighting a Candle for 'Hair' at 25
It was only a quarter of a century ago, but sometimes it seems light years.
On April 29, 1968, a date judged astrologically propitious, "Hair" opened at the Biltmore Theater, bringing to Broadway love beads, polymorphous sex, full-frontal nudity, bare feet, anti-Vietnam War protests, dope and the conviction that a new world -- free, fearless and unfettered -- was dawning.


BIG BROTHER'S HERE
Floyd Abrams's article "Big Brother's Here and -- Alas -- We Embrace Him" (March 21) is an intellectual exercise, tut-tutting the loss of freedom that will likely never be regained.
He writes that "we should
pause
" -- emphasis mine -- "for a moment and acknowledge the magnitude of what we have already lost of our personal privacy and what losses seem inevitably to lie ahead.
And we should seek to limit those losses."
We are free citizens of a free republic, and we should yell and kick and raise holy hell at every slightest infringement on our personal freedoms.


Form 1040? The Question Is Not Literacy
To the Editor:
Tax collecting is an "artifact" enterprise, like most other bureaucratic exercises.
The I.R.S. creates no inherently useful products or services.
What it does create is a safe haven for obsessional personalities who are unable to locate useful vocations in the modern world.


They Opened in Vilna
Until his death in 1985, Joseph Buloff was one of the leading actors in Yiddish drama.
ON STAGE, OFF STAGE: Memories of a Lifetime in the Yiddish Theater (Harvard University, paper, $29.95), written with Irving Genn, a family friend, combines selections from Buloff's reminiscences and correspondence with the memories of his wife and leading lady of 60 years, Luba Kadison.
Much of their fascinating story concerns the Vilna Troupe, the celebrated Yiddish theater company where the two began their careers.
Humor, pathos and occasional hyperbole characterize the authors' descriptions of the improvisation and absurdism that were part of everyday life for Jews in the Eastern Europe of the early 20th century.
When Yiddish was prohibited on the stage, actors were instructed to ad-lib in a variety of tongues, even in gibberish, if the local secret police arrived.
Buloff claims to have introduced the theater of the absurd with his expressionistic production in 1925 of "Singer of His Sorrows," which Eugene Ionesco told Buloff influenced his own anti-naturalistic writing style.
The couple made their way to New York in 1927.
They appeared with Maurice Schwartz's famous Yiddish Art Theater.
They also formed an amateur theater group in Chicago and toured South America.
In the 1930's, Buloff made a successful transition into American theater and film, appearing in such Broadway hits as "Oklahoma!" and "My Sister Eileen." "On Stage, Off Stage" conveys, simply and directly, an engrossing tale.


Sentences in Sex Assault Divide Glen Ridge Jurors
As news spread about the sentences for the three Glen Ridge men found guilty of sexually assaulting a retarded schoolmate in 1989, jurors in the case began calling one another, searching for an explanation.
"We couldn't believe it," said Patrick Parker, a truck driver from Irvington who was on the jury.
"What I feel I really can't even put into words. To me, it felt like what we did was for nothing."


Correct Team In Olympic Dressage
Thank you for "Island Equestrians Turning to Dressage"  [ March 28 ] .
I would like to correct one inaccuracy.
Michael Poulin of Maine, my partner and coach, rode Graf George in the Olympics.
DOROTHY E. MUMA Riverhead


Form 1040? The Question Is Not Literacy
To the Editor:
I am shocked at the argument that we allocate more of the country's economic resources to understanding the basically flawed income tax code.
Adding tax instruction at the primary and secondary school level is a total waste of time and resources and would be another diversion from basic education in an already troubled system.


54 Rms Pk Vu
NEW YORK, NEW YORK
How the Apartment House Transformed the Life of the City (1869-1930).
By Elizabeth Hawes.
Illustrated. 285 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Bomb Check Disrupts Traffic on West Side
Traffic was disrupted for over an hour on Manhattan's Upper West Side yesterday evening when a bomb squad was dispatched to investigate what the police described as a suspicious-looking suitcase that was found outside a Tower Records Store at Broadway and 66th Streets.
Employees at the store said they had told the police of the suitcase.
Sgt.
Albert Carpino said the police received the call about 6 P.M., and were particularly concerned because the People's Republic of China's mission to the United Nations is nearby.
Detectives from a bomb squad found the suitcase wedged between two newspaper boxes.


After Waco's Inferno, an Inquisition That Insists on Rational Answers
THE drama changes in its particulars but never in its fundamentals:
In the first act, Something Big and Very Bad happens.
Sometimes it is an act of man (a major episode of killing, or oil-spilling, or prison rioting), and sometimes of nature (hurricane, flood, famine), but always it is big and bad.


Waste Management, American Style
To the Editor:
Regarding "Making Wasteful Packaging Extinct" (Viewpoints, April 4), about Germany's ambitious experiment with mandatory recycling, we won't know if it works there for several years -- but even if it does, that does not mean Americans will embrace such a system.
What works in Europe doesn't necessarily work here.


The Magnolia's Fleeting Beauty
WHEN the magnolias are in bloom, I want to live forever.
If the weather holds -- no last-minute frosts or torrential downpours to turn the white petals brown -- the velvety blossoms will last a week, maybe 10 days.
Every morning, if they're still there, I feel lucky.
If a frost does them in, I just say, "Well, next year." (Talk about gardening being a metaphor for life.) It's this very chanciness that makes me love them so.
Who wants sure-fire plants anyway?
But this year (and I'm knocking on wood as I write this), the magnolias are magnificent -- including my favorite one down on the family farm in Maryland.
I think it's a saucer magnolia (Magnolia x soulangiana), because it has those big creamy cuplike flowers edged in purple.
My parents planted it about 25 years ago, and by now, it's a good 30 feet tall and just as broad.
Like some of the other Asian varieties, the saucer magnolia blooms before it leafs out -- and standing under that velvety cloud of pure blossoms is kind of like falling in love.
An achingly beautiful experience that you know can't last.


Hal Schaffel, Producer, 78
Hal Schaffel, a television and film producer, died on Wednesday in Los Angeles.
He was 78.
The cause of death was complications after a heart attack and bypass surgery in December, said his son Robert, of Jersey City.


POSTINGS: Opening in June; Biggest Pool in New York
The biggest pool in New York City, the AquaCenter, is scheduled to open in June at the Asphalt Green Swim, Sports Training and Rehabilitation Center in the Yorkville section of Manhattan.
The pool is 170 feet long, 60 feet wide and up to 16 feet deep, which is large enough for international competitions.
It also has a floor that can be raised and lowered hydraulically without draining the water, which makes it possible to have teaching sessions for those confined to wheelchairs.
More than 250,000 swimmers a year are expected to use the pool.
Admission fees and program costs have not yet been set.


Accounts of Struggles Prompt a Flood of Help
The public response to the profiles of 10 inner-city youths published by The New York Times over the last three weeks has been as personal as the stories themselves.
Hundreds of readers across the nation unexpectedly reached out to offer support and encouragement to the young people.
In addition to letters and telephone calls, readers sent job offers, checks, clothes and toys.
Some readers said they had grown up in tough neighborhoods and understood the problems faced by this generation; others said they were simply moved by stories of survival.


Bosnian Serb Rejects Plan
Bosnia's Serbian leader said a proposal to link Serbian enclaves in Bosnia with a demilitarized corridor was unacceptable.
Page 20.


IN SHORT: FICTION
GRASSLANDS Stories. By Jonathan Gillman. Rutgers University, cloth, $20; paper, $9.95.


Identity Crisis


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Stimulus Bill: Vote to kill a Republican proposal to spend $4 billion for extended unemployment benefits and another $2 billion for highways, summer youth jobs, immunizations and small-business loans.
Approved 53 to 45, April 20.
2.
Stimulus Bill: Vote to reduce President Clinton's original $19.5 billion economic stimulus program to $15.4 billion.
Approved 52 to 46, April 20.
3.
Stimulus Bill: Vote to end the filibuster on President Clinton's economic stimulus program.
Failed, with 56 in favor and 43 opposed (four short of the 60 needed), April 21.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
N
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
House
1.
Jobless Aid: Vote on a bill providing $4 billion for extended unemployment benefits.
Approved 301 to 114, April 22. (The Senate had approved the bill by voice vote on April 21.)
13
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
A
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
N
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
N
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
A
11. Owens (D) . . .
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


From the Tibetan Mountains to the Connecticut Shore
WHEN Richard Gere used the Academy Awards last month as a platform for calling on the Chinese to get out of Tibet, his remarks were greeted with delight by Connecticut's newest refugee group, Tibetans, who want to bring their story to the world.
Their story, according to Dickie Gyamcho, who is coordinator of the Tibetan Resettlement Project for Connecticut, is of a peaceful people with an ancient culture who were invaded by a powerful neighbor, have been held captive for more than three decades, whose population has been decimated with 1.2 million killed, and who live as a minority in their own land.


RECORD BRIEF
Baby Jane Dexter: 'I Got Thunder'
Elba 5006; CD and cassette.


Patching and Cleaning Spruces Up Siding
VINYL and aluminum siding do not require regular maintenance, but annual washing can keep both looking new.
The simplest way to wash siding is by hand with a sponge or soft-bristled brush, preferably one with a long handle that can be attached to a garden hose.
Mix a half-cup of any heavy duty nonabrasive household detergent with a gallon of water and use that as a washing solution.
Washing from the ground up yields the best results, but rinse the areas frequently with plain water to prevent streaks.
They occur if washed siding dries before it is rinsed.
Another method is to use a pressure washer, which can be rented.
It consists of a gasoline-powered compressor and a variety of spray nozzles that can be attached to a garden hose.
Before pressure-washing use plastic sheeting to cover electrical outlets, light fixtures, poorly sealed windows and doors and other areas that have to remain dry.
Seal around the edges of the plastic with duct tape.
Also cover plants and shrubs.


Roommate Muddle


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Norristown, Pa.; County Seeks To Sell Offices
MONTGOMERY COUNTY is renewing efforts to find a buyer for the Stony Creek Office Center here, a 50,600-square-foot project it took over three years ago because it had guaranteed a loan for its renovation.
The county has been auditioning brokers and property managers since choosing to accept bids from companies that say they can find new ways to cut expenses and lure bidders.
It has already rejected two offers as inadequate.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
In his response to the article about campus crime, Robert A. Reichley, executive vice president of Brown University, states that "the majority of our problems are petty larceny resulting from such student carelessness as unattended book bags or leaving dorm or student room doors unlocked." Is Reichley trying to say that students bring these crimes on themselves?


Lots of Pain And Not Much Gain
By the end of "This Boy's Life," Robert De Niro has become the perfect demon stepfather.
As Dwight, he shouts relentlessly at his adolescent stepson, Toby, and calls the boy a pig for eating candy.
He knocks over chairs and smashes dishes, forces an empty mustard jar over Toby's eye because he doesn't think it's empty enough to be tossed out, and eventually comes to a brutal, all-out punching match with him.
By then the audience is likely to feel as thrashed as Toby.
So why isn't that a compliment?
Because sitting through "This Boy's Life" means experiencing two hours of emotional abuse, and life is too short to put yourself through such a lot of pain for so little in return.
Such graphic films are often highly praised, and too wrenching to sit through.
"Il Ladro di Bambini" ("Stolen Children"), the tale of an abused and unloved brother and sister being taken to an orphanage, and "Lorenzo's Oil," a medical mystery about parents who try to find a cure for their son's degenerative disease, are other recent works that fit the pattern.
Like "This Boy's Life," these films are so admirable, with serious themes and unsentimental styles, that they are hard to fault (which may account for some of the glowing reviews).
But they are also grueling to watch and impossible to send a friend to see.


Working With Nature, Not Against It
IN case gardeners have not noticed, attitudes are changing.
Methods of plant care and insect control are not the same as they used to be.
Product labels are being read.
The result is that gardeners are beginning to do environmentally safe tending.
They are learning to work with nature, not against it.
In response, retailers report that chemical gardening trends are down, while organic gardening trends are up.
Manufacturers are eagerly capitalizing on these trends as rapidly as they can.
Products are now labeled "environmentally safe," "nonchemical," "nonpolluting," "organic." These pitches are beginning to have their effect because consumer behavior is changing.


Elite Intelligence Panel Is Refilled, in Usual Way
Almost no one else has heard of it, but members of a Presidential panel known as the Pfiab can take private pride in being privy to some of the hottest secrets in town.
That is what makes a place on the panel, the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, perhaps the plummiest of all White House appointments -- and a post that often lands in the hands of those to whom Presidents and their parties owe favors.
The Clinton White House, it turns out, is no exception.


Corrections
The Beauty column in The Times Magazine last Sunday misidentified a substance used in hair products.
It is silicone, an organic silicon compound, not silicon.


Patching and Cleaning Spruces Up Siding
VINYL and aluminum siding do not require regular maintenance, but annual washing can keep both looking new.
The simplest way to wash siding is by hand with a sponge or soft-bristled brush, preferably one with a long handle that can be attached to a garden hose.
Mix a half-cup of any heavy duty nonabrasive household detergent with a gallon of water and use that as a washing solution.
Washing from the ground up yields the best results, but rinse the areas frequently with plain water to prevent streaks.
They occur if washed siding dries before it is rinsed.
Another method is to use a pressure washer, which can be rented.
It consists of a gasoline-powered compressor and a variety of spray nozzles that can be attached to a garden hose.
Before pressure-washing use plastic sheeting to cover electrical outlets, light fixtures, poorly sealed windows and doors and other areas that have to remain dry.
Seal around the edges of the plastic with duct tape.
Also cover plants and shrubs.


10 Children and Their Challenges; ASENHAT GOMEZ, 18
It was hard to be an observer and not participate, and as Asenhat's 18th birthday approached, her mother entrusted me with half a week's pay and asked me to buy a typewriter as a present.
I spent a Sunday afternoon visiting various stores searching for just the right one.
Peering into her life as a new immigrant in Brooklyn, I glimpsed what my own parents endured when they arrived in New York from Puerto Rico during the Depression, investing their meager working-class wages in the education of their three children, living in a crowded South Bronx neighborhood not dissimilar from the South Side of Williamsburg.


Into the Wilds of 100 Miles of the East End
INTO the woods.
No, not that way into the woods.
How about this way?
"Or we could start here," said Lee McAllister of Ridge as he and other hikers huddled over a topographical map.
"It might be restricted there," Dave Wilcox of Speonk said.
"It looks like it's a little too close to the runways."


Possible Other Causes Of Breast Cancer
"Officials Heed Call on Breast Cancer"  [ April 4 ]  prompts me to point out that one important additional possible cause was not mentioned, and that was radon.
Although radon in soil-gas leaking into homes causes 20,000 to 40,000 deaths annually in the United States, about the same number as AIDS, it is not generally realized that radon in drinking water has also been implicated by one research worker, Prof.
Douglas G. Mose of George Mason University, as being a possible cause of breast cancer.
Unlike electromagnetic fields, radon is a Class A carcinogen, that is, an agent known to cause cancer.
Long Island is not very different in residential atmospheric-radon risk from most other places in New York, but the question of radon in Long Island water supplies, especially household water taken from individual wells, has not been addressed.
Professor Mose's research suggests that we should look into this on Long Island.


Lisa I. Liebmann, Brooks Adams
Lisa Isabel Liebmann, the daughter of Loraine P. Liebmann and Herman Liebmann, both of New York, was married on Thursday to John Brooks Adams, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Quincy Adams Jr. of Lake Forest, Ill.
Jean S. Kotki, a leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, performed the ceremony at the studio of Philip Taaffe, a painter, in New York.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a writer and art critic who contributes to the art-listings department of The New Yorker magazine.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Making Vegetables an Integral Part of the Meal, Italian Style
VEGETABLES, it was said recently, are even better for us than we thought.
And now that the markets are full of fresh young spring vegetables, it is the perfect time to think about healthful food, like pasta with vegetables.
Even people who grimace at the thought of an evening without meat on the table seem happy to eat a main course that consists of such a combination.
Broccoli rape is an Italian version of broccoli, with a smaller head and a slightly bitter taste.
It makes a superb sauce for pasta (and is also great with Italian sausages).
Fennel looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a slight taste of anise.
It is sometimes called Florence fennel so as not to be confused with herb fennel.
It is superb pureed and mixed with broccoli in a delicately flavored risotto, which can be served as a main course or as a first course.


BEST SELLERS: April 25, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
37
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
6
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
1
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of the "Star Wars" trilogy begun in "Heir to the Empire" and "Dark Force Rising."
4
3
2
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide -- but may have returned to life to reap benefits.
5
4
4
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a model.
6
1
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $19.95.) A physician moves to a small Texas town and tries to live down her bad reputation.
7
6
10
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a patent clerk.
8
7
3
FORWARD THE FOUNDATION, by Isaac Asimov. (Foundation/Doubleday, $23.50.) The final volume of a science fiction series.
9
5
9
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
10
10
2
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
11
8
2
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
12
11
34
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
13
13
22
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
14
14
7
DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the story of a street boy and a genie.
15
15
7
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state, the human race approaches its end.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
37
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
2
1
10
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
3
3
32
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
5
19
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
5
10
2
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for individuals and institutions to make civility part of their lives and functions.
6
4
23
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
7
9
6
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political forces.
8 *
11
31
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
9
8
7
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
10
6
45
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
11 *
7
8
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
12
1
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
13
1
AMY FISHER: My Story, by Amy Fisher with Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the Long Island teen-ager who is now serving time for shooting the wife of a man she says was her lover.
14
12
14
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
15 *
13
2
MARILYN MONROE, by Donald Spoto. (HarperCollins, $25.) A biography of the movie star.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
2
41
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Tips on playing golf.
3
4
2
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
4
3
58
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
5
59
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
Rankings reflect sales for the week ending April 10. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
JUDGE ON TRIAL, by Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Klima's novel describes the crisis of conscience of a jurist in Czechoslovakia as the sureties of his personal life and the Marxist state crumble.
THE PATH TO GENOCIDE: Essays on Launching the Final Solution, by Christopher R. Browning. (Cambridge University, cloth, $39.95; paper, $19.95.) A magisterial, rigorously meditated study of how Nazi Germany instituted the industrialized murder of millions of men, women and children.
WOMAN OF THE INNER SEA, by Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) A picaresque, often hilarious novel, about a wealthy woman's search for love following a family tragedy, that ponders how individuals achieve spiritual wholeness.
CUT WITH THE KITCHEN KNIFE: The Weimar Photomontages of Hannah Hoch, by Maud Lavin. (Yale University, $40.) An account of the work of the avant-garde artist that illuminates new definitions of femininity and sexual roles in Weimar Germany.
PARTICLES AND LUCK, by Louis B. Jones. (Pantheon, $22.) In Mr.
Jones's second novel, a young physicist spends 24 hours learning the difference between reality as described in theoretical journals and reality as people live it day to day.
THE SEVENTH MILLION: The Israelis and the Holocaust, by Tom Segev. (Hill &amp; Wang, $27.50.) A frank and devastating chronicle by a columnist for an Israeli newspaper of the uses and abuses of the Holocaust by political leaders in Palestine and Israel.
ATGET'S SEVEN ALBUMS, by Molly Nesbit. (Yale University, $55.) A scholar's large-bore analytical powers find political commitment and self-conscious intentions in the work of the Paris photographer who has been interpreted as a brilliant primitive.
CORRECTION-DATE: April 25, 1993, Sunday CORRECTION: The Bear in Mind column on page 30 of The Times Book Review today misstates the paperback price of "The Path to Genocide: Essays on Launching the Final Solution," by Christopher R. Browning.
It is $10.95.


Inside Knowledge


Diana Maychick, David Foote
Diana Maychick, an author and journalist in New York, was married yesterday to David Foote, the president of Foote Associates, a management consulting firm in Stamford, Conn.
Carole Wollenweber, the Deputy Town Clerk of Pound Ridge, N.Y., officiated at the Pound Ridge Town Hall.
Mrs.
Foote, the author of "Meryl Streep: The Reluctant Superstar," is the daughter of Stella G. Maychick of Yonkers and the late Dr.
Edward J. Maychick.
She and her husband graduated from Vassar College and she received a master's degree in writing from Johns Hopkins University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


10 Children and Their Challenges; DERRICK WHITE, 19
I wanted to see Derrick's haunts around Memphis -- the project where he grew up amid the chronically jobless, the high school where he shone, the places where he spends his time as he waits to get back on track after dropping out of college.
I could not drive and take notes, so I asked if he would mind driving.
The car was a brand-new, bright red Nissan Sentra from Avis.
No one in his family has a car, but I did not ask if he had a license or if he could drive.
Boys his age just can.
He rolled back the seat, adjusted the mirrors, snapped on his seat belt, turned the radio on to rap music and drove faultlessly all day.


Where the Cubicle Is Dead
APPLE COMPUTER INC. had a problem: Its computer designers wouldn't come to work.
Unable to concentrate in the typical modern office -- small cubicles in large, wide-open rooms -- many simply stayed home to do technical work.
But this improvisation wouldn't do.
The best ideas, Apple executives realized, are nurtured when there's a feeling of community, when engineers can toss suggestions around at the water cooler.
Such suggestions become products.
And in the computer business, an extra month or two in a product's development can cost millions of dollars or mean the loss of a market edge.


ASTHMA KILLS
I want to thank Robin Marantz Henig for her article "Asthma Kills" (March 28) and, particularly, for informing fellow asthmatics that it is vital to treat the inflammation and not just the symptoms.
I was born asthmatic and my condition has deteriorated these last years.
But, despite asthma, I remain active, at 27, playing tennis and running regularly.
Recently, however, I have had frightening experiences, as well as bouts of depression, owing to the physically and mentally debilitating effects of this disease.
I shudder to think that I may have been on my way to the fate of young Mike Ivey, who died within minutes of an attack, had I not finally gone to a pulmonary specialist.
He is treating me with anti-inflammatory drugs, (all my life I had been treated only with beta-agonists).
I, too, found I increasingly needed an inhaler and would panic if I found myself without my sacred "puffer." My doctor is using inhaled steroids to reduce the inflammation that has built up over the many years of treating only the symptoms with beta-agonists.
The inhaler remains an integral part of my treatment, but not the primary medicine.
MARY T. MCGILL
Lyndhurst, N.J.


Margaret Moyles, Gregory D. Curran
Margaret Mary Moyles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Moyles of Sewickley, Pa., was married there yesterday to Gregory Daniel Curran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Curran of Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gerald Murray, a cousin of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
James Church.
Mrs.
Curran is the international sales administrator for Victoria Creations Inc., a manufacturer of costume jewelry in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is a partner in the Riverfront Capital Fund, a private investment firm in Pittsburgh.
Her maternal great-grandfather, John F. Curry, was the Manhattan Democratic leader of Tammany Hall.


A Voice That Always Brings a Happy Ending
One day 55 years ago, while her mentor, the bandleader and drummer Chick Webb, was sick in the hospital, Ella Fitzgerald sat down with his arranger, Van Alexander, to cook up a little swing tune to give their boss when he got well.
What they came up with was a playful little jump-rope rhyme, "A-Tisket, A-Tasket," about a girl, like Little Red Riding Hood, who loses a green and yellow basket on the way to visiting her mother.
Webb was charmed by the ditty.
And on May 2, 1938, just a week after Fitzgerald's 20th birthday, he recorded it with her singing the vocal.
Seven weeks after that session, "A-Tisket, A-Tasket" was the No. 1 hit in the country.
And the record, which was to be the only million-selling single of Fitzgerald's career (if you exclude a duet with the Ink Spots), became the biggest hit of 1938.
A year later Webb died, and Fitzgerald went on to lead the band for two years.


It's Over and Done: Nets Finish at No. 6
The Nets no longer need a calculator or a physics professor to figure out the possibilities for their finish in the Eastern Conference.
For New Jersey, it's very simple: no matter how the Nets do against the Pistons on Sunday afternoon, they will finish fifth in the conference race and face the third-seeded Cleveland Cavaliers in the first round.
Sunday's game no longer features playoff drama for the Nets but still has a touch of irony for the New Jersey coach, Chuck Daly, who is facing his old team in the regular-season finale.
The Pistons are missing the playoffs for the first time since 1983.


A Dealer in Art and, Some Say, a Dealer in Secret Police Data
Roy E. Bullock has recently become one of the best-known collectors in the Bay area, but it is not his Japanese wood block prints that has attracted attention.
Rather, the collection that is raising curiosity and anger is his data base of 12,000 people and 500 organizations, including some culled from confidential police files.
Like any careful collector, Mr.
Bullock sorted and labeled what he had, dividing his world into categories: "ANC" for supporters of the African National Congress in South Africa, "Skins" for right-wing extremists like skinheads and neo-Nazis, and "Arabs" for critics of Israel.
The rest fell under two headings: "Pinkos" for liberals and "Right" for conservatives.


Islanders Continue Thriving in Overtime
The Islanders are one victory away from winning a Stanley Cup playoff series for the first time in six years.
They took a three-games-to-one lead over the Washington Capitals tonight by staging another dramatic comeback and scoring another overtime goal to clinch another victory.
Once again, the hero was Ray Ferraro, this time in double overtime.
He beat Rick Tabaracci at 5 minutes 40 seconds after taking a pass from Claude Loiselle to clinch a 4-3 victory.
His wrist shot, between the pads, triggered another explosion of celebration from the capacity crowd of 16,297.


Tech Notes; Televised Give and Take
When Sega of America Inc., the video game rival of Atari and Nintendo, announced earlier this month that it would ally with Time Warner Inc. and Tele-Communications Inc. to transmit its games over television networks, a quiver ran through the cable and entertainment industries.
The new service, to be tested this fall and rolled out next year, would be the first nationally distributed "interactive" programming.
Interactive is
the
buzzword today.
The term evokes visions of smart TV sets that one day will enable users not only to play games but to carry out such diverse tasks as compiling customized schedules of television programs, paying bills and ordering merchandise -- all without leaving the Barcalounger.


The Tube Tightens Up on Video Channel Surfers
TELEVISION WATCHING has been described as the kind of activity a potato could enjoy.
But it could just as easily -- and just as accurately -- be depicted in more dynamic, even dramatic terms.
For viewers, it could be seen as a restless, merciless hunt for fulfillment, for advertisers and programmers, as a fight for survival against an increasingly well-armed public.
The weapon?
The remote control.


Devils' Dilemma: Avoiding Exorcism
Peter Stastny saw the headline today and remembered it.
And as a reporter entered the Devils' training center, Stastny recited it.
"Invincible versus invisible," Stastny said.
"Absolutely right. It's the best team in hockey against us, but we'll try to change it tomorrow."


Cal May Lose Three
California's basketball program apparently is losing three players, including two key performers during the Bears' recent National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament run.
JEROD HAASE, a freshman guard who was granted a release from his scholarship last week, appears headed for Kansas, the school that defeated Cal in an N.C.A.A. regional semifinal.


Angels' Angels
In a bright morning in mid-March, the splashy, old-fashioned lights outside the Walter Kerr Theater on West 48th Street in Manhattan suddenly flashed on and began their Busby Berkeley-ish dance around the the theater's empty marquee.
As photographers on the street snapped away, a crane hoisted a billboard announcing the next attraction -- "Angels in America" by Tony Kushner.
The billboard presents an eerie painting by Milton Glaser: a dark figure, human but winged, crouching in an attitude that could be interpreted as supplication, obeisance or grief.
It's a fair representation of Kushner's play, a two-part, seven-hour epic that considers the AIDS plague as the defining metaphor for a national spiritual decline during the 1980's and as the starting point of a social order for the next century.


Correction
A listing with the Practical Traveler column on April 11, giving sources for state and provincial travel information, misstated the address for Quebec Province.
It is Tourisme Quebec, C.P. 979, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3C 2W3.


'The World Is Round' Offered in Hartford
Once the world was round
And you could go on it around and around and around
Everywhere there was somewhere and everywhere there they were.


Suspect Firm Said to Prompt Report in '90
The New York City Transportation Commissioner, Lucius J. Riccio, told the city's Commissioner of Investigation two years ago that he believed he was under extraordinary pressure from lobbyists and a senior mayoral aide to grant a lucrative contract to a data processing company that had been caught up in the municipal scandals of the mid-1980's, a city official says.
But the Investigation Commissioner, Susan E. Shepard, apparently did not start a full investigation into Mr.
Riccio's complaint.
Ms.
Shepard did start an inquiry into the contract last month, apparently after learning that The Village Voice was preparing an article critical of the city's actions in formulating and awarding the contract.


Echo From Cabaret's Heyday in the 70's
"YOU'RE supposed to focus me," Baby Jane Dexter said in an interview.
In no order whatever, the singer was trying to remember how many schools she had attended while growing up in Garden City.
Five, except that one was in Toronto and one in Maryland -- "It doesn't matter where."
She was sorting out the reasons for dropping out of a promising career.
And she was recounting her activities and inactivity in 10 years away from show business.


Publishing: A Small World After All
The publishing world seems to be getting smaller and smaller.
The May 3 issue of The New Yorker will carry an article by Dr.
David Shaffer, below, a professor of child psychiatry at Columbia University, who has been published in numerous medical journals.
He also happens to be the husband of Anna Wintour, the editor-in-chief of Vogue.
Vogue and The New Yorker are owned by Advance Publications.
The article is about suicide, and among other things, it disputes studies that claim that a disproportionately high number of suicides are committed by lesbian and gay teen-agers.


Remembrance Of Things Past
To the Editor:
So Hollywood is returning to the days of physical comedy  [ "Once Again the Clowning Gets Physical," April 11 ] ?
All right.
While they're at it, how about returning to the days of great story construction and brilliant dialogue, like the work of Preston Sturges and Joe Mankiewicz?
I'll never forget George Sanders in "All About Eve" introducing Marilyn Monroe as a graduate of the Copacabana School of Dramatic Art.
MARSHALL ANKER New York


Julia W. Schmidt, John Livingston Jr.
Julia Warden Schmidt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Schmidt of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Lieut.
John Robert Livingston Jr., United States Navy Reserve, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Livingston of South Bend, Ind.
The Rev.
Richard J. Lichti performed the ceremony at the Reformed Church.
The Rev.
Gary Williams, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Livingston, 28, graduated from Vanderbilt University and received an M.B.A. from Indiana University.
Her father retired as an executive vice president and board member of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation in New York.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Fords  $115,000
448 Crows Mill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old duplex; new garage with workshop, deck, remodeled bath with skylight; taxes $2,578.
Hopatcong  $87,000
104 Durban Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; deck, fireplace; taxes $1,817.
Medford  $280,000
6 Chemsford Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial, floor-to-ceiing stone fireplace, wet bar, sitting room in master bedroom; taxes $6,121.
Mount Olive  $69,000
12 High Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; new second floor, skylights, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $1,154.
Stanhope  $225,000
1 Lepont Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, new colonial; 1-acre wooded lot, 2-car garage, breakfast nook; taxes not yet set.
Woodbridge  $130,000
550 East Maple Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old two family; stucco exterior, porch, full basement; taxes $2,923.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn.  $459,900  37 Black Alder Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old Tudor; central vacuum, security system, period details, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,027.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $170,000
68 Stewart Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, flagstone patio, cathedral ceiling, 1-car garage; taxes $2,796.
Brightwaters, L.I.  $218,000
89 South Bay Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces,  1-car detached garage; taxes $6,200.


A Week of Free Vaccinations for Children (and Brave Adults)


Art All Over
A tour of Manhattan galleries, April 21.


New &amp; Noteworthy
AN ACT OF TERROR, by Andre Brink. (Vintage International, $14.) This South African author presents a portrait of an anti-apartheid Afrikaner who participates in a bungled plot to assassinate the nation's president.
"I read this novel for hours at a time, drawn not only by its tautly handled suspense but also by its 'chain of voices,' " Michael Gorra said here last year.
HOLOCAUST TESTIMONIES: The Ruins of Memory, by Lawrence L. Langer. (Yale University, $13.) Drawing on the videotaped recollections of Holocaust survivors, Lawrence L. Langer analyzes the difficulty such testimonies hold for the speaker and the listener.
Often, he notes, the trauma of "deep memory" -- the sense of almost reliving the events -- is so great that survivors feel pressured to return to the more ordered, chronological presentation of "common memory." In 1991 our reviewer, David S. Wyman, called the book a "thoughtful essay," which he said is "unsparing" and filled with "great sensitivity."


A Busy Week for Benefit Concerts
BENEFIT concerts seem to be an increasingly popular method of fund-raising, perhaps because the donors know that they are not only contributing to a worthy cause but also receiving musical dividends in the bargain.
At least five such events are on the calendar this week, two of them this afternoon at 3.
The Westport School of Music is holding its 34th annual scholarship benefit at that hour in Pequot Library in Southport, with the pianist and teacher David Korevaar playing works of Bach, Beethoven, Liszt and Chopin.
"We really need a successful event this year," said the director of the school, Martha Hisey.
"The economy has affected so many of our families that we have allocated more scholarships than ever before."


A Vote for Investment Professionals
To the Editor:
"At Tax Time, Thoughts of I.R.A.'s" (Mutual Funds, April 11) spoke to the point that much of the I.R.A. money flows into exactly the wrong places, because "most people do not understand the real risk of investing for several decades: inflation." It then proceeds to extol the virtues of 18 "no loads" with five-year track records "that reflect a controlled level of risk." Investor needs are neatly categorized by age.
What if these needs were addressed individually by an investment professional who could help select an appropriate fund or funds that may carry a sales charge, or "load"?
Is it possible that this advice might indeed put money in the right places?


Guido Carli, Economist, 79, Dies; His Firm Hand Led Italy's Growth
Guido Carli, for decades Italy's foremost economic leader and an influential figure in international finance, died in Spoleto on Friday.
He was 79.
Official news reports said he died on the way to the hospital after a heart attack.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Mar. existing-home sales, millions, ann. rate
3.55
3.50
Tuesday
April consumer confidence index
62.6
64.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
359
340
March new-home sales, thousands
595
580
First-quarter G.D.P., percent change
4.7
2.5
Friday
March factory orders, percent change
1.4
1.8
March personal income, percent change
0.2
0.3
March personal spending, percent change
0.6
0.0
Tuesday: Two-year Treasury-note auction  Wednesday: Five-year Treasury-note auction


Closets Are Out, But Outing Is Not
NAME: Michelangelo Signorile.
IDENTITY: Irascible advocate of "outing," the practice of revealing the names of "closeted" homosexuals -- those who do not publicly reveal that they are gay.
Writer for Out magazine.


Lisa S. Pent and John L. Fallon
September wedding plans have been announced by Lisa Susan Pent, an assistant vice president and an assistant manager in New York for the Fuji Bank Ltd., and John Lawrence Fallon, a senior account executive in New York for the MCI Communications Corporation.


The Battle Over Gun Control
I am disappointed by your article "The Battle Over Gun Control Moves to Hartford" (April 11).
You have grossly misinformed the general public into thinking that anyone can just walk into their neighborhood gun store and purchase a fully automatic weapon.
The weapon that you have described in your article is classified as a machine gun (a Class III weapon is how a gun dealer would describe it).
It is true that a Connecticut resident can purchase a fully automatic machine gun in the state of Connecticut.
The purchaser must first go to a machine gun dealer. (There are only a handful in the state.) If they can find you the machine gun that you want, you generally pay them for it in full at the time of the sale.
They will give you an A.T.F.
Form 4 and two fingerprint cards.


Anita I. Rhee and John H. Bae
Anita I. Rhee, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Choon Jai Rhee of West Bloomfield, Mich., was married yesterday to John H. Bae, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Myung Eui Bae of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
In Soon Choi performed the ceremony at the Korean Presbyterian Church in Detroit.
Mrs.
Bae, 24, is an assistant to the securities transaction team at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a professor of mathematics at Wayne State University.


1 Dead, 40 Hurt As a Blast Rips Central London
A huge bomb hidden in a parked construction truck shattered the heart of London's financial district this morning, killing one man, wounding more than 40 people and raising a cloud of smoke that was visible across much of the capital.
Detectives at Scotland Yard immediately blamed the Irish Republican Army, which set off a similar bomb in nearly the same neighborhood just over a year ago, killing three people and causing $1.25 billion in damage.


The Different Types Of Special Interests
Howard Blankman of Jericho should realize that not only Richard L. Amper Jr., but also 59 percent of East Enders have a major concern about protecting the pine barrens, according to a recent survey by Suffolk Community College.
Contrary to what Mr.
Blankman charges, it is the developers, not Mr.
Amper and the "environmentalists" who have their own agenda  [ "Environmentalist Who Sets His Own Agenda," April 3 and Letter, April 4 ] .
Unfortunately Long Islanders have danced to the tune of the developers' growth-at-all-costs song for too long, and we've paid the price.


Giants Eye Defenders A Cut Below the Best
If the Giants still had the ninth choice in today's National Football League draft, they might have been able to take a premier defensive end like Eric Curry of Alabama or Dan Williams of Toledo or a quick outside linebacker like Wayne Simmons of Clemson.
Instead, they may have to settle for linebacker Chris Slade of Virginia or defensive end Michael Strahan of Texas Southern, who are good but a cut below the best.
But the Giants gave up their first-round choice in this draft when they chose quarterback Dave Brown of Duke last July in the first round of a supplemental draft.
They seem to have no regrets because they might have picked Brown anyway with the ninth pick of this draft.
Besides, he now has a year of pro experience.


Conflict in the Balkans; Serbs Again Reject Vance-Owen Peace Proposals
Courting the risk of allied air strikes and virtually assuring that new international sanctions will descend on Yugoslavia on Monday, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs said today that a proposal to link Serbian enclaves in Bosnia with a demilitarized corridor was not acceptable.
After meeting for three hours with Lord Owen, who is trying to mediate an end to the Bosnian war, the Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic, said the latest version of the peace plan "is absolutely anti-Serb" and "didn't meet a single Serbian need."


A Photographer's Skill: Pattern, Form -- and Addiction to Color
THE exhibition of Cibachromes, at Norwalk Community-Technical College, in Norwalk, represents, among other things, the rediscovery of one first-rate Connecticut photographer, Robert Sheehan, by another, Philip Trager.
It was drawn from the collection of Sheehan that was given to Wesleyan University by Mr.
Trager and his wife, Ina.
Sheehan died in 1969 at the age of 47, having lived a life that was, to say the least, unlucky.
His father was a psychiatrist more concerned with his patients than his family; his mother was an alcoholic and so, eventually, was he.
He grew up in Scarsdale, attending high school there, and spent two years at Fordham University.
With the outbreak of World War II, he joined the Coast Guard Auxiliary and, while serving, sustained a burn that resulted in the loss of one eye.
But this did not discourage him from resuming the photography he had started during adolescence and, by 1948, he was working in the still relatively new medium of Kodachrome.


A Few Friends and Lovers


Wired
NO MATTER WHAT YOU think about braces, there is nothing that can prepare you for that awful moment when the brackets are on, the wires are threaded through, and you look in the mirror at your changed self.
There you are, wearing what feels like a boxer's mouthpiece, and facing an enormous dental bill.
In a way it's a relief, for I have done the thing I talked about for 20 years.
I'd always hated the way my teeth looked and I had asked six different dentists whether I should get braces.
The first five agreed that, yes, my teeth did protrude, but said that I didn't look bad.
They said braces were just not worth the trouble.
The sixth dentist said he knew an excellent orthodontist if I wanted a consultation.


Whimsy, Elegance and a Garden Theme
THERE is a special pleasure in visiting an exhibition of well-made contemporary craft works in a historic setting.
The ambiance in the 116-year-old Prallsville Grist Mill here echoes the natural materials used by the artists.
Spring greenery bordering the Delaware River, seen through the windows, reinforces the show's theme, "In and Out the Garden."
More than 250 pieces are on display in this ninth annual craft show in the old mill, which is listed as a national landmark.
Fourteen of the 58 contributors are New Jersey artists.


RECORD BRIEFS
Shostakovich: Suites Nos. 1 and 2 for Jazz Orchestra, Piano Concerto No. 1, 'Tahiti Trot'
Ronald Brautigam, pianist (Concerto); Peter Masseurs, trumpeter (Concerto); Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra conducted by Riccardo Chailly.
London 433 702-2; CD.
Martinu: 'La Revue de Cuisine,' Orchestral Works
St. Paul Chamber Orchestra conducted by Christopher Hogwood. London 433 660-2; CD.


Where Asian Cuisine Can Be Sampled
IN a travel-mad age, Asian Experience in Westport offers diners a quick culinary tour of Asia, a chance to sample dishes that might be found in 10 countries.
To assure a smooth journey are chefs from Thailand, China (Canton), Taiwan, Vietnam and Malaysia.
It is probably no coincidence that most dishes on the large dinner menu are from those countries and from the Philippines, Indonesia and Korea, with a dish apiece from Singapore and Japan.
We have always been skeptical of restaurants that attempt too many different cuisines.
But Asian Experience's five specialty chefs should insure that those five cuisines at least would be fittingly presented.


Corrections
The Home Clinic column and diagram on Jan. 31, about building a workbench, misstated a dimension for a shelf.
The wood should be 20 inches wide, not 17.
A reader's letter has recently pointed out the error.


It Seems Likely the Jets Will Stand By No. 3 Pick
By the middle of last week, Dick Steinberg had fielded a dozen or more calls from National Football League teams inquiring about the possibility of making a deal for the Jets' No. 3 pick in the first round of today's draft.
"It's a natural drill to go through," he said.
"Teams call and ask you would you be interested. I get a dozen calls like that, but nothing specific."


Perspectives: Housing for the Elderly; Designer's Touch Felt on West 54th St.
BUT for Consolidated Edison's long-term plan to build a substation in the West 50's, there would be no Clinton Gardens.
At least not at its midblock location at 404 West 54th Street, between Ninth and 10th Avenues.
Clinton Gardens is the latest development for the low-income elderly by the New York Foundation for Senior Citizens.
It is a 100-apartment, 10-story building on a portion of the property that Con Ed has assembled to be prepared, at some future point, to meet the West Side's needs for additional electrical capacity.


Dina Schefler, Robert Nemeth
Dina Schefler, a founder and the president of In Focus Associates, photographers' representatives in New York, was married yesterday in Montego Bay, Jamaica, to Robert R. Nemeth, a vice president of J. P. Morgan Investment Management Inc. in New York.
The Rev.
Anthony Ottey, an Anglican priest, performed the ceremony at a home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Mele, who also live in Barneveld, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nemeth graduated from Tulane University.
She is also a daughter of Arno Schefler of Aspen, Colo.
Her father, an art dealer, breeds Thoroughbreds in Aspen, as does her stepmother, Danner Schefler.
The bride's mother, Robbin Mele, owns Robbin Bain Inc., an interior design concern in Utica, N.Y.
The bride's stepfather is the chairman of the Mele Manufacturing Company, a manufacturer of jewel cases and gift accessories in Utica.


Hardly a Lock for the Three-Peat
On Friday night, more than an hour before the Chicago Bulls' last meaningful game of the regular season, Horace Grant barricaded himself in a corner of the locker room and Scottie Pippen napped under the trainer's table with a towel over his face.
Sitting against a wall, not yet in uniform, Michael Jordan answered enough reporters' questions for the three of them.
Speaking for the Bulls, one way or another, is Jordan's way of life.


Sound Bytes; 'Take No Prisoners,' A Bold Wordsmith Says
John C. Dvorak is a BUSY guy.
He has seven "Dvorak's Guide" computer books on the market and writes 20 magazine columns a month about personal computers, including the Inside Track column that features his trademark use of BOLD, CAPITALIZED WORDS for emphasis.
He has two weekly radio shows.
He writes software, too, and gives speeches, sometimes in a RHINESTONE TUXEDO.
Having mixed a history major with a chemistry minor, he worked as a CHEMIST for Union Oil before starting a microcomputer software company in 1978, back when NOBODY knew about PC's.
He KNOWS computers, and he loves them.


Corrections
The Find of the Week report in the Foraging column last week, about Four Color Images gallery, referred incorrectly to the cartoon strip Mandrake the Magician.
It still appears, syndicated by King Features.


Constance Moss, James B. Skeele
Constance Elizabeth Cremer Moss, the daughter of Mrs.
Roland C. Sherrer Jr. of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Peter B. Moss of Chestertown, Md., was married yesterday to James Billington Skeele, a son of Mrs.
Henry K. Skeele of Stuart, Fla., and the late Mr.
Skeele.
The Rev.
Robert T. Hollett performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Chestertown.
Mrs.
Skeele, 30, is the president of Cici Moss Interiors, an interior design concern in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
She graduated from the Tobe Coburn School of Fashion Design.
Her father is the president of Northside Sales, a manufacturer's representative in Chestertown.


Chrysler Stretches the Envelope
TAIN'T necessarily so, I know, but I have always subscribed to the theory that more is better.
More pudding, more parties.
Longer, lower, wider.
You'd think I was born in Texas instead of Pennsylvania.
But in one regard, at least, bigger is indeed better, and that has to do with the Chrysler Corporation's two latest cars -- the stretched versions of the LH series introduced last fall, the Chrysler Concorde, the Dodge Intrepid and the Eagle Vision.


Tara Mendrzycki, Adam M. Smith
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Mendrzycki of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tara Ann Mendrzycki, to Adam Mason Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Smith of Cranford, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Mendrzycki, 26, is a counselor with Adapp, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York's drug-abuse prevention program, in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in counseling from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Her mother, Catherine Mendrzycki, is the principal of Saint Patrick's Elementary School in Bedford, N.Y.


Free Agency Put Aside, It's Draft Day
The 58th annual National Football League draft unfolds at noon today at the Marriott Marquis in Manhattan, and although the rules have changed, the chief goals remain for each of the league's 28 teams: reload, rebuild, regroup.
The N.F.L.'s new free-agency system has put a new spin on the draft.
Most teams have used free agency to fill needs at positions where immediate help was needed, and at positions where development of young talent requires longer time.
Now they will look to the draft to complement their free-agency moves.


'Rising Stars' Series Winding Down
THE concert season normally slows down in mid-April, but one would never know it from this week's busy lineup, beginning with some impressive events today.
In Katonah, the last in Caramoor's "Rising Stars" series starts at 3 P.M.
Eight young string players will join their renowned coaches -- Andre Previn, Krista Bennion Feeney, Ani Kavafian and Gary Hoffman -- for a program that includes a Haydn quartet, Schubert's radiant Two-Cello Quintet in C and the Schumann Piano Quintet.
The number to call for reservations is 232-1252.


Getting around the country
Vietnam has announced that foreign travelers will no longer need travel permits to visit most areas of the country, lifting a rule that for years had discouraged travelers from venturing much beyond Vietnam's two big cities.
The move, which went into effect this month, ends the need for travelers to go through the time-consuming and sometimes fruitless process of applying for a police travel permit whenever they wished to journey outside the capital, Hanoi, or the country's commercial center, Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.


Working With Nature, Not Against It
IN case gardeners have not noticed, attitudes are changing.
Methods of plant care and insect control are not the same as they used to be.
Product labels are being read.
The result is that gardeners are beginning to do environmentally safe tending.
They are learning to work with nature, not against it.
In response, retailers report that chemical gardening trends are down, while organic gardening trends are up.
Manufacturers are eagerly capitalizing on these trends as rapidly as they can.
Products are now labeled "environmentally safe," "nonchemical," "nonpolluting," "organic." These pitches are beginning to have their effect because consumer behavior is changing.


Updating Dorms to Meet Student Needs
From Florida to California, from Wisconsin to Louisiana, colleges and universities are renovating old dormitories and building new ones.
The reason, officials say, is that students today have higher living standards and higher expectations.
To stay competitive when university enrollment has been declining nationwide, schools are updating housing in an effort to attract and keep students.
"It's a trend that will continue throughout the decade," said W. Garry Johnson, president of the Association of College and University Housing Officers-International, based in Columbus, Ohio.


For Perilous Shoals, A Chart Is Essential
NOW he knows, but it's too late to bring the game back.
When Latvia's No. 2 ranking grandmaster, 25-year-old Alexander Shabalov, sat down to play Sweden's No. 2 ranking grandmaster, Ferdinand Hellers, 24, in Round 8 of the New York Open at the Ramada Hotel, formerly the Hotel Pennsylvania, in Manhattan on April 11, he chose a complex attack, the sort of thing no one should attempt without hours of concentrated study.
But he soon veered off the proper track into a sideline that had been rejected by all the books on this opening years ago.


Making Vegetables an Integral Part of the Meal, Italian Style
VEGETABLES, it was said recently, are even better for us than we thought.
And now that the markets are full of fresh young spring vegetables, it is the perfect time to think about healthful food, like pasta with vegetables.
Even people who grimace at the thought of an evening without meat on the table seem happy to eat a main course that consists of such a combination.
Broccoli rape is an Italian version of broccoli, with a smaller head and a slightly bitter taste.
It makes a superb sauce for pasta (and is also great with Italian sausages).
Fennel looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a slight taste of anise.
It is sometimes called Florence fennel so as not to be confused with herb fennel.
It is superb pureed and mixed with broccoli in a delicately flavored risotto, which can be served as a main course or as a first course.


A Holocaust Rorschach Test
The further the Holocaust recedes into time, the more prominent its memorials become.
While personal recollections are reflected in diaries and memoirs, films and novels, public memory is being molded in monuments and museums, which now number in the thousands in Europe, Israel and the United States.
Depending on where these memorials are built and by whom, they remember the past according to a variety of national myths, ideals and political needs.
Some recall war dead, others resistance and still others mass murder.
All reflect the past and present experiences of their communities, the state's memory of itself and, at a more specific level, an artist's vision.
Memory is never shaped in a vacuum, and the motives of memory are never pure.
The reasons for building memorials are as various as the sites themselves.
Some obey the traditional Jewish injunctions to remember.
Others respond to a government's need to explain a nation's past to itself.
Some aim to educate the next generation; others are conceived as expiations of guilt or as self-aggrandizement.
Still others are primarily tourist attractions.


Federal Agencies Mishandled Waco From Start; To Look Within
To the Editor:
In light of the tragedy in Waco, Tex., there is no better time than now to look into the mirror of social and philosophical beliefs and restrictions to realize that the image reflected back is distorted and grotesque.


Legal Assistance For the Elderly
The March 28 article "Program Aims to Cut Crime Against Elderly" was informative and timely.
Unfortunately, older people are extremely vulnerable to crime in our society today.
Older people also frequently have many legal problems that often are not taken care of promptly because they are not aware that these problems can be eased by an attorney, they fear the cost of an attorney or they are afraid of the legal system.
In New Jersey, the State Division on Aging and the Aging and the Law Committee of the State Bar Association have co-sponsored a Law Day for Senior Citizens for the last nine years.
The goal of Law Day is to make older people aware of the legal assistance available for them as a service funded under the Older Americans Act.


The Many Medals Of Washingtonia
GEORGE WASHINGTON is commemorated these days by a Federal holiday and lots of department store sales.
But during the 85 years from the end of the Revolutionary War until the beginning of the Civil War, Washington's popularity approached idolatry.
Commemorative medals were minted by the thousands in the United States, England and France with sentiments struck upon them like "How abject Europe's kings appear by the sight of such a man" and "George the Great." In his lifetime, Washington changed from a simple landed colonial gentleman to one who was above shaking any visitor's hand and who bowed formally to even the most casual of greetings.
Yet, he refused to become king of the new nation, as many wanted him to be.


Corrections
The Connecticut Q&amp;A column on April 11, and its picture caption, about Dr.
Fred J. Epstein, misstated his affiliation.
He is the founder of the divison of pediatric neurosurgery at New York University Medical Center.


MTV 'Unplugs' Into Poetry
The burgeoning poetry scene is being discovered by what Tracie Morris calls "the entertainment-industrial complex."
"It's all the mass appeal and the media," said Ms.
Morris, right, a poet who lives in Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn.
She added that she was concerned about how the pressure to sell things "compromises artistic integrity."


Federal Agencies Mishandled Waco From Start; Reno's Hard Choice
To the Editor:
I wholeheartedly commend Attorney General Janet Reno's actions in handling the Branch Davidian standoff in Waco, Tex.
Although the result was a tragic loss of life, it was nonetheless the course willingly chosen by the followers of David Koresh, and once initiated, the end was inevitable.


Miss De Santis, Mr. Marmur
August wedding plans have been announced for Mary Beth De Santis, a daughter of Virginia Ann De Santis of San Francisco and the late Vito Thomas De Santis, and Alexander George Marmur, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Julius Marmur of Larchmont, N.Y.
Miss De Santis, 29, is a group production manager for Micro Times, a computer magazine published by BAM Publications in Pleasant Hill, Calif.
She graduated from the University of California at Davis.
Her mother retired as a policy writer for the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.


Data Bank/April 25, 1993


SURFACING
ANXIETY --
Inability to Rollerblade:
Certain less-than-athletic Manhattanites are experiencing violent frustration as yesterday's trend shows no sign of abating.
How can so many people be so coordinated?
SPRING --
And the personals are in bloom:
In this season of hope, the number of people seeking love (or whatever) in New York magazine's personal ads has increased by 20 to 30 percent over the winter.
"April showers and the libido flowers," said Nancy Fedder, the magazine's director of classified advertising.
PRETENSIONS --
Leather-bound John Grisham:
Move over Herman Melville.
Doubleday has published limited-edition leather-bound copies of John Grisham's "The Client," "The Pelican Brief" and "The Firm." Signed and numbered, the books cost $200 each.


Boy, 7, Dies After Ground Collapses Under Him
A 7-year-old boy died today when the ground on which he was playing with his twin brother gave way and slowly pulled him under, despite the frantic efforts of his father and neighbors to pull him out.
The boy, Kwami Sharif, was found in what rescuers described as an underground cavern formed by tree stumps and other debris 8 feet below the surface of the ground.
He was sitting slumped over, his head faced down in a couple of inches of water, said Mayor Paul Matacera, who was at the scene most of the day.
Body Removed
Workers held up plastic sheeting to shield the site from onlookers as emergency crews removed the boy's body at 5:07 P.M.
He was pronounced dead a few minutes later at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.


Francis Gaudette, 57, Executive at Microsoft
Francis J. Gaudette, executive vice president and chief financial officer at the Microsoft Corporation, died Friday at the Virginia Mason Hospital in Seattle.
He was 57.
He died after an eight-month battle with cancer, said Marty Taucher, a spokesman for the software maker, which is based in Redmond, Wash.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Springtime Shakeup
A LESSER man would swerve.
But then a lesser man might not choose a career of driving over potholes.
"You've got to be fearless in this line of work," Mark Kulewicz of Greenlawn said, steering his car toward a series of huge ruts.
As passengers checked their seat belts, Mr.
Kulewicz checked his Joltmeter.
The pothole rater was ready.
Bumpedy-bumpy-bump.
Bodies bounced, and the Joltmeter, like an electrocardiogram, printed out the peaks and valleys.
"That might rate an uncomfortable," Mr.
Kulewicz said looking at the graph paper.
Certainly not a, "Yahoo!" as in, "Ride 'em cowboy."


Purple Passion
To the Editor:
I feel compelled to write a letter to an editor about as often as I witness a solar eclipse, but I must spring to my feet and shout "Amen!" to James Gorman's essay "Of All Dinosaurs, Why Must This One Thrive?"  [ April 11 ] .
Interminably have I endured the incessant moronic chuckle of what Mr.
Gorman describes as a "talking eggplant" on the mind-numbing "Barney" television program, which my granddaughter used to watch with catatonic inertia.
She has, thank God, become as bored with it as I was to begin with.
I enthusiastically second Mr.
Gorman's concluding motion to "just kill the laugh." PAUL LIPPMAN Hoboken, N.J.


Public &amp; Private; The Real Anita Hill?
One of the most enduring sociopolitical mysteries of the 20th century for many Americans will surely be the question of what really happened between Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill.
Now along comes a whodunit entitled "The Real Anita Hill" that claims to clear things up.
It doesn't.


DNA TESTING FREES MAN JAILED IN RAPE
Citing a new analysis of genetic evidence, Virginia's Governor today pardoned a man who had served six and one half years on a rape conviction.
Seven hours later, Walter T. Snyder Jr., 27, walked out of the prison here into the arms of a son, Terrell, who was 1 when his father was arrested.
"I'm not bitter," Mr.
Snyder said, blaming what he said were overzealous detectives.
"Man is so unjust, man to man."


Ikea's New Realities: Recession and Aging Consumers
It is a cold, gray morning in this suburb of Stockholm, but hundreds of people are lined up for the opening of a vast new Ikea store.
"Welcome to cheap land," says Anders Moberg, the genial president of the Ikea Group, using a pun based on Smaland, the name of the region of Sweden where the furniture retailer was founded.
Then he cuts a large yellow and blue ribbon and watches, smiling, as the crowd rushes past in search of sofas, tables, beds and other goods that the company aims to sell for 10 percent to 30 percent less than other furniture retailers.


A CALMING OF THE MIND
In "A Slow, Methodical Calming of the Mind" (March 21), Daniel Goleman describes various applications of the too-often mysterious discipline of meditation.
But he resorts to the traditional, medical-scientific, reductionist dichotomy when he states, "No doubt, part of the relief is purely psychological." How sad that we do not trust any methodology unless we can quantify and replicate its benefits.


Many Tears, Many Reasons
AT the intermission of a reading of Larry Kramer's 1985 play, "The Normal Heart," at the Roundabout/Criterion Center last Sunday night, Barbra Streisand, dressed elegant-casual in black, was graciously signing autographs.
Mr.
Kramer, who helped found the Gay Men's Health Crisis and Act Up, was walking around in a parka and blowing his nose.
"People thought I was crying," he said later. "But I have a cold."


War Over Cigarette Machines
EACH of New Jersey's 11,000 cigarette vending machines carries a warning, reflecting a state law passed six years ago that bans the sale of tobacco products to anyone under the age of 18.
But public officials and anti-smoking groups say many under-age residents are using the vending machines, and a number of towns have moved to ban or control them.
The issue, which has been fought out in town councils and courts, is now before the Appellate Division of State Superior Court.
Whichever way the court decides, it is certain to have a major effect on the approach towns take to the machines.


What's Your Learning Style
The conventional method of teaching recreational sports can be summed up as detection and correction -- an instructor watches students perform and then tells them what they're doing wrong and how to do it right.
But this can be an unpleasant and ineffective way to learn, and many instructors have turned to a kinder school of thought: people learn in many different ways, and it's up to teachers to tailor the lesson to the student.
This approach, long reserved for training elite athletes, now holds the promise of better performance for amateurs.
It is built on a foundation of psychological research, originating with Carl Jung early in the century, that identifies certain basic personality types.
Expanding on Jung's research, a psychologist at McBer &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in Boston, determined that each person has a predominant learning style -- watching, thinking, feeling or doing -- and in the mid-1970's developed a test for use in both schools and business to identify it.
"Our research found that when people are taught in all of the learning styles, they retain the information longer than if they were simply lectured to," says Jennifer Zaccaro, a sales and marketing manager for McBer.


A SENSE OF PLACE
WE are a textbook town: we have a bottom, a middle, a top.
Many of the people at the top, those who possess enough money and property to be called "rich," live, literally, above the rest of us -- on the side of a small mountain that forms Montclair's western border.
The homes on the mountain cost millions.
They have sweeping front lawns and carriage houses, stone balustrades and cobblestone drives.
Some of the town's oldest families live up there -- bankers and doctors and lawyers -- and some of the town's newest, too: actors, producers and entrepreneurs.


Foreign Affairs; Clinton As Carter?
From Washington and around the world, the grumbling has begun about President Clinton's leadership, his ability to wield power and his willingness to do what's necessary to prevail.
To combat this, he has to gain control quickly of two keystone issues, mastering Congress on the budget and mustering Europeans behind a plan for bold action on Bosnia.
Otherwise, his Administration risks becoming what it fears most -- a repeat of the Carter Administration.


The Disabled Learn Karate and Expand Their Opportunities
JENNIFER JOHNSON deftly pinned Stephen La Scala to the floor, stirring applause from the audience.
Ms.
Johnson, who has been studying karate for two years, is president of the American Wheelchair Table Tennis Association, and stickers from her victories decorate her wheelchair.
Ms.
Johnson, who was stricken with polio, and a group of other disabled athletes recently gathered at Burke Rehabilitation Center here for a karate demonstration and clinic sponsored by Help Expand Recreation Opportunities, or HERO, a two-year-old Hartsdale organization.
The nonprofit group has also developed programs in tennis and volleyball and publishes manuals and other educational materials.


Corrections
A report on the Making a Difference page last Sunday, about a multimillion-dollar restaurant and bar company, misidentified it and referred incorrectly to one venture, the Aces &amp; 8's bar in Lower Manhattan.
The company is the Global Entertainment Syndicate Inc.
The bar closed in March.


Taking Turns at Death
THE VIRGIN SUICIDES
By Jeffrey Eugenides. 249 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.


A Still-Bitter Okinawa Greets the Emperor Coolly
On the first journey a modern Japanese ruler has made to the southernmost reaches of his country, Emperor Akihito came this weekend to view the sites where tens of thousands of civilians died a half-century ago in his father's name, and to heal the bitter antagonism that many here still feel for the Japanese leaders who led them to carnage.
The visit was the latest in Akihito's travels of condolence -- though not apology -- to corners of Asia that Japan left in ruins and sorrow.
But in many respects, this trip to Okinawa was the toughest, to a corner of his own country that has long felt betrayed, forgotten and deeply ambivalent about the Emperor its people died defending.


EIGHT TONS OF AID SAILS OFF TO CUBA
In an effort to ease the worsening shortages of food and other necessities in Cuba, the first of a dozen boats set out for Havana today loaded with eight tons of vitamins, food and hospital supplies.
Food rationing and the resulting nutritional problems have become severe in Cuba since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the loss of $5 billion in annual Soviet subsidies.
Early this month, the Cuban Health Ministry announced that there was an epidemic of a blinding eye disease caused, in part, by the lack of Vitamin B in the daily Cuban diet.


IN SHORT: FICTION
IN THE SPARROW HILLS Stories. By Emile Capouya. Algonquin, $19.95.


A la Carte; Finding Good Value in 2 Well-Hidden Spots
TWO tiny Greek restaurants prove that the adage "You get what you pay for" is not always true.
Both well-hidden, taverna-type spots offer frugal diners more than their money's worth.
They also provide excellent service, tasty meals and more.
The "more" at Lucky Boy in Lawrence is the evening special meal.
At the Greek Corner in the Woodbury Mall, it is the Greek salad.
These two modest Greek owned-and-operated restaurants are authentic enough to simulate a short trip to Greece that air-traffic controllers cannot ruin.


White House Memo; Amid Setbacks, Clinton Team Seeks to Shake Off the Blues
At the White House meeting on Tuesday, the chief of staff tried to cheer up the Clinton team.
Sure, President Clinton was having some problems, Thomas F. (Mack) McLarty 3d told the group, but Ronald Reagan's poll ratings also dropped after his first few months in office and it was only when he got shot that his popularity soared.
"Ah, Mack, what are you suggesting here?" deadpanned Rahm Emanuel, the political director, as the room broke up in laughter.
"Things aren't that bad."


Reprints Available
Reprints of this 10-article series, Children of the Shadows, may be ordered from The New York Times, Children of the Shadows Project, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Copies are $1 each by check or money order only, payable to The New York Times.
Sets of 40, at $8 a set, are available to teachers and schools using school mailing addresses.
Delivery will take three to four weeks.


Conflict in the Balkans; U.N. Plan Still Best Hope for Peace, Bosnian Says
Security Council fact-finders came to Bosnia today and saw for themselves the Serbian roadblocks, the shortages of supplies and the horrors of a village where Muslim homes were burned a few days ago.
Packed into jeeps and British light Warrior tanks, they drove to the tiny hill hamlet of Ahinici, two miles from Vitez in central Bosnia, where Croats and Muslims have been fighting.


'Inside American Education'
To the Editor:
Incredible.
That is the word that kept jumping into my brain as I read John Brademas's review of Thomas Sowell's book.


Sara Kunen and Michael Ackerman
Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Kunen of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sara Fran Kunen to Michael David Ackerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan J. Ackerman of Rye Brook, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kunen, 28, is a freelance graphic design coordinator for the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.


Baltimore
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Baltimore" reminded us, again, what a great town Baltimore is.
Five years ago our travel agent suggested Baltimore as a Valentine's getaway vacation for my wife and me.
We had a great time and have returned every Feb. 14 since.
We even purchased a brick on Broadway Pier in Fells Point.


42d Street
To the Editor:
In the March 28 article on the Eltinge Theater, Christopher Gray incorrectly states that the Durst Organization's plan for the revitalization of the 42d Street theaters did not happen.
The truth is that our theaters were appropriated by Urban Development Corporation in the midst of implementing the plan.


10 Children and Their Challenges; FREDDIE BROWN, 17
After more than three weeks of practically living in Freddie's world -- following him with an open mind and notebook as he tried to steer clear of harm and the police in an impoverished corner of the Bronx -- I could not help but wonder if I could have survived in circumstances like his.
Could I have escaped?
Succeeded?


Shuttle Launching Is Put Off Until Monday
The launching of the space shuttle Columbia, scheduled for this morning, was postponed until Monday because of suspected trouble with a flight navigation system.
The countdown was halted in its final hours early this morning when technicians received signals indicating possible problems with the electrical power for one of Columbia's three navigation units, the inertial measurement units.


APRIL 18-24: Corruption in Alabama; Governor Hunt's Fall Brings Opportunity
Guy Hunt made history in 1986 when he was elected Alabama's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction.
He made history again Thursday when he became the first Alabama Governor to be forced from office after being convicted of a felony.
Jurors took only two hours to conclude that the Governor illegally used $200,000 raised for his inauguration for personal expenses, including cattle, jewelry and lawnmowers.
Mr.
Hunt contended he lawfully used the funds to repay himself for loans he made to past campaigns, and he plans to appeal.
Lt.
Gov.
Jim Folsom Jr., a Democrat, was sworn in as Governor.


Pretenders Keep Dreaming
Brazil's diamond-encrusted crown and gold-leaf throne are to remain in the Imperial Museum.
One century after Brazil's Emperor, Pedro II, was deposed in an army coup and bundled off to exile in Europe, Brazil's royal family had their first big chance at a comeback in a nationwide plebiscite on Wednesday.


CAPTURING THE BUTTERFLY
Marlene Navarro is guilty of money laundering ("Capturing the Butterfly," by David McClintick, April 4).
Does that allow United States Government agents to kidnap her from another country?
The Drug Enforcement Administration (with the connivance of certain Venezuelan authorities) destroyed her passport and other personal documents and forced her into a dog cage to fly her out of the country.
McClintick calls this "cutting legal corners." Your magazine calls it "one of the most successful undercover operations in history."
This operation's mainstay was a soldier from the Bay of Pigs invasion, one of the most infamous in a long history of "undercover operations" in that other America, Latin America.
Millions of tax dollars were spent to put Navarro in jail.
Meanwhile, Americans (Norte) consume much cocaine.
To stop them, the United States Government carries on clandestine activities like this all over the world, and especially in Latin America.


Sculpture Provides Immovable Feast
SCULPTURE is a passion for David Finn.
Over the last 30 years, he has written 50 books on the subject, including an especially useful primer, "How to Look at Sculpture," published by Harry N. Abrams ($12.95, soft cover).
Mr.
Finn, who heads the Ruder &amp; Finn public relations firm in New York, spends most of his spare time photographing and writing about sculpture, as well as painting and sculpturing.
He likes to explain the difference between statues and sculpture by saying that people pose in front of statues to show where they've been (like the Statue of Liberty), while sculpture is to be enjoyed and appreciated as artwork.


At Last, It's Here
Nature flung itself into its spring finery last week, eclipsing fashion.
Who would dare to compete with the explosion of taxi-cab-yellow forsythia?
Or the extravagant pink blossums of the magnolia trees that grace Fifth Avenue?
Or the canopy of white magnolias framing the library lions, Patience and Fortitude?
Perhaps only the fearless chow, above, with a haircut that made him look like one of those lions, would take up the challenge.
At the corner of Fifth Avenue and 60th Street, people received haircuts in exchange for a donation to the Earth Foundation.
A man bedecked in empty soda cans and crusading against waste and pollution peddled his unicycle around Bryant Park, the hot new lunch spot in midtown.
In Central Park, schoolchildren helped clean up.


THE BABIES OF BEDFORD
I was drawn to Jean Harris's article "The Babies of Bedford" (March 28).
In July 1982, my family and I had as our guest for a week's stay the 12-year-old son of an inmate at Bedford Hills Correctional Facility.
Joe was one of 45 children of inmates who participated in a summer program designed to strengthen the bonds between incarcerated women and their children, whom they seldom saw.
The children visited their mothers in prison from 9 to 3 every day, returning to their host families in the evening.


Knicks Discover Little Rest At the Top
One day after they clinched the No. 1 regular-season finish in the Eastern Conference, the Knicks (59-22) continued the hard-working ethic that elevated them to this level.
Instead of partying over winning the top playoff seeding and the accompanying home-court advantage, they practiced yesterday.
They prepared for their game this afternoon at Madison Square Garden against the second-place Chicago Bulls (57-24), a finale that won't alter the standing but would give the Knicks a 60-victory season if they prevail.


The Different Types Of Special Interests
While the New York State Court of Appeals has not deemed it within its purview to grant the Long Island Pine Barrens Society petition requesting a cumulative impact study of 224 development projects in the remaining pine barrens of Suffolk County, it not only acknowledged the vital importance of such a study, but also urged the Legislature to enact specific legislation to protect the aquifer covered by the pine barrens.


Saberhagen Comes Up One Strike Short
It was a Cy Young moment, and Bret Saberhagen knew he blew it.
Thus the Mets yesterday again found themselves playing, in Saberhagen's words, "well enough to lose."


Bob Dole Versus Political Reform
First Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, strangled the President's economic stimulus plan.
Now the Dark Prince of Gridlock has pledged to give the same killing treatment to Mr.
Clinton's long-promised campaign finance reform package.
So sure of his antipathy is Mr.
Dole that he has not even bothered to wait for its unveiling, which could happen any day now.
If you're dead set against cleaning up politics, there's really no need to read the legislation.
But well-meaning Republicans and the Democrats should not let Mr.
Dole's pre-emptive hostility deny serious political reform to the American people.
To do so is to taunt an electorate already angry over the mortgaging of their democracy to wealthy influence peddlers.
They want a better, freer Congress.
This is a fight Mr.
Clinton can win -- if he will stiffen his resolve and use his communication skills to show up Mr.
Dole's rhetoric for what it really is: shilling for a corrupt status quo.


A Cherry Tree Grows in Brooklyn


State Inquiry On Crown Hts. Nears an End
Having questioned Mayor David N. Dinkins on Friday, the state investigator examining the racial violence in Crown Heights is wrapping up his inquiry and is likely to issue his report by the end of May.
Richard H. Girgenti, the State Director of Criminal Justice, was directed in November by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to review the city's response to the 1991 disturbances in the Brooklyn neighborhood as well as the prosecution of Lemrick Nelson Jr., a black youth who was acquitted of killing Yankel Rosenbaum, a Hasidic scholar, during the violence.


10 Children and Their Challenges; MARCUS TRAMBLE, 19
Marcus and I swapped war stories about being stopped by nasty police officers and being disrespected by waiters who seem to seat every white face first.
Then I say that if you think that is bad, listen to this, and I tell him about being dressed in a new Brooks Brothers suit trying to hail a cab when I lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, in the heart of yuppie New York City.


Shawn, 17: Running Past Many Obstacles
"I'm a powerful, intellectual man going somewhere," said Shawn Hunt, talking about his future as he hurried from high school to a track meet.
His hair was newly cropped in the trademark close fade that inspires his friends to call him Baldheaded Shawn, or Barkley, after Charles Barkley, the basketball star.
Around his neck he wore a small gold lion, a gift from his older brother, a sergeant in the Army.
His backpack held his track shoes and his books.
Not long ago, Shawn Hunt, who at age 11 was a messenger for the neighborhood drug dealers and three years later was packing a .25-caliber pistol, seemed headed only for jail.
But this year, at 17, almost everything has changed: He is an honor student at Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Brooklyn, co-captain of the track team, a youth leader at his church.
He holds down a part-time clerical job at Downstate Medical Center.
Next fall he plans to attend Clark-Atlanta University in Georgia.
He would like to be a psychologist or a sports-medicine doctor.


Corrections
The Home Clinic column and diagram on Jan. 31, about building a workbench, misstated a dimension for a shelf.
The wood should be 20 inches wide, not 17.
A reader's letter has recently pointed out the error.


Misfits, Then and Now
To the Editor:
Robert Plunket's misguided interpretation of "From Here to Eternity" to suit the current debate on gays in the armed forces  [ "Classic War Films, Contemporary Echoes," March 21 ]  blissfully overlooks several points about the classic film.


Indecent Proposals With a French Twist
A FRENETIC production of "A Little Hotel on the Side," a classic French farce by Georges Feydeau and Maurice Desvallieres, is at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through May 15.
The comedy is about would-be marital infidelity that turns into an escapade in which all the characters try to prove that they were somewhere else when a hotel of questionable reputation is raided.
As in any farce, much of the humor rises out of mistaken identities and convenient doors available for rapid exits.


It's Nice To Be Nice
To the Editor:
James Gorman's critique is mean-spirited. He considers "Barney" too . . . nice?


Who Foots the Bill For Recycling?
EACH week, millions of people nationwide carefully sort their trash, putting, say, cans in one container, bottles in another, newspapers in a third.
Most people feel good about recycling, convinced that they are helping the planet, and their communities, by conserving resources and saving landfill space.
What they're also doing, though, is taking money away from health care and other basic services.
As experts in municipal government and garbage disposal point out, the market value of those cans, bottles and newspapers does not come close to meeting the costs of collecting and processing them.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 25, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
10
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
40
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
3
65
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A law firm is engaged in secret activities.
4
54
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
5
1
THE ASSASSIN, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The Philadelphia police contend with a plot to kill the visiting Vice President.
6 *
1
DANGEROUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romance and danger in the ballrooms and country houses of Regency England.
7
1
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
8
4
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A diplomat's past life in horse racing helps others.
9
4
TREASURES, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The loyalties of a brother and two sisters are tested.
10
18
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation.
11
7
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
12
5
ACTS OF FAITH, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $6.99.) The tales of three Brooklyn natives.
13
1
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
14
3
STARS, by Kathryn Harvey. (Avon, $5.99.) A scandalous past haunts a manipulative woman.
15
2
MORE THAN FRIENDS, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The fortunes of two idyllically intertwined families.
16 *
4
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser investigates murders.
17 *
6
WILDEST HEARTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) A businesswoman proposes a marriage of convenience to a rich man.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
494
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
2
10
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
3 *
80
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
4
9
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
5
101
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6 *
15
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
7
26
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
8 *
17
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
9 *
29
ALIVE, by Piers Paul Read. (Avon, $5.99.) How some of the members of a rugby team survived a plane crash in the Andes in 1972.
10 *
10
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
3
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
131
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3 *
114
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
89
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
1
TEACHING YOUR CHILDREN VALUES, by Linda Eyre and Richard Eyre. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Advice for parents of children from age 2 to the teen-age years.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Geraldine Visco, Paul A. Capello
June wedding plans have been announced for Geraldine Winifred Visco, a writer and an administrator for the department of industrial engineering at Columbia University, and Paul Anthony Capello, a multimedia artist and carpenter.
Ms.
Visco, 38, graduated from Columbia, where she received a master's degree in writing.
She is a daughter of Carmella Watkins of Santa Barbara, Calif., and Louis Visco of Burlington, Mass.
She is a stepdaughter of Rhonda Visco of Burlington.


The Scientist Who Took Pictures
PICTURING TIME
The Work of Etienne-Jules Marey (1830-1904).
By Marta Braun.
Illustrated. 450 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $65.
ETIENNE-JULES MAREY
A Passion for the Trace.
By Francois Dagognet.
Translated by Robert Galeta with Jeanine Herman.
Illustrated. 204 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Zone Books/The MIT Press. $26.95.


In Zaire, Democracy Seems No Nearer
To the Editor:
The crisis in Zaire has become appreciably worse since you reported April 11 (some editions) that the duly elected ministers of Etienne Tshisekedi's Government were prohibited from leaving the country by President Mobutu Sese Seko's troops.


The Executive Computer; Top Executives Seeking More From Technology
Corporate executives appear to be more knowledgeable about computer technology than ever before, but they have also become more demanding and less forgiving, a new survey has found.
While they believe information technologies are the key to competitive advantage, they also say they have not been getting their money's worth.
The survey, conducted by the computer industry newspaper Computerworld and Andersen Consulting, also found that 81 percent of top executives are personally using computers in their daily jobs, nearly double the percentage reported when the survey was first taken four years ago.


'I Am So Impressed With You'
The following remarks were taken from more than 20 hours of discussions with teen-agers from the New York City region.
Excerpts appear with each article.
Q
How do some of you define success in this society?
WUBNESH HYLTON , 19, Brooklyn (Hunter College): For myself I feel I'm successful.
And I don't think it's as a result of the education system.
I'm 19, I just moved into my own apartment, you know.
I'm in school, and I'm happy.
I have a job, I'm doing something that I care about. ...
ZAIRE GRAHAM, 17, Bronx (High School of Fashion Industries): I have yet to accomplish success.
For me, I'm successful to the point I made it -- to me.
My senior year in high school; I can feel that I'm successful that I made it there.
And I'm still there for the second term.
But I have yet to become successful in my heart . . . because I want my college education.
I want this not because society says I need it, but because I want it.
DOUGLAS KILCOMMONS, 17, Staten Island (Tottenville High School): I just want to interject something.
I am like so, I am so impressed with like Juan and Bernardo and Zaire and Wubnesh.
I am so impressed with you guys. ...
In my school the biggest problem with minorities is they always feel like they are like under the gun.
Q
What do you mean by that?
DOUGLAS Under the gun?
O.K., well they always feel like they're the ones who are like treated differently.
And in some respects that is true, and I agree with that.
However, you guys are the success, the minority success story in my mind.
Look, all of you expressed today some of the problems that you had earlier, but you helped yourselves.
And that's why it impresses me so much. ...
And that is what we have to teach everyone to do.
Even white people who are down and out and like, you know, like bums laying on the street.
ZAIRE I don't know if I agree with the student that said that black youths don't focus on education.
We must be focusing on education somehow 'cause we've got our black universities filled up with college students.
SUZANNE SCHAMING, 17, Staten Island (Tottenville High School): We have an honors program.
And there is one black person I know that is in the honors program.
And I have talked to this girl on many occasions, and, once we had a Harmony Day last year, and she talked to our class.  . . .
She constantly gets abuse from black people 'cause she's black and she's in the honors program.
And she said she gets abuse and she gets called names. ...It's sort of like putting a stereotype on yourself and expecting everyone else to fit into that.


Westbrook, 41, Makes Sure Youth Isn't Served
The top eight fencers in the men's saber division are so close in point totals, no one wants to go on record to say, even unofficially, which five will make it to the United States world championship team.
But if New Yorkers had their way, Peter Westbrook would clearly be the favorite.


Suzanne Denton, Daniel G. Cohen
Carolann Moore of Houston and J. Gerald Denton of Dallas have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Suzanne Michelle Denton, and Daniel Gideon Cohen, a son of Edward and Betsy Cohen of Philadelphia.
Miss Denton owns Denton Art Associates in Philadelphia, which sells artworks.
She graduated from Baylor University and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a commercial-banking management consultant in Dallas.
Her mother is the director of human resources at Specialty Retailers Inc. in Houston, which owns three clothing-store chains in the Southwest.
Miss Denton's stepfather, Judge Louis M. Moore, is a state judge in the 281st Civil District Court in Houston.
She is also the stepdaughter of Paula Denton.


Conflict in the Balkans; Weighing Strikes in Bosnia, U.S. Warns of Wider War
As President Clinton weighs military action in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the danger of the war spreading elsewhere in the Balkans is emerging as a dominant issue in the deliberations, Administration officials say.
The C.I.A. has told the White House that any spillover of the fighting in Bosnia could ignite a regional war that might ultimately bring in Greece and Turkey, both NATO members, against each other.


Mutual Funds; Just What's in a Sales Degree?
WITH changes constantly being made in the way mutual funds are run, measured and sold, it is small wonder that fund investors are often bewildered.
So what are they to do -- especially when they must rely most often on sales forces that must keep current, too, as they hawk roughly 2,000 of the industry's 3,000-plus funds?
That question has prompted Federal and state regulators to begin studying whether fund salespeople are up to the job.
In the private sector, meanwhile, an advanced-degree program for fund salespeople -- the Certified Fund Specialist degree -- was introduced in 1990 in an effort to create experts who would attract and reassure investors.


Britain Takes New Role In Restructuring Europe
After years of being dragged reluctantly toward closer cooperation with the rest of Europe, the British Government is casting itself as the architect of an evolving European Community, with an enlarged membership and a determined commitment to free trade.
In a speech Thursday night before a Conservative Party conference, Prime Minister John Major declared that it was in Britain's interest "to be in there shaping the new Europe, a new Europe that is larger, more open and less intrusive."


China's Crackdown on Births: A Stunning, and Harsh, Success
She should be taking her 2-month-old baby out around the village now, proudly nursing him and teaching him about life.
Instead, her baby is buried under a mound of dirt, and Li Qiuliang spends her time lying in bed, emotionally crushed and physically crippled.
The baby died because under China's complex quota system for births, local family planning officials wanted Ms.
Li to give birth in 1992 rather than 1993.
So on Dec. 30, when she was seven months pregnant, they took her to an unsanitary first-aid station and ordered the doctor to induce early labor.


A Bleak Assessment as Rights Meeting Nears
As the new Secretary General of Amnesty International, Pierre Sane should in theory feel hopeful about an upcoming World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna, seeing it as an opportunity to promote just the kind of causes that his organization has long defended.
But less than two months before delegations from 180 countries gather for the first such conference in 25 years, Mr.
Sane is pessimistic.
"There's a real danger of a retreat in the defense of human rights," he said.
"If we manage to preserve the status quo, we will have achieved a lot."


An Army of the Faithful
Usually, Christie Adkisson stays home when it snows.
But on this particular snowy day, a Saturday at the beginning of January, she and her husband, Jim -- founding members of the Oregon Christian Coalition -- jump in the car for the 45-minute trip into Portland.
They pass a few lonely cars along the way, but when they arrive at the downtown Red Lion Hotel they are more pleased than surprised to see the parking lot stuffed with the cars of Oregon's most prominent Republicans.
After all, the day is being billed by all concerned as the battle for the soul of Oregon's Republican Party.
Within minutes of the vote for state party chairman -- a contest between two local businessmen -- Bill Witt, a conservative, and Randy Miller, who is only slightly more moderate -- the political skirmishing begins, and the delegates find themselves wrangling over obscure rules and complex voting regulations.
"They disenfranchised us twice before," Jim Adkisson says of the party regulars, "but now the shoe's on the other foot." Still, like every other conservative in the room, he is worried about 10 crucial swing votes.
"It's going to be close," Adkisson says, pacing past urns of coffee in the back of the Red Lion conference room.


Never a Retiring Sort, McEnroe Bids to Coach
Tom Seaver was pitching, John McEnroe was receiving, the medium was a charity squash exhibition inside a glass-enclosed court at the World Financial Center, and the whole experience reminded McEnroe of why he continues to be retired from tennis.
Losing is no fun.


Manager's Profile; Dan Rice
Fund: Met Life/State Street Equity Global Energy (Boston), top performer for 12 months ended March 31, up 56.2 percent; $26 million in assets.
Manager since 3/2/ 90 inception.
Born: Nov. 12, 1951; Norfolk, Va.


Honoring a President
Friends of Michael I. Sovern of Columbia University gathered at the Pierre, April 19.


Tracey Lombino, Dante Brittis Jr.
Tracey Jean Lombino, a daughter of June McLaughlin Lombino of Rye, N.Y., and Robert J. Lombino of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Dante Anthony Brittis Jr., the son of Dr.
Brittis Sr. and Dr.
Nance Brittis of Yonkers.
The Rev.
Bernard Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
Mrs.
Brittis, 33, is an associate with the law firm of Kelly &amp; Flanagan in Elmsford, N.Y.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received a law degree from Emory University.
Her mother owns June Elizabeth's, women's clothing boutiques in Rye and Larchmont, N.Y.
Her father is a consultant to the textile industry in Rye Brook.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ECO-HEROES Twelve Tales of  Environmental Victory.
By Aubrey Wallace.
Mercury House, paper, $12.50.


Making Vegetables an Integral Part of the Meal, Italian Style
VEGETABLES, it was said recently, are even better for us than we thought.
And now that the markets are full of fresh young spring vegetables, it is the perfect time to think about healthful food, like pasta with vegetables.
Even people who grimace at the thought of an evening without meat on the table seem happy to eat a main course that consists of such a combination.
Broccoli rape is an Italian version of broccoli, with a smaller head and a slightly bitter taste.
It makes a superb sauce for pasta (and is also great with Italian sausages).
Fennel looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a slight taste of anise.
It is sometimes called Florence fennel so as not to be confused with herb fennel.
It is superb pureed and mixed with broccoli in a delicately flavored risotto, which can be served as a main course or as a first course.


Q and A
Buying Lire in New York
Q.
Where in New York City can one buy Italian currency and traveler's checks in lire?
How does the rate of exchange compare with that quoted daily in newspaper foreign currency charts? -- Sanford Halberstadter, Linden, N.J.


Jennifer Brooke, Louis M. Corso
Jennifer Brooke, the daughter of Joan Hilton of New York, was married yesterday in Pelham Manor, N.Y., to Louis Michael Corso, the son of Helen and Salvatore Corso of North Caldwell, N.J.
The Rev.
Keith Outlaw performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the New York Athletic Club.
Ms.
Brooke, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a vice president and an associate creative director at AC &amp; R Advertising Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.


All Coaches Who Can, Just Do It
The Sneaker Wars took a high-level turn earlier this month when one of college sports' designated holy men, Coach K of Duke, changed his logo from Adidas to Nike for a reported $1 million signing bonus and $375,000 a year for 15 years.
On Friday, it was announced that some of that money would be used to build the university an intramural sports center.
Depending on where you stand on the Sneaker Wars, that addition made it all right, made it pure evil, simply didn't matter at all.
Coach K, Mike Krzyzewski won consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association championships in 1991 and 1992 with teams that were on track to be graduated.
This year he was knocked out of the tournament early and went on to say, as only a back-to-back winner can, in speeches and op-ed articles (The Times printed one) that winning is not as important as playing your best.
Everything I've ever heard or read about Coach K indicates that he is a good person and a good coach.
That Duke is a good school.
That Nike and Adidas make good sneakers.


Day Care
To the Editor:
As the parent of a young child, I was horrified to see a large bunch of balloons in your photo of the EAB day-care center on Long Island accompanying an article on March 28  [ in some editions ]  entitled, "For Company Day Care, Naptime's Over".


Working With Nature, Not Against It
IN case gardeners have not noticed, attitudes are changing.
Methods of plant care and insect control are not the same as they used to be.
Product labels are being read.
The result is that gardeners are beginning to do environmentally safe tending.
They are learning to work with nature, not against it.
In response, retailers report that chemical gardening trends are down, while organic gardening trends are up.
Manufacturers are eagerly capitalizing on these trends as rapidly as they can.
Products are now labeled "environmentally safe," "nonchemical," "nonpolluting," "organic." These pitches are beginning to have their effect because consumer behavior is changing.


Learning About Jobs At the Parent's Side
THE Westchester Arts Council has joined the Ms.
Foundation for Women's "Take Our Daughters to Work" program, a nationwide event planned for Wednesday, and has announced a list of arts organizations where girls 9 through 15 can spend the day.
The event is intended to broaden the horizons of the country's future women and excite them about career possibilities.
In addition to the arts organizations, various institutions, businesses and government offices in the county are taking part, including Nynex and Tambrands.


Gulf War Is Said to Have Cost the Region $676 Billion in 1990-91
Two years after the end of the Persian Gulf war, a new report estimates that the conflict cost the region $676 billion in 1990 and 1991, not counting vast damage to the environment and a continuing suppression of the rate of economic growth in the region.
The report, prepared by the Arab Monetary Fund in conjunction with two other Arab economic institutions and released at the fund's annual meeting last week in Damascus, Syria, estimates that $51 billion that would otherwise be invested in the region's economies continues to be held in foreign accounts as a result of the war.


Streetscapes: Local Law 10; 'Scalping' Predates The Legislation
WHEN the beautiful 85-year-old cornice was ripped off the Allenhurst apartment building at the southeast corner of 100th Street and Broadway this year, anyone familiar with New York City's old buildings would have drawn the same conclusion: An unfavorable facade inspection under Local Law 10 led to the "scalping," leaving a bare stucco scar along the top -- just the kind of action to confirm preservationists' fears of the 1980 law.
An alternative interpretation is that Local Law 10 is not the problem, but the solution for how to maintain an aging cityscape, an idea supported by a study of the actual incidence of such facade stripping.


THE GUIDE
NEUBERGER EXHIBITION
In celebration of the financier-art patron's 90th birthday, 50 of the 500 works of art contributed by Roy R. Neuberger to the museum that bears his name at the State University of New York at Purchase will be on view today through July 21.


Adele Obermayer, David Malpass
May wedding plans have been announced for Adele Obermayer, a researcher and guest coordinator in Fort Lee, N.J., for CNBC, the NBC cable news network, and David R. Malpass, a managing director at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
Ms.
Obermayer was until recently a senior analyst for the United States Senate Budget Committee in Washington.
She graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in public policy and administration from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman J. Obermayer of Arlington, Va.
Her father, a professor of journalism at the University of Maryland, was the editor and publisher of The Northern Virginia Sun, a daily newspaper in Arlington.


New York Lofts Gain as Home of Choice
LOFTS have long had a raffish reputation in the New York real estate world.
To some, they offer large, light-filled, gallery-like spaces with soaring Italianate windows, cast-iron Corinthian columns and artists for neighbors.
To others, they have all the warmth and homeyness of a warehouse -- loading docks, freight elevators, graffiti-stained front doors, desolate streets.
In recent years, though, loft living has become less Bohemian and more bourgeois as more and more people, particularly families, seek out large flexible spaces, one-floor room configurations and more casual neighborhoods.


Llewellyn Sinkler, Oscar Shamamian
OSCAR SHAMAMIAN and Llewellyn Sinkler were introduced while they were both in a hardware store picking out doorknobs.
They are the sort of couple who, given a warehouse full of doorknobs, would probably end up choosing the same one.
Mr.
Shamamian, 33, is a partner at Ferguson Murray &amp; Shamamian Architects, a firm in SoHo known for its classical designs that have been said to evoke grand estates of the 1920's and 30's.
Ms.
Sinkler, 34, is an interior decorator at Bunny Williams Inc. on the Upper East Side.
She grew up in Charleston, S.C., in what she described as "traditional 18th-century houses that were architecturally divided into perfect squares and proportions."





A New Zoo In Jerusalem
Fortunately, no lambs lie down with the lion at the new Biblical Zoo in Jerusalem.
Since the world has yet to reach the hopeful future expressed in Scripture, it might have meant finding a new lamb each morning to throw into the lion's den.
All the same, the lion is doing fine.
So are the tigers, bears and other animals that fill the 62-acre zoo, which opened recently in Manahat, a valley on the southern outskirts of the city.
The new park replaces a cramped facility farther north.
Built at a cost of $20.5 million, with much of the money provided by the Tisch family of New York, it does away with cages in favor of more natural surroundings, including waterfalls and ponds dotted with flamingos and swans.


Baltimore
To the Editor: Susan Katz Miller's otherwise fine article contained a journalistic exaggeration that I just can't ignore.
Her observation that the end may be near for Baltimore because the Census Bureau has combined Baltimore and Washington into a single metropolitan area is absolutely ridiculous.
Who cares what the Census Bureau does?


What in Heaven's Name Is Going On?
In Hollywood, where daily variety is better read than the Bible, and big agents and studio executives are widely hailed as higher powers, a curious trend is materializing.
Spiritual matters -- ranging from the quasi-metaphysical to old-fashioned biblical sagas -- are surfacing in a burst of screenplays.
The scripts, some of which are destined for television, run from action-adventures to political thrillers to black comedies.
Story lines embrace Tibetan monks, faith among Appalachian mountain folk, the Buddha, the Virgin Mary, the Devil, angels and even Jesus Christ.
One script circulating centers on Christ's little sister (her name is Ilona, and she's a Mets fan).
And in what may be a reaction to the specter of AIDS and the anxieties of life in the 1990's, the apocalypse has also become a popular theme.


A 'Stage Father' Flexes His New Muscles
When Lord Acton wrote in 1887 that power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely, he didn't have the film business in mind.
He knew nothing of stars who could demand a king's ransom from a studio, a bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel and almost any perk or part they wanted.
In Hollywood, the rules of the game dictate that no one says no to a hot actor.
And at the moment, with a worldwide box-office gross of $373 million for "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York," there is no actor hotter than the 12-year-old Macaulay Culkin.
But if it is Macaulay who is the source of the power, it is his father, Kit Culkin, who wields it.
In fact, Mr.
Culkin was just rated the 48th most powerful person in Hollywood by Premiere magazine, ahead of such heavyweights as Michael Douglas and Eddie Murphy.
Earlier this month, Mr.
Culkin signed an $8 million contract with M-G-M for his son to appear in a film called, paradoxically, "Getting Even With Dad," which will start shooting in Chicago this spring.
The deal makes Macaulay the highest paid star ever at the studio.


Conflict in the Balkins; Weighing Strikes in Bosnia, U.S. Warns of Wider War
As President Clinton weighs military action in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the danger of the war spreading elsewhere in the Balkans is emerging as a dominant issue in the deliberations, Administration officials say.
The C.I.A. has told the White House that any spillover of the fighting in Bosnia could ignite a regional war that might ultimately bring in Greece and Turkey, both NATO members, against each other.


Polling on Sexual Issues Has Its Drawbacks
As the gay-rights movement tries to show its strength with a march in Washington on Sunday, another poll on homosexuality shows just how difficult it is to measure all sorts of private behavior and how shaky such measures are in policy debates.
A poll to be reported on Monday by Louis Harris &amp; Associates indicates that 4.4 percent of American men and 3.6 percent of women had sex with a same-sex partner in the five years before they were surveyed.


THE CAMPUS CRIME WAVE
In the March 28 Letters column, Jacob Appel, Brown University class of '96, comments on Anne Matthews's "The Campus Crime Wave" by stating that the "baby-boom generation has crippled our economy with a 13-digit debt, depleted our natural resources, permitted our infrastructure to decay, eliminated all standards of common decency and created a war machine capable of liquidating millions of people in a matter of seconds."


Hill to UndergoShoulder Surgery
VIRGIL HILL, the World Boxing Association light heavyweight champion, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left shoulder on Tuesday, his manager has announced.
Hill (35-1, 19 knockouts) is expected to make a full recovery and continue boxing, said BILL SORENSEN from Bismark, N.D., where the boxer's manager is also the Mayor.


STOP BLAMING BASEBALL
Baseball games (and articles about baseball) need to be shorter.
How about borrowing a page from pro basketball and instituting a delay clock between pitches, plays and innings?
This one change could cut an hour from most games without fundamentally affecting the dynamics of play.
Speedier, livelier games would also address the problem of the television announcer, who currently is forced to fill prodigious amounts of dead time with a mind-numbing patois.


John Williams and Emilie Cohen
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Cohen of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Emilie Streit Cohen to John Ransom Williams, a son of John M. and Mary Ann Williams of St.
Louis.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cohen, 28, teaches English at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in English literature from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
Her mother, Evelyn Cohen, is a psychotherapist and a marriage counselor in New York.


How to Keep Sight of Health Plan Costs
To the Editor:
In your April 19 front-page article on the big price tag seen for the Clinton health plan, I could relate very well to the comment by Robert Reischauer, Congress's chief economist, that reliable estimates were probably impossible.
As an actuary in the private health insurance business, I have a good deal of experience in estimating the price tags on large employee health benefit plans.


Some Tips for a Healthy Tree
If you plant a magnolia tree, remember that it is a shallow-rooted plant that doesn't cotton to a lawn mower, so plant ground cover from the base of the trunk to the drip line, the area where rain drips off the edge of the canopy.
Magnolias like a good rich soil on the acid side, and like all trees, they should be planted in a generous hole and watered well.
Prune magnolias before they flower in the spring, or wait until June, after they have flowered.
If you want to eliminate any stems of the star magnolia, which is a multistemmed tree, it's best to do it the first year or so, before the stems get too thick.
The same principle holds for saucer magnolias, which branch low on the trunk.
Such pruning can safely be done in June, or from October through March.


Conflict in the Balkans; War Is an Icy Undercurrent In Blooming Belgrade Spring
In the basement restaurant of the Writers Club, a late-night den of smoke and drink and heated talk among Belgrade intellectuals, it was obvious just looking at the waiter's face that something had gone terribly wrong.
He reddened and sputtered and put his hand over his heart.
Then he confessed: The jar of caviar that the hostess had brought for her table of guests had fallen and broken.
The caviar was inedible.
The hostess's face clouded over.
Then she threw her hands up in the air and laughed.
"How can I be angry over a broken jar of caviar after what I've seen in this country?" The other diners relaxed.


Nude Club in Forest Hills To Close After Protests
After more than two months of community outrage and vitriolic protests, the owners of a nude dance club on Austin Street in Forest Hills say they have tentatively agreed to sell their lease and move to another part of Queens.
A spokesman for the club, called Runway 69, said yesterday that its owners would close the club as soon as they reach an agreement with the landlord of the building to buy out the lease and turn it over to one of their own managers, who wants to offer comedy instead of nudity.


Does the World Still Recognize a Holocaust?
LADY THATCHER, in her scorching indictment of Western inaction over Bosnia and Herzegovina two weeks ago, said: "I never thought I'd see another holocaust in my life." And then to her fellow Tory, Prime Minister John Major, she gave the unkindest cut of all.
During the Battle of Britain the country was overwhelmed and inadequately prepared, she said, but at least it had "a Prime Minister with a lion heart." The implication was unmistakable: Mr.
Major is no Churchill -- he is Neville Chamberlain.
Not for half a century has the world witnessed events in Europe that have stirred such an agonizing echo of past horrors.
The television footage of houses reduced to rubble, the bombed-out churches and mosques, the lined-up bodies and mass graves -- they all evoke the flickering black-and-white newsreels of World War II.
The words "genocide," "massacre," "holocaust," "civilian bombing" and "ethnic cleansing" haunt everyday speech and stir up guilt-ridden memories like smoke rising from a crematorium.


Not the Fox Trot


Federal Agencies Mishandled Waco From Start; In What We Trust
To the Editor:
The tragedy at Waco may remind us that while the motto, "In God We Trust," is common coin in America, our civilian population is more heavily armed than any other.
In a taped interview before the Waco standoff, David Koresh defended his group's accumulation of weapons by citing the argument of the National Rifle Association that gun possession is an American right.
The children who died in that unholy sanctuary in Texas, and the other little ones who fall victim to shootings in our streets, are tragic sacrifices to our trust, not in God, but in guns.
LLOYD L. BROWN New York, April 21, 1993


The Ball Isn't Livelier; It's Just Fatter
The baseballs were barely out of the pitchers' hands for the first time this season when the cry began to be heard: The ball is juiced up, it's livelier, the rabbits have multiplied again and are alive and well and living in baseballs.
The last time the cry was heard, it was thunderous.
Major league batters hit 4,458 home runs in 1987, and people in and out of baseball were certain the ball was livelier.
The next season, though, when batters hit only 3,180 home runs, a remarkable 29 percent plunge, no one talked about a dead ball.


Jazz Was Sin, Jewishness Worse
In 1937, the Nazis unveiled their famous show "Entartete Kunst" ("Degenerate Art") in Munich, in the newly constructed Haus der Kunst, itself a classic example of clean-lined, sterile Fascist architecture.
The show was intended to expose the leading modernist painters and sculptors as esthetic equivalents of medically "degenerate" human specimens; photographs of people with birth defects and mental illnesses were juxtaposed with supposedly similar artworks, and the exhibition was festooned with racial denunciations and Nazi slogans.
It was recreated in Dusseldorf in 1987 and in Los Angeles two years ago.
The Los Angeles show traveled to Chicago, Washington and Berlin, everywhere provoking discussion.
But the Nazis' attack on the visual arts was just part of their broader assault on modernist culture.
In 1938, a lesser-known exhibition in Dusseldorf, "Degenerate Music," gave similar treatment to proscribed composers.
That exhibition, too, was recreated 50 years later in Dusseldorf.
After traveling to nine other cities in Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Holland, it resurfaced in Los Angeles, where it inspired the musical component of the "Degenerate Art" show, and at the Bard Music Festival in upstate New York.


Sports of The Times; The Prizefighter From Russia Who Wanted a Rematch
THE ONE guy above all who you might think would want boxing abolished visited a doctor at the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine in Manhattan on Friday afternoon.
He is the guy with the hundreds of stitches that appear mowed in the shape of a question mark in his closely cropped scalp.
The design is a result of surgery to remove a blood clot on the brain five weeks ago today after he had collapsed after absorbing a flurry of punches in a prizefight and had suffered a technical knockout.


A Season For Hope
Last Sunday's welcome spring weather brought out a fun-loving crowd to the "Kids for Kids" benefit for the Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
Held at the Industria Superstudio and underwritten by Vogue magazine, the event, which was fashioned after a New York street fair, raised just over $1 million.
Outside, celebrities like Spike Lee, Dustin Hoffman and Joan Rivers worked merchandise and game booths.


Mr. Clinton, the Point Is Revenues
To the Editor:
Jeff K. Thredgold is surely correct in predicting that massive, deficit-reducing tax revenues would flow from a change in capital gains treatment ("The Payoff of a Capital Gains 'Amnesty,' " Viewpoints, April 11).


Another Blow to Unit Cohesiveness
With all the bad publicity the Navy received as a result of a drunken revelry at a Las Vegas hotel two years ago, it might not have seemed that the service could be hurt by the release of a Pentagon report on the episode.
But the inspector general's new report, released on Friday, surprised even the cynical.


New Treads
The Professional Bowlers Association is making a tire change.
The P.B.A. announced yesterday that its most prestigious tournament would be known as the General Tire Tournament of Champions, starting next year.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Scarsdale
ONE fine June evening in 1922, a representative of the Suchard chocolate company walked into the Scarsdale Village Board meeting and proposed building a factory on 10.5 acres on Palmer Avenue.
His action abruptly ended a debate then going on about the need for a villagewide zoning law, made possible by recent state enabling legislation.
"For 20 years, we have been developing a village of homes," said Arthur Boniface, then the board's president.
"Nothing in the nature of a factory has come into the village."


Leslie Hulme, Frank Pottow
Leslie Caroline Hulme, the daughter of Aura R. Hulme of Pittsburgh and the late Milton G. Hulme Jr., was married there yesterday to Victor Frank Pottow, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Geoffrey W. J. Pottow of Toronto.
The Rev.
Dr.
F.
Morgan Roberts performed the ceremony at Shadyside Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Pottow is a proofreader in the appraisals department of Sotheby's, the auction house, in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in creative writing from City College.
Her father was the president and chief executive of the Mine Safety Appliances Company, a maker of industrial safety equipment in Pittsburgh.


Corrections
The Bear in Mind column on page 30 of The Times Book Review today misstates the paperback price of "The Path to Genocide: Essays on Launching the Final Solution," by Christopher R. Browning.
It is $10.95.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Henry Indyk; Want Healthy Grass? Look to the Soil
WHEN it comes to grass, Dr.
Henry Indyk is king.
He has been inducted into the New Jersey Turf Grass Hall of Fame and received the distinguished service award of the Golf Course Superintendents of New Jersey.
He has been the National Irrigation Association's Man of the Year, and his expertise was called on during the reconstruction of the Los Angeles Coliseum for the 1984 Olympics.
Dr.
Indyk retired in 1990 after three decades with Rutgers University as a professor and Cooperative Extension specialist in turf management, but at the age of 72 he keeps his hand in.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the overuse of psychotherapy referred incorrectly to a plan for mental health benefits presented by the National Association of Social Workers to the President's Task Force on Health Care Reform.
The plan emphasized the need to make mental health care available to all who need it and to offer coverage for all mental illnesses just as it is offered for physical illnesses.
It did not emphasize ways to weed out healthy people overusing mental health benefits.


Debacle on Times Square
HIGH RISE
How 1,000 Men and Women Worked Around the Clock for Five Years and Lost $200 Million Building a Skyscraper.
By Jerry Adler.
Illustrated. 374 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Conflict in the Balkins; U.N. Plan Still Best Hope for Peace, Bosnian Says
Security Council fact-finders came to Bosnia today and saw for themselves the Serbian roadblocks, the shortages of supplies and the horrors of a village where Muslim homes were burned a few days ago.
Packed into jeeps and British light Warrior tanks, they drove to the tiny hill hamlet of Ahinici, two miles from Vitez in central Bosnia, where Croats and Muslims have been fighting.


Federal Agencies Mishandled Waco From Start; Not Enough Patience
To the Editor:
It may be that a tragic outcome for the Waco cult was unavoidable.
However, there was an alternative approach the authorities might have adopted: to hold supreme -- regardless of provocation and growing impatience -- the principles of humaneness and the sanctity of life.
Such an approach would have precluded any strategy for ending the standoff that could reasonably be expected to result in catastrophe and loss of life.


Suspect Firm Said to Prompt Report in '90
The New York City Transportation Commissioner, Lucius J. Riccio, told the city's Commissioner of Investigation two years ago that he believed he was under extraordinary pressure from lobbyists and a senior mayoral aide to grant a lucrative contract to a data processing company that had been caught up in the municipal scandals of the mid-1980's, a city official says.
But the Investigation Commissioner, Susan E. Shepard, apparently did not start a full investigation into Mr.
Riccio's complaint.
Ms.
Shepard did start an inquiry into the contract last month, apparently after learning that The Village Voice was preparing an article critical of the city's actions in formulating and awarding the contract.


Sharon Stampfer, M. D. Weitzman
August wedding plans have been announced by Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Stampfer of New Rochelle, N.Y., for their daughter, Sharon Gail Stampfer, and Dr.
Matthew Darrell Weitzman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Weitzman of Cardiff, Wales.
Ms.
Stampfer, 23, is an administrative assistant at the American Institute of Architects, a trade organization in Washington.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a cardiologist in New Rochelle and an associate clinical professor of medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
Her mother, Doris L. Stampfer, is the chairwoman of mathematics for the Byram Hills school district in Armonk, N.Y.


After 250 Years, Nobody Has Even Come Close
Never mind the common view of Thomas Jefferson as the great apostle of neo-classical architecture; he was, but that misses the real point about the extraordinary design sensibility of the man who, incidental to his career as a self-taught architect, was the author of the Declaration of Independence, the third President of the United States and the founder of the University of Virginia.
Jefferson loved classical architecture and did more than anyone else to establish its presence in America -- but he loved imagination, invention and the breaking of rules even more.
How was it that a man who disdained dogma could be the moving force behind a style that is the essence of dogma?
Go to Monticello and find out.
This is the time to do it, too; in honor of Jefferson's 250th birthday on April 13, more than 150 objects he acquired or had made for his house have been brought back to it.
Works of art, artifacts, pieces of furniture, books, maps, scientific instruments and natural history specimens constitute the exhibition "The Worlds of Thomas Jefferson at Monticello," which will remain through December.
Because the exhibition takes all of Monticello as its venue, the rooms look more as they did in Jefferson's day than they have at any time since his death in 1826.


Mary Palmer, F. F. Taylor 3d
Mary Evelyn Palmer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Valfrid E. Palmer of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., was married there yesterday to Frank Fitzhugh Taylor 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor Jr. of Memphis.
Msgr.
T.
Leo Danaher performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady Star of the Sea Church.
Mrs.
Taylor, 28, graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father, a former vice president and general manager of The Daily News in New York, retired as the president and chief executive of Alco-Gravure Inc., a gravure printing company in Rochelle Park, N.J.


Stephen A. Douglas's Style Tips and Other Errors
Though it has been only a week since the official start of the gubernatorial races, there has been more than time enough for political truisms to be driven home to candidates in both parties.
Lesson No. 1: Do Not Give Up Your Day Job.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  CHINA CRACKS DOWN ON BIRTHS


Sports of The Times; Home Court Can't Always Be Trusted
WHILE the Knicks celebrate having the home-court advantage throughout the Eastern Conference playoffs, history should be whispering in their ears, "So what?"
In all the commotion over the Knicks' duel with the defending champion Chicago Bulls for the best conference record, it sounded as if the home-court advantage assured home-court victories.
But the home court is like home cooking: It depends on who's cooking.


Conflict in the Balkins; Serbs Again Reject Vance-Owen Peace Proposals
Courting the risk of allied air strikes and virtually assuring that new international sanctions will descend on Yugoslavia on Monday, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs said today that a proposal to link Serbian enclaves in Bosnia with a demilitarized corridor was not acceptable.
After meeting for three hours with Lord Owen, who is trying to mediate an end to the Bosnian war, the Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic, said the latest version of the peace plan "is absolutely anti-Serb" and "didn't meet a single Serbian need."


Airline Rebates for Agents: The How and the Why
IN the travel business, override is a buzzword that behaves like a four-letter word.
If a newspaper says that a travel agent receives override commissions, meaning bonuses above 10 percent for an airline ticket, agents turn as defensive as if they had been accused of stealing dimes from paupers.
In February, The Wall Street Journal reported that agents were "grabbing" commissions as high as 25 percent while the airlines wasted away.
Trade publications for the travel industry responded with editorials and articles pointing to the essential role of travel agents, who now sell 80 to 85 percent of the airline tickets in the United States, a statistic no one disputes.
Agents were evidently pained because they believed the article made it appear they were taking juicy commissions, not quite the case in a time of dwindling profits.
Even American Express, the largest in the business, is having a hard time.
The Basic Questions
If the heat can be dispelled from the topic, the real questions are: How do bonus commissions work?
Who gets them?
Are they likely to knock out more airlines?
Do they help or hurt travelers?


Snap, Crackle, Pop In Battle Creek
THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE
By T. Coraghessan Boyle. Illustrated. 476 pp. New York: Viking. $22.50.


20 Held in Midtown Raid
Reports from neighbors about cocaine use and sales at a midtown Manhattan bar led to the arrest of 20 people on drug-related charges Friday night, a police spokesman said yesterday.
Narcotics investigators from the Midtown North Precinct made the arrests at the Possible 20 Bar, at 253 West 55th Street near Eighth Avenue, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a spokesman.
The owner, Anne Marie Kavanagh, 26, of 3302 24th Avenue, Brooklyn, and the manager, Brian O'Rourke, 29, of 3242 Decatur Avenue, the Bronx, each received a summons for running a disorderly establishment, the police said.


Focus: Houston; Updating Dorms to Meet Student Needs
FROM Florida to California, from Wisconsin to Louisiana, colleges and universities are renovating old dormitories and building new ones.
The reason, officials say, is that students today have higher living standards and higher expectations.
To stay competitive when university enrollment has been declining nationwide, schools are updating housing to attract and keep students.


Arkansas Drops a Baton And It's Villanova Again
Villanova, frustrated since 1984 in a Penn Relays race the Wildcats used to win regularly, upset Arkansas to win the men's 6,000-meter relay today before a crowd of 39,592.
The Wildcats' task was made easier when John Schiefer, leading the race on the third leg for Arkansas, dropped the baton when he was brushed by Brad Sumner of Villanova as he sprinted by.
By the time Schiefer retrieved the stick, the Razorbacks were 25 yards back in fourth place.


For Italians, A Hard Quest
As he continued casting around today for a new government to guide Italy to its uncharted future, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro found himself seeking particular credentials: Wanted, an ad might read, person of caliber to oversee the national restoration project, wholesome character essential, tenure uncertain.
The successful candidate will be under pressure from the people to formulate new political ways after decades of corruption and misrule.
And the winner will have to work both with politicians who see change as life-threatening and those who sense in it their call to greatness.


Patching and Cleaning Spruces Up Siding
VINYL and aluminum siding do not require regular maintenance, but annual washing can keep both looking new.
The simplest way to wash siding is by hand with a sponge or soft-bristled brush, preferably one with a long handle that can be attached to a garden hose.
Mix a half-cup of any heavy duty nonabrasive household detergent with a gallon of water and use that as a washing solution.
Washing from the ground up yields the best results, but rinse the areas frequently with plain water to prevent streaks.
They occur if washed siding dries before it is rinsed.
Another method is to use a pressure washer, which can be rented.
It consists of a gasoline-powered compressor and a variety of spray nozzles that can be attached to a garden hose.
Before pressure-washing use plastic sheeting to cover electrical outlets, light fixtures, poorly sealed windows and doors and other areas that have to remain dry.
Seal around the edges of the plastic with duct tape.
Also cover plants and shrubs.


Wall Street; The Chink in Lehman's Armor
LEHMAN BROTHERS will be in the arms of a foreign bank by year end, or so a hyperactive rumor mill has it.
Whoever buys the operation from American Express will get a winning underwriting outfit and a top-ranked research department, too.
But it will also get what some consider a booby prize: The Lehman retail division, a 450-broker operation working in seven cities.
At a time when investors are tripping over themselves to buy stocks, what could be wrong?
Lehman's stunning history of run-ins with the stockbroker cops.


'Something Will Happen to Bring The Age of Aquarius About'
Michael Butler, the producer of "Hair" and the onetime "millionaire hippie," is dressed for an African safari.
Except it's not a real safari but a dinner dance and costume party with an African-safari theme -- appropriate dress requested, please.
The 300 guests -- owners of polo teams, polo players, polo enthusiasts -- who've gathered under the white tent in this wealthy community near Palm Beach, have obliged with khaki and leather for days.
A few are costumed as zebras.
There's one gorilla outfit.
Two couples have shown up in blackface.


President Sees Many Gains in His First 100 Days
President Clinton awarded himself high grades today for his first 100 days in office, saying in his weekly radio address that he had changed the nation's direction, tackled the budget deficit and helped small businesses and struggling families with children.
Mr.
Clinton spent much of today meeting with Senate Democrats at a weekend retreat, as he taped the speech on Friday.
The President and the senators are trying to figure out how to regroup after Senate Republicans defeated his jobs bill this week.


Voters in Russia Expect Results, but Not Answers
Russia wrapped up its preparations today for Sunday's referendum, showing that it had fully learned at least those lessons of democracy that deal with brash campaigning, pork barrels, pressed flesh and dirty tricks.
Despite initial warnings that Russians were tired of politicking and would not bother to vote, the latest opinion polls predict a turnout as high as 75 percent in virtually all parts of the country.


A 'Fair Lady' That Aims to Please
TO come upon a musical with the grace and uplift of "My Fair Lady" is ever renewing.
That it goes on, literately for pages, in celebration of the glory of language and the transformational power of learning, without forgetting to sing and dance, is an important reminder of how the Broadway musical theater was once in possession of a soul.
So built in are the show's virtues and rewards that the temptation to just do it, on the assumption that "My Fair Lady" will "play itself," could be irresistible.
The Paper Mill Playhouse is not resisting.
The Paper Mill Playhouse is doing it, but one cannot fairly say to the Paper Mill Playhouse, "You did it."


Self-Propelled
When my French publisher, Robert Laffont, asked me whom in the whole of France I wished to meet, I said, "d'Aboville," whose book "Seul" ("Alone") had just appeared.
The next day at a cafe in the shadow of Saint-Sulpice, I said to d'Aboville's wife, Cornelia, "He is my hero." She replied softly, with feeling, "Mine too."
It is a commonplace that almost anyone can go to the moon: you pass a physical and NASA puts you in a projectile and shoots you there.
It is perhaps invidious to compare an oarsman with an astronaut, but rowing across the Pacific Ocean alone in a small boat, as the Frenchman Gerard d'Aboville did in 1991, shows old-fashioned bravery.
Yet even those of us who go on journeys in eccentric circles, simpler and far less challenging than d'Aboville's, seldom understand what propels us.
Ed Gillet paddled a kayak 63 days from California to Maui a few years ago and cursed himself much of the way for not knowing why he was making such a reckless crossing.
Astronauts have a clear, scientific motive, but adventurers tend to evade the awkward questions why.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FOCUS ON THE SOUND
The quality of Long Island Sound will be the focus this week of the Junior League of Eastern Fairfield County.
With the assistance of the towns of Stratford and Fairfield, local Audubon Societies, the Long Island Sound Task Force, Fairfield University and other environmental organizations, the league has organized two events titled "You Can Make a Difference."


That British Style
To the Editor:
In his review of "Pandaemonium" (April 4), Stanley Hoffmann argues that I "confuse nationalism and ethnicity." Fair enough.
They
are
confusing.
Deriving respectively from the Latin and Greek terms for much the same thing.
But then he goes on to assert that "not all the groups that demand a right to establish their own nation-state do so on an ethnic basis. The conflict in Ireland is between Catholic Irish and Protestant Irish."


Conflict in the Balkans; Weighing Strikes in Bosnia, U.S. Warns of Wider War
As President Clinton weighs military action in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the danger of the war spreading elsewhere in the Balkans is emerging as a dominant issue in the deliberations, Administration officials say.
The C.I.A. has told the White House that any spillover of the fighting in Bosnia could ignite a regional war that might ultimately bring in Greece and Turkey, both NATO members, against each other.


Jones Revised
To the Editor:
There's no escaping the inadequate "analyses" and deconstructions of the Times demolitioners.
For Robert Plunket, Pvt.
Robert E. Lee Prewitt resembles today's "gay and lesbian soldiers." Prewitt is "decidedly unmacho" and a "talented musician to boot," and he's played by Montgomery Clift, "an actor now known to have been homosexual."


Margaret Luney and David Walker
Margaret Helen Luney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Luney of Tarrytown, N.Y., was married there yesterday to David Murdoch Walker, a son of Mrs.
Murdoch C. Walker of Summit, N.J., and the late Mr.
Walker.
The Rev.
J.
Peter Crynes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Transfiguration.
Mrs.
Walker is an associate at the New York law firm of Emmet, Marvin &amp; Martin.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father, a lawyer in New York, was a vice president and the secretary of the Squibb Corporation in New York before its merger with the Bristol-Myers Company.


At the Shubert, 'Will Rogers Follies'
JUST a week ago, a musical about the showman Mike Todd opened in New York, making a gasping attempt to live up to a reassuring but ultimately misleading title: "Ain't Broadway Grand."
About to enter its third year on Broadway, a block away from the doddering new show, which had a Connecticut tryout last year, "The Will Rogers Follies" delivers the elaborate production numbers, the feel-good songs and the sentimentalized biographical outline that "Ain't Broadway Grand" vaguely promised.


Ohio Prison Siege Ends


The Rails Warn That Business Is Weakening
IS this a recovery that won't pick up speed?
Signs that the economy is slowing again have begun to appear, and while it is possible to dismiss some of them as reflecting bad weather in March, that is not true for all of them.
Some of the earliest indicators of industrial health come from the railroad industry, where the pickup after the March blizzard on the East Coast turned out to be brief.
"The week prior to Easter was very strong, but it did not come out of Easter as strong as it had in the past," said Howard Keen, chief economist for Conrail.


Mixing the Serious With the Bar Crowd
RESTAURANTS send out signals.
They try to tell us who they are.
The message that Jonathan's transmits is mixed.
Customers who take a peek at the stunning restaurant in Garden City Park cannot help but be impressed.
Bold modern paintings harmonize with tall antique columns crowned by Boston ferns.
Separating two dining rooms are ornate brass grills that were once gates in a bank vault.
White tablecloths and fresh flowers are further clues indicating that Jonathan's is a serious restaurant.


Jane E. Miller, Barton Henderson
Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin B. Miller of Mount Kisco, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jane Ellen Miller, to Barton Thomas Henderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Henderson of Rye, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Miller, 26, is an associate producer at Table Rock Productions, a video production company in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is the president of Miller Proctor Nickolas Inc., a sales engineering firm in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother is a freelance writer.


Huntington Hotel
To the Editor: I was pleased to see that the article, "Restored Elegance at Huntington Hotel" (Jan. 24), notes that Pasadena's Huntington Hotel is a new building -- not the restored landmark that the public has often been led to believe it is.
Here is a fuller account.
The original Huntington Hotel was razed in March 1989, despite the considerable efforts of such preservationists as the group Pasadena Heritage.
When the replacement was opened in 1991, however, its promoters chose coyly to gloss over this destruction.
A press release from their architect glowingly described the hotel as "newly restored" and "vintage," a project that lent "new vitality to a historic landmark." The historic landmark, however, was long gone, a fact the release did not mention.


PAKISTAN IS FACING TERRORIST LISTING
Aware that the step could shatter what was once a close relationship, the Clinton Administration is debating whether to add Pakistan to its official list of nations that support terrorism.
The proposed declaration has stirred deep misgivings within the State Department and in Congress because of the danger of a backlash of anti-American feeling in another Islamic country and because the alleged offenses mainly involve support for separatist guerrillas in the disputed Kashmir region.


Muddied Picture as Derby Week Opens
Churchill Downs, founded in 1874 to showcase Kentucky's horse-breeding industry, opened its spring season today and raised the curtain on Derby Week, which will peak next Saturday with 18 to 20 colts poised in the starting gate for the 119th Kentucky Derby.
Derby bunting and even Derby fever surfaced beneath the twin spires of the dowdy old track, but overnight rain limited the morning workouts for the colts either committed to the Derby or waiting in the wings for their owners to make the big decision to commit them.


Yet More Numbers On Gay Americans
Wide-ranging figures on the number of Americans who are gay illustrate how hard it is to measure private behavior with any accuracy.


INSIDE
Boy Dies as Ground Caves In
A 7-year-old New Jersey boy died after the ground gave way and pulled him under, despite the frantic rescue efforts of his father.
Page 41.
Call to Curb Drug Prices
Some economists and health-care experts say the Government should try to limit prices on drugs that Federal researchers developed.
Page 36.
States Move on Health Care
Before President Clinton can present his proposals to improve health care, the states are going ahead on their own to improve matters.
Page 30.
Biblical Clues to Waco
Scholars say the Bible's Book of Revelation provides an important clue to understanding the fiery end to the Branch Davidian standoff near Waco, Tex.
Page 32.


Editorial Notebook; The Movies' New York
Even if I hadn't read that a forthcoming TV movie about the World Trade Center bombing was filmed in Portland, Ore., I'd know it the moment I saw the film.
No matter how clever the art director or the camera operators, a movie set in New York but made elsewhere won't fool a New Yorker.
We may not know it's Portland or Toronto or Los Angeles we're looking at, but we know it's not Manhattan, Queens or the Bronx.
For one thing, the light is wrong.
Even when the sun is blazing, New York's light has a chill Atlantic clarity.
It is, in essence, blue.
Not so the light in "Murder, She Wrote" or the late "Cagney and Lacey." Both allegedly take place in New York, but the light that shines on Jessica, Chris and Mary Beth is West Coast yellow.


Corrections
The Thing column on April 4, about TriBeCa, referred incorrectly to N. Moore Street.
The "N" stands for North, not Nathaniel.


Corrections
The Home Clinic column and diagram on Jan. 31, about building a workbench, misstated a dimension for a shelf.
The wood should be 20 inches wide, not 17.
A reader's letter has recently pointed out the error.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
110.50
112.25
134.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5840
1.6166
1.6509
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2617
1.2598
1.1871
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5745
1.5245
1.6740
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$346.50
$338.50
$336.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Why We March
How is this day unlike all other days, and why do we march?
But first, a big political-esthetic concern: What to
wear
? Others also wonder. A brochure from the Gay Merchants' Group of South Miami Beach:


With Broken Glass
'Tell America what is happening to us."
This was in Europe today, not during World War II, in a holding center for Bosnian Muslim refugees in Karlovac, less than an hour by car from the Croatian capital of Zagreb, and barely an hour by plane from the great cities of the new Europe -- Rome, Zurich, Vienna, Prague, Frankfurt, Athens.


Reading Between the Lines?
To the Editor:
In the bird's-eye-view illustrations accompanying Herbert Muschamp's article about the new Police Academy  [ "Modernism and Morality in the South Bronx," March 28 ] , the shape of the building bears a striking resemblance to that of a handgun.


STOP BLAMING BASEBALL
Richard Ford's essay blames the dwindling interest in baseball on reasons ranging from demographics to litigation, from mortgages to playing surfaces, from free agency to Republicans ("Stop Blaming Baseball," April 4).
It ignores, however, the single occurrence that changed forever the way we view baseball.
Before 1957, a day at the ball park was a chance to visit with old friends, make new ones and philosophize, between innings, about life in a world where the team that was better at pitching, hitting, fielding and base running won the game.


A Stroke Of Genius
WAYNE NEWTON'S unlikely enshrinement into the hallowed halls of hipness began with a Las Vegas-style existential crisis.
Gazing into his bathroom mirror one fateful day during the winter of 1991, Mr.
Newton refused to look below as the first half of his infamous pencil-thin mustache swirled down the drain.
Was it too late, the singer fretted, to reconsider his decision to finally lose his Valentino-via-Vegas look?
"I stared at what was left of my mustache, and thought
very
hard about what it all meant," said the 51-year-old casino crooner, whose collected monikers over the decades include "Mr.
Excitement," "the Midnight Idol," "King of the Strip" and, most often, "Mr.
Las Vegas."


Baltimore
To the Editor: The writer of "What's Doing in Baltimore" may live in Baltimore but does not know about Bolton Hill, which she says it contains "19th-century townhouses abandoned by whites during the race riots of the 1960's." We have lived in Bolton Hill since 1951, many of our neighbors are much longer residents.
I am unaware of any residents who abandoned their houses in the 1960's.


White Men Blamed For Buffaloes' Demise
In "For Buffalo, It's Home on the Range in Riverhead"  [ April 4 ] , about Mr.
Tuccio's nine buffalo and his long-range plans to expand to 100, the writer explains why the 100 million bison in the 1600's fell to 100 during the 1850-70's: "The loss is attributed to the fast horses and repeating rifles used by Indians and settlers after the Civil War to satisfy the market for robes, rugs and leather, as well as heads, tongues, hams and bones."


A User-Friendly High-Tech Library
WHEN the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet Galway Kinnell reads from his poetry at the opening of the renovated Scarsdale High School library here Friday at 7:30 P.M., his appearance will lend more than a celebrity spark to the event.
Elena Rabban, the district's coordinator of library media and audiovisual services, said she had invited Mr.
Kinnell, a professor at New York University and the 1983 Pulitzer Prize winner for poetry, to reinforce the value of poetry in an age of technology.
Technology was certainly at the fore, she added, as the school computerized its catalogue of 50,000 volumes and incorporated the electronic systems that will make a wealth of information available to students here.
But throughout the five-year planning process, she said, as the library was streamlined and redesigned within its existing space of 13,100 square feet, she worked with the architect, Peter Gisolfi &amp; Associates of Hastings-on-Hudson, to balance the latest in machinery with benefits of a more long-standing kind.


The Different Types Of Special Interests
One does not need to remind Howard M. Blankman that the conscience of "developers" is "the bottom line," here and everywhere else in the world.
Consequently, it has to be restrained and "in-formed" with other important aspects of life.
The issue is not whether the pine barrens constitute 10 percent or less of the total water-resource reserves of Long Island, a totally irrelevant issue, in any case.


Affair of the Heart


Results Plus
TENNIS Pioline Upends Edberg Unseeded Cedric Pioline of France upset top-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in a wind-whipped semifinal match at the Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
A strong wind affected the match with clay blowing across the court.
In the final today, Pioline will play Sergi Bruguera of Spain who outlasted the defending champion, Thomas Muster of Austria, 6-4, 1-6, 7-6 (9-7), in the other semifinal. (AP) GOLF Sullivan Shares Lead Former Greater Greensboro Open champion Steve Elkington sank an 85-foot putt on the 17th hole yesterday to forge a tie with Mike Sullivan heading into the final round of the $1.5 million tournament in Greensboro, N.C.
Elkington, who won the tournament in 1990, and Sullivan, who led after each of the first two rounds, were tied at eight-under-par 208 on the Forest Oaks Country Club course.
Despite the strong winds on the course, Tom Sieckmann pulled off a rare feat, holing out a 267-yard shot for a double eagle.
Sieckmann hit a 3-wood into the par-5, 574-yard ninth hole for his two.
The hole is the longest on the 6,950-yard Forest Oaks Country Club course.
Sieckmann finished at one-under 71. (AP) RUNNING Springtime and Couples On a day that was a perfect 10 and ideal for a couples tour of Central Park, the 15th annual Trevira 10-mile Twosome turned into a dual binational duel yesterday, but only among the men.
Inna Poushkariva of Russia ran away with the women's race, while Simon Chemoiywo of Kenya and his countryman William Mutol fought off a series of challenges from a pair of determined Brazilians and finished one-two.
Chemoiywo, who finished in 46 minutes 27 seconds, and Mutol (46:32) took turns in the lead as Delmir Dos Santos of Brazil (46:43) and his unrelated teammate, Valdenor Dos Santos (46:59), took turns challenging.
Poushkariva, who took the lead for good at the 4-mile mark, finished in 55:18, ahead of Marion Sutton of England (55:53) and Madina Biktagirova of Byelorussia (56:05).
Mutol and Sutton won the couple's competition in a combined 1:42:25, the third time a top Trevira finisher has not been on the winning team and the first time a pair of second-place finishers has won.
HOCKEY U.S.
Defeats Norway The United States defeated Norway, 3-1, yesterday in Dortmund, Germany, to gain a quarterfinal berth in the world championships.
The Rangers' Tony Amonte and Darren Turcotte ignited Team USA by scoring two goals within 40 seconds in the second period after the Norwegians, who have yet to win a game, had taken a 1-0 lead.
The victory left the Americans in second place in the Pool B standing behind the Czech Republic, which routed France, 6-2.
Germany and Finland have also qualified for the playoffs, which start on Tuesday.
In Munich, Eric Lindros had his second straight 6-point game, scoring five goals and setting up one as unbeaten Canada trounced Italy, 11-2.
Canada clinched first place in Pool A. (AP) ROWING Harvard Edges Navy A seesaw duel between Harvard and Navy in the 57th Adams Cup race in Philadelphia yesterday ended with the Crimson sprinting to a victory by 2.36 seconds.
Penn was third, 1.9 seconds behind Navy.
The defeat on the Schuylkill was the first loss for the Midshipmen varsity eight this season and the Harvard victory came two weeks after the Crimson lost by 10 seconds to Brown.
The winning time was fast, 5 minutes 23.7 seconds.
Navy broke out in front of the trio at the start of the 2,000-meter race.
In Hanover, N.H., Brown continued its unbeaten ways by turning aside Dartmouth, last year's Eastern Sprints champion.
The Bears won by 7.5 seconds in the current-aided time of 5 minutes 12 seconds.
On the Charles River at Boston, the Yale varsity defeated Northeastern and Rutgers, the Bulldogs coming back from a poor performance against Penn a week ago.
The winning margin was 6.34 seconds.


'Official' Is a Relative Term, and It Always Will Be
The very idea of "correcting" official baseball records from the dim past is misguided, illogical and pointless.
It is illogical and pointless because of the plain meaning of the words "official" and "record." It is misguided because the illusory goal of "greater" accuracy is unattainable and counterproductive.
After 45 years of experience as a baseball writer for daily newspapers, including 20 as an official scorer, I know first hand that the raw material researchers now use is unreliable and no closer to "truth" than the established numbers being replaced.


10 Children and Their Challenges; FERNANDO MORALES, 16
In hanging around with Fernando and his friends in Bridgeport, Conn., I did see flashes of appealing qualities: an occasional kindness, a display of wit or intelligence or charm, some genuine entrepreneurial skills as they were hustling drugs.
But then their alienation and mistrust would surface, and I would have a hard time imagining how they could ever manage to hold a real job.


Amy Mazzola, Tad Flynn
Amy Mazzola, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Mazzola of New York, was married yesterday to Terence Brian Flynn, a son of James T. Flynn of New York and Mary L. Flynn of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Ms.
Mazzola, who is keeping her name, is a vice president in corporate finance at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father, a former president of Lincoln Center, is a management consultant to arts organizations.
Her mother, Sylvia Drulie Mazzola, a former theatrical producer, was the associate producer for the original "West Side Story" and "The Music Man."


APRIL 18-24: Inching Toward America; Maker of Abortion Pill Agrees to Let Others Make It
A major roadblock to an abortion pill for American women fell last week when its French manufacturer agreed to license the drug to the Population Council, a not-for-profit research organization in New York.
After negotiations prompted by the Food and Drug Administration, Roussel-Uclaf agreed to let the Population Council find a manufacturer to produce and distribute the pill, known as RU-486, which causes the uterus to shed its lining, including any attached embryo.
RU-486 is available in government clinics in France, Britain and Sweden.
But Roussel and its German parent company, Hoechst A.G., has for years refused to make the pill available in the United States because, they said, they feared a boycott of their other products by anti-abortion groups.


CAPTURING THE BUTTERFLY
This is an old story: a group of fanatics -- here the D.E.A. -- decides that its cause is so important, it is above the law.
Violating the right to counsel is a greater danger than cocaine is.
The D.E.A. is doing more harm than the drug dealers.
NORMAN BAUMAN
New York, N.Y.


Making Vegetables an Integral Part of the Meal, Italian Style
VEGETABLES, it was said recently, are even better for us than we thought.
And now that the markets are full of fresh young spring vegetables, it is the perfect time to think about healthful food, like pasta with vegetables.
Even people who grimace at the thought of an evening without meat on the table seem happy to eat a main course that consists of such a combination.
Broccoli rape is an Italian version of broccoli, with a smaller head and a slightly bitter taste.
It makes a superb sauce for pasta (and is also great with Italian sausages).
Fennel looks rather like a bulbous head of celery, but it has a slight taste of anise.
It is sometimes called Florence fennel so as not to be confused with herb fennel.
It is superb pureed and mixed with broccoli in a delicately flavored risotto, which can be served as a main course or as a first course.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
SHOW HOUSE
The 28-room summer home that Edwin J. Schoettle, a Philadelphia businessman and a sailing enthusiast, built in 1910 on a bluff overlooking the Toms River in Island Heights has been transformed into a show house that will open for the entire month of May with a gala on Saturday.
A boutique featuring artwork and juried crafts will be open during the show house hours, and a special program will be presented at 2 P.M. each day and at 7 o'clock on Tuesday and Friday evenings.
The programs will include concerts of varied music, poetry, fashion shows and lectures.


Births Punished by Fine, Beating or Ruined Home
Four days after the birth, a brigade of 10 men and women came from the township to spoil the celebration.
They demolished the parents' hut, strewing stones and straw all over the place.
Then they demanded the equivalent of $45, and when the family could not pay, they smashed the couple's chest of drawers -- their only furniture aside from a bed.


DRUG MONEY SNAGS HAITI PEACE TALKS
When the midnight skies here shuddered unexpectedly one night last week with the roar of jets taking off, people close to Haiti's military leadership dismissed what the planes carried as simply cargo.
For cautious diplomats, contraband was the preferred term for what was carried on the unscheduled flights, which came on the eve of an expected agreement to settle Haiti's political impasse.


On the Road With Cary Edwards
AT 9 P.M. last Sunday, after a day spent attacking the policies of Gov.
Jim Florio, the man he would like to displace, Cary Edwards stood before a group of 60 Republicans in New Providence and fielded a question from a local resident.
"Why are you the best Republican candidate to run against Florio in November?" Robert Dougherty asked.





At the Whitney, Sound, Fury and Little Else
The Whitney Biennial has not spontaneously brought about world peace and racial harmony, as it seems hellbent on proving it can do, but it has accomplished one minor diplomatic coup.
It has brought various New York critics of usually discordant opinions into rare harmony: at the least, they dislike it.
I hate the show.
I had hoped, after some weeks had passed and the smoke had cleared, to discover gems left in the rubble.
But it turns out I became increasingly depressed by the exhibition, partly because the few good works in it -- those of Cindy Sherman, Nan Goldin, Janine Antoni, Kiki Smith, Ida Applebroog, Gary Hill and some others -- are so diminished by the grim circumstances in which they have been placed.
There's virtually no sensitivity to art that demands a certain silence and space around it, art that aspires to something more than political sloganeering and self-indulgent self-expression.


Blood Ties


Names in Lights, Hips in Cup
Shirley MacLaine started this way.
Shirley MacLaine started this way.
Shirley MacLaine started this way.
That's what Cinda Eatock keeps telling herself every evening as she parades, and sometimes tap-dances, through the theater district of Manhattan dressed as a giant coffee cup.


At the Schoolhouse, 'Lone Star'
STUFFING himself with peanuts, popcorn, beef jerky, Mars Bars and Baby Ruths, and slugging down Lone Star beer, Roy, back from Vietnam for two years, keeps taunting his younger brother, Ray, about how he served his time.
And Ray didn't.
Roy dwells on war memories, of stealth as a way of life; of rape, plunder and baby burning as the highlights of that life.


Children of the Shadows
When the rest of America even bothers to think about youngsters in inner cities, it resorts, too often, to stereotypes.
Menacing young men with baggy pants, reversed baseball caps or hooded parkas.
Dropouts who carry guns, deal drugs, mug the unwary.
Gum-smacking young women with huge gold earrings who are more interested in getting pregnant than getting ahead.
But a 10-part New York Times series, which ends today, has presented the faces and voices behind those simplistic images.
These "Children of the Shadows" are desperately trying to make it, while fighting against tremendous odds.
Their ability to cope is not only astonishing but admirable, from 10-year-old Nicholas Whitiker, forced to be the man of his household, to 17-year-old Shawn Hunt, who abandoned life as a drug messenger to become a model student headed for college.


Waste Management, American Style
To the Editor:
To suggest we can aim at recycling and reusing up to 72 percent of our packaging strikes me as unrealistic.


Rex F. Harlow, 100, A Pioneer in Publicity
Rex F. Harlow, a leader in public relations who helped to raise its professional standards, died on April 16 at his retirement community in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 100.
Dr.
Harlow, a former publishing manager and education professor, switched to public relations in the early days of its development.
He advocated social responsibility, including a code of ethics, and promoted the use of sociological and psychological research.


William P. Fenn, 90, Protestant Missionary
William P. Fenn, a former missionary educator who led a coalition of Protestant-sponsored colleges and universities in Asia, died on Wednesday at a retirement community in Doylestown, Pa., at the age of 90.
Dr.
Fenn was the retired general secretary of the United Board for Christian Higher Education in Asia.
The board promotes colleges and universities in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the Philippines and Indonesia and programs in China, Thailand, India and Pakistan.


Kristin McMahon, T. A. Kligerman
Kristin Loraine McMahon, an architect with Peter Marino Architects in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Alexander Kligerman, an architect and partner at Ike &amp; Kligerman Architects, also in New York.
The Rev.
Armistead C. Powell, an Episcopal priest, officiated at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Austin, Tex.
Michael Carrell, a Roman Catholic deacon, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Kligerman, 32, graduated from the University of Texas at Austin.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William R. McMahon of Raleigh, N.C., and Richardson, Tex.
The bride's father is an industrial resident and director of manufacturing process sciences at the Semiconductor Research Corporation, a technology research consortium in Raleigh.


In Westchester, Without a Pool
To the Editor:
In the last paragraph of Paul West's review of "Haunts of the Black Masseur: The Swimmer as Hero," by Charles Sprawson (March 7), you let the reviewer say, "Don't editors read manuscripts for such things anymore?"


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Brightwaters  $218,000
89 South Bay Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 1-car detached garage; taxes $6,200.
East Meadow  $169,000
2125 Franklin Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,100.
Islip Terrace  $130,000
110 Washington Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, attached 1-car garage; taxes $4,500.
New Hyde Park  $203,000
125 North 11th Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,300.
Plainview  $185,000
80 Ruby Lane  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 dens; taxes $6,400.
Williston Park  $183,000
17 Temple Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old colonial; dining room, den, attic, 2-car detached garage; taxes $2,700.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn.  $459,900  37 Black Alder Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old Tudor; central vacuum, security system, period details, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,027.
Eastchester, N.Y.  $170,000
68 Stewart Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, flagstone patio, cathedral ceiling, 1-car garage; taxes $2,796.
Fords, N.J.  $115,000
448 Crows Mill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, around 40-year-old duplex; new garage with workshop, deck, remodeled bath with skylight; taxes $2,578.


The Remote Reaches of Nepal
AS we trekked into the isolated hamlet of Dhule in western Nepal, a strange apparition appeared before us: a rather plump, bare-legged man in a striped robe of red, green and yellow and a big white turban.
Upon his chest hung a medallion decorated with cowrie shells.
In the country we had been walking through, no one wore turbans, robes or medallions, and no one was plump.
My husband, Philip, and I were heading north toward Dolpo, a remote part of Nepal near the Tibetan border.
Much of our route lay through a region closed to foreign visitors until two years ago; our northernmost point, Shey, was closed until 1992.
We had arranged a private trek for the two of us, accompanied by a crew of 2 Sherpas, a cook and 2 "kitchen boys," and initially 18 porters (as we used up supplies, porters were sent back; we ended up with 5).
From our starting point near Pokhara, we took six weeks for the trek, although it can be shortened to three or four weeks by flying to an airstrip closer to Dolpo.


Conflict in the Balkans; U.N. Plan Still Best Hope for Peace, Bosnian Says
Security Council fact-finders came to Bosnia today and saw for themselves the Serbian roadblocks, the shortages of supplies and the horrors of a village where Muslim homes were burned a few days ago.
Packed into jeeps and British light Warrior tanks, they drove to the tiny hill hamlet of Ahinici, two miles from Vitez in central Bosnia, where Croats and Muslims have been fighting.


Bagels Are Now Fast Food, And Purists Do a Slow Boil
The bagel, that chubby, chewy staple of New York life, has rolled across the country.
First, it took over the frozen-food counters of supermarkets, then made its way onto menus at McDonald's and Burger King.
Now, it has started pushing aside muffin and croissant stores in malls everywhere.
"The fast-food industry is always looking for the next hamburger, and right now the smart money is riding on bagels," said Steven Finn, the president of Bruegger's Bagels, a chain of 65 bagel stores whose headquarters are in Burlington, Vt.


Nancy L. Sharp, Brett Zickerman
Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Case Sharp of Easton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Lynn Sharp, to Brett Mark Zickerman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Zickerman of Fairfield, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sharp, 26, is the media-relations manager for the United States Committee for UNICEF in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is a partner at the law firm of Pullman &amp; Comley in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother, Susan Sharp, is a contemporary painter.


Airline Rebates for Agents: The How and the Why
IN the travel business, override is a buzzword that behaves like a four-letter word.
If a newspaper says that a travel agent receives override commissions, meaning bonuses above 10 percent for an airline ticket, agents turn as defensive as if they had been accused of stealing dimes from paupers.
In February, The Wall Street Journal reported that agents were "grabbing" commissions as high as 25 percent while the airlines wasted away.
Trade publications for the travel industry responded with editorials and articles pointing to the essential role of travel agents, who now sell 80 to 85 percent of the airline tickets in the United States, a statistic no one disputes.
Agents were evidently pained because they believed the article made it appear they were taking juicy commissions, not quite the case in a time of dwindling profits.
Even American Express, the largest in the business, is having a hard time.


Huntington Hotel
To the Editor: Readers should know, contrary to the statement in Hilary de Vries's article about the Huntington Hotel in Pasadena, that all "guest rooms and suites are oversized," we stayed in a decidedly undersized room on a New Year's visit this year.
Our travel agent had reserved an oversized room to accommodate us and a rollaway bed for our son.
The room we were assigned was elegant but completely filled with a king-sized bed, an armoire, an overstuffed chair and a desk.
When the rollaway bed was squeezed in, the room was cramped and awkward.
The management told us there was little variance in the size of the rooms -- just in the location and view.
We decided against a room-service dinner one night because we couldn't imagine where the table would fit and there was only one suitable chair.


10 Children and Their Challenges; CRYSTAL ROSSI, 12
A day or two after Crystal and I first sat down and talked we moved into the crisis-management mode.
She decided to withdraw from the project and communicated that to me through friends who popped out of the girls' bathroom at her Bensonhurst junior high school with impish explanations that Crystal was being punished by her mother.
I headed off to the principal's office, and Rose Molinelli frowned and determined to get to the bottom of things.


Sex Survey May Say Most About Society's Attitudes to Gays; Different Set of Rights
To the Editor:
It is misappropriation for members of the gay leadership to identify the April 25 march on Washington with the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s 1963 mobilization.


Gloria E. Walsh, Gregory V. Smith
Mrs.
Thomas deWitt Walsh of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Gloria Ewing Walsh to Gregory Vance Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Charles Smith of McLean, Va.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Walsh, 36, is the vice president at Pyramid Imports, a women's accessories wholesale company owned by her fiance in Mesa, Ariz.
She graduated from George Mason University.
Her father, the late Mr.
Walsh, was a writer in the sales promotion department at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York, and a playwright and painter.
Her mother, Ann Watson Walsh, is a real-estate broker at Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc. in New York.


Rodman Gilder, 74, Child Psychoanalyst
Rodman Gilder, a psychoanalyst who specialized in treating emotional problems of children with major physical ailments, died on Wednesday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 74.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


In the Region: Connecticut; The Screening of an Underscreened State
WHILE Connecticut's entertainment facilities are manifold, the movie industry feels the state is under-screened.
This means that residents of all but a relatively few communities must travel 10 to 20 miles to go to the movies.
To remedy this situation, four theater chain owners are spending an average of $6 million each on eight new multiplex cinemas under construction across the state.


'Tribal Is What It Was Supposed To Be; Tribal Is What It Was'
Tom O'Horgan -- the director who helped transform "Hair" from an earnest Off Broadway protest play into a high-flying display of counterculture excess and, for a while at least, the rock extravaganza the whole world clamored to see -- is looking curiously Buddha-like these days.
His face is round, if not quite rosy.
He's got a couple of chins and the black T-shirt he's wearing this sunny afternoon doesn't conceal a potbelly.
It has been four years since he cut his hair, which is pulled back into a braid that reaches halfway down his back.
What clinches it, though, is his manner.
Placid.
Retiring.
Even when he's talking, he seems lost in meditation.


Business Diary/April 18-23
THE ECONOMY Isn't That Bob Dole, With Democratic Feathers in His Mouth?


APRIL 18-24: A Verdict, a Vote; Politically Speaking, L.A. Gets On With Life
After two agonizing years of urban strife and political drift, Los Angeles is moving on.
First came the Federal jury verdict convicting two white police officers of civil rights violations in the Rodney G. King beating.
Three days later voters turned out to select a Mayor to replace Tom Bradley, who is retiring.
With two dozen candidates in the race, which was all but obscured by the police trial and verdict, no candidate got more than 33 percent of the vote.
That means a runoff between the two leaders, Richard Riordan, a Republican lawyer and businessman, and Councilman Mike Woo, a liberal Democrat who represents Hollywood.


APRIL 18-24: Greening of the Presidency; Clinton Reverses Bush On Global Warming And Biodiversity Pacts
On a sunny spring day last week, President Clinton traveled from the White House to a greenhouse at the United States Botanical Gardens and promised two things that President George Bush had refused to do: sign an international agreement protecting rare and endangered species and pledge that the country would reduce greenhouse gases to their 1990 levels by the year 2000.
Greenhouse gases, which trap heat in the atmosphere, include the carbon dioxide produced by burning coal, oil and gas.
The speech won praise from environmentalists, who had been troubled by what they perceived as Mr.
Clinton's inclination to compromise on environmental issues.
Many had criticized his decision last month to back down from a proposal to raise grazing and mining fees on Federal lands, after being pressured by lawmakers from Western states.


10 Children and Their Challenges; JERINA GERVAIS, 18
"Are all white people racists?"
Jerina and I are driving through Oakland, Calif., when she asks that question, early on in the process of learning about her struggle to put her old, wild life behind her, when everything she said or did felt like a racial-sensitivity test that I would no doubt fail.
I steady the wheel and say, "No, all white people aren't racists, but sometimes they're scared, and that may look a lot the same."
"Do you listen to rap music?"


IN SHORT: FICTION
BLOOD DANCE By James William Brown. Harcourt Brace, $22.95.


Karen H. Leidy and Jeffrey C. Gerstel
June wedding plans have been announced for Karen Hope Leidy and Jeffrey Craig Gerstel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel M. Gerstel of Cedarhurst, L.I., by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey T. Leidy of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Ms.
Leidy and her fiance are graduates of Swarthmore College.
She is the Latin American marketing manager for Elizabeth Arden in New York.
Her father is a territory sales manager for Sterling Health USA, a pharmaceutical company in New York.
Her mother, Herta Leidy, is a customer-service representative for L &amp; F Products, a consumer packaged goods company in Montvale, N.J.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE BROODY HEN.
Written and illustrated by Olivier Dunrea.
Doubleday. $15. (Ages 4 to 8) The broody hen laid lovely colored eggs in ridiculously precarious and inappropriate places all over the barnyard and each, in turn, fell and broke.
Then she settled down and nested and laid her rainbow of eggs in the broody pen, and lo, colorful chicks emerged.
The singsong narrative is fun to read aloud.


Corrections
The Home Clinic column and diagram on Jan. 31, about building a workbench, misstated a dimension for a shelf.
The wood should be 20 inches wide, not 17.
A reader's letter has recently pointed out the error.


'It Makes Me Feel Good to Know I Contributed to the World'
"Yes, you can say I'm a housewife now."
Shelley Plimpton is serving homemade asparagus soup and bread on the wooden deck of her Seattle home.


A User's Guide To the Best Of Balanchine
George Balanchine was ballet's great chameleon, a genius whose choreography took on an astonishing array of hues.
The full spectrum of his range will be evident during the New York City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration" at the New York State Theater from May 4 to June 27.
The eight-week retrospective offers 73 pieces in roughly chronological order, from "Apollo" of 1928 to "Mozartiana," staged in 1981, two years before Balanchine's death.
The season is crammed with marvels, and no work will be presented more than three times.
Fans will surely be bedazzled, and a mere glance at the schedule can be dizzying.
But don't be overwhelmed.
A study of coming attractions reveals Balanchine's major choreographic preoccupations.
Here are a few of the kinds of treasures on view.


Hanoi Two Decades After the War
UNCLE HO never stops smiling as the bicycles whiz past him hour after hour in the middle of the busiest intersection in Hanoi.
The bikes converge there beneath a giant billboard that shows a youthful, grinning Ho Chi Minh -- Uncle Ho, or Bach Ho, as he is still affectionately known in north Vietnam -- with a young child held tight in his thin arms.
The Vietnamese bicyclists rarely look up at the billboard, but that is no sign of disrespect for the founder of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
It is a matter of simple survival.


Hunt's Fall Can't Hurt Alabama Politics' Reputation
Politicians seem to be held in low esteem everywhere these days, but things may have hit rock bottom here.
In a state with crushing problems of poverty and education, the felony conviction and removal from office of Gov.
Guy Hunt this week is seen less as an outrage and more as yet another indication of how government here has routinely failed its citizens.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Reading Gerald Seymour's new book, THE JOURNEYMAN TAILOR (Edward Burlingame/ HarperCollins, $20), one inevitably thinks back to John Ford's great 1935 film, "The Informer." Even though almost 60 years separates movie and novel, there is much the same tension and power, the same pity for the human condition and the same close look at an unhappy, fear-ridden Dublin.
This comparison, of course, is a tribute to Mr.
Seymour's skill.
He has taken on a formidable job in his novel, detailing the never-ending fight between the Irish Republican Army and the British forces opposing it.
The plot is fairly complicated, there are many characters, and the author uses a kind of
cinema verite
technique, with constantly shifting frames. But the book never falters.


Oliver Tambo Is Dead at 75; Led Assault on Apartheid
Oliver R. Tambo, who led the African National Congress through its decades of banishment and its guerrilla war against the South African Government, died of a stroke here early this morning.
He was 75.
Nelson Mandela, his lifelong friend and successor as president of the congress, bid forlorn homage to Mr.
Tambo as a father figure who held the fractious movement intact during its 30 years of exile.


Revelation: Script for Cult Apocalypse
For anyone striving to understand the forces that led to the fiery deaths of 86 people in the compound of the Branch Davidians near Waco, Tex., the Bible's Book of Revelation remains an important, if cryptic, clue.
David Koresh, the cult's leader, had pledged to emerge from the besieged compound when he finished a manuscript explaining the seven seals described in chapters five to seven of Revelation.
It was also the subject of a videotape he made for followers in Australia.


Parole Officer Gave Information to a Drug Dealer, Officials Reveal at Trial
It started out as a strict and official relationship: a New York State parole officer and the convict she was supervising in a work-release program.
But then it took a very wrong turn, the authorities said, with lethal consequences.


Subs Steal the Show After Early Witt Exit
The wait was interminable for Mike Witt.
He had not pitched in a major league game since June 13, 1991, when George Steinbrenner was still banished from baseball and Stump Merrill was the Yankee manager.
Witt lived with an asterisk beside his name that denotedhis constant presence on the disabled list.
That asterisk was erased when Witt started today's game, but the doubts about whether he will ever help the Yankees remained.
He lasted four innings, and he gave up five runs.
He allowed Pete O'Brien's grand slam in the third after the Yankees had built a 2-0 lead, and he surrendered the fifth run in the fourth after the Yankees had rallied to take a 5-4 lead.


CHRONICLE
MARGARET O'BRIEN and GLORIA DE HAVEN will be newcomers compared with the stars whose images will flicker on the screen at a party on Saturday to benefit the Gramercy Theater, which has reopened as a nonprofit revival house.
Six or seven short films will be shown, including a silent movie made by Lillian Gish in 1912, "Musketeers of Pig Alley"; Jackie Cooper's "Christmas Party," in which Marie Dressler and Clark Gable appear as chaperones, and a tribute to Ruby Keeler.
The Gramercy reopened earlier this month, in part as a result of grass-roots campaigns and rallies after the closing of the Biograph Theater on West 57th Street in 1991.
It will have the same man at the helm, FRANK ROWLEY, who was also program director for the Regency Theater, another revival house.


Dance in Review
Lori Belilove and Company  Isadora Duncan Foundation Studio 141 West 26th Street Chelsea May 1 and 2
From the turn of the century until her death in 1927, Isadora Duncan performed in vast auditoriums.
But this pioneer of modern dance also gave programs in salons, studios and drawing rooms.


BMW Dealers Group Chooses An Agency
The newly formed association of Philadelphia BMW dealers said it had selected Ally &amp; Gargano in New York to handle its $1 million account.
The agency, which already handles advertising for BMW's New York-New Jersey-Connecticut dealership association, was awarded the account after a review that included six Pennsylvania-based shops: Cross Keys Advertising Inc. in Doylestown; Elkman Advertising in Bala-Cynwyd; Mike Zeko Creative Services, Neff &amp; Associates, and S.F.G Inc., all in Philadelphia; and another undisclosed Philadelphia agency.


Bridge
The most formidable bridge family in Europe is surely the Schaltzes of Denmark, with Peter Schaltz the focal point.
He and his wife, Dorthe, regularly represent Denmark, as his parents did before him, and the family owns one European title and one world title.
Peter and Dorthe recently finished third in the Danish Pair Championship thanks in part to his skill on the diagramed deal.
His four-diamond bid with three high-card points, and one of those useless, makes it clear that he is a hard man to shut out.
Against the optimistic five-diamond contract, West cashed two heart winners and shifted to a spade.
South took the ace, ruffed a spade, and finessed the diamond queen successfully.
The ace collected the remaining trumps, and he felt hopeful.
But there was still work to be done in clubs.


President Asks for Time and a Little Tenderness
Offering an edgy accounting of his first 100 days in office, President Clinton told newspaper executives meeting here today that he has been judged too early and too harshly by his partisan opponents and by the press.
"When people say to me, 'Well, what did you do in your first 100 days?' -- well, what did the other guys do in their first 100 days?" Mr.
Clinton said in a rambling, largely unscripted speech in which he offered a belated but vigorous defense of the economic bill that Congress blocked last week.


Patents; Attacking Corn's Big Enemy
Bacteria that kill insects have been found in tombs of mummies in ancient Egypt.
Their presence in the soil has killed mosquitoes in the Middle East, beetles in northern Europe and silkworms in Asia.
And for the last decade, scientists have engineered them to kill specific bugs that threaten food crops and agricultural products like cotton.
A naturally occurring bacteria gene called Bacillus thuringiensis, or Bt, has helped revolutionize insecticide manufacturing by replacing chemicals with biological insect-slayers.
Now a Pennsylvania company hopes a new biopesticide patent based on Bt's will help eradicate this country's corn rootworm menace.


In District 21, Schools Plus Politics Equal Gain
Platoons of teachers marched into a Democratic club meeting in Coney Island earlier this month and, voting under the watchful eye of their school principals, helped a powerful local school board member, Sheldon Plotnick, take control of the political club's leadership.
Mr.
Plotnick is campaigning for re-election to his third school board term, even as he ratchets up a first-time bid for New York City Council.
He organized the takeover of the Democratic club, he said, because the club leadership, with whom he is feuding, refused to dispatch the club's election workers to toil on his behalf in his two political campaigns.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CRIME: ANY IS TOO MUCH
The frustrated cry against crime that echoed during David N. Dinkins's first summer as Mayor is reverberating again.
This time, it is being sounded by Mr.
Dinkins's own Police Commissioner.
Reported crime may be down, but the public's threshold for pain keeps going up.
Which is precisely the point Senator Moynihan was making earlier this month when, in remarks that miffed the Mayor, Mr.
Moynihan compared New York with the more stable city he remembered from his youth 50 years ago.
Metro Matters.
B2.
BURNED UP OVER A CIGARETTE BILLBOARD
To understand how a billboard promoting cigarettes in Shea Stadium has come to be a political thorn for Mayor Dinkins, it is helpful to think of Spider-Man, the comic-book vigilante forever at odds with city leaders.
The billboard is a Marlboro advertisement under the huge video screen in left-center field, making, anti-smoking advocates say, a dangerous connection between smoking and athletic prowess.
Spider-Man is a childhood hero of Joseph W. Cherner, a once and probably future Wall Street bond trader who as head of a small anti-tobacco group has used his wealth and drive to back Mr.
Dinkins into a political corner.
B3.


Brooklyn Boy Dies After Hit and Run
An 8-year-old Brooklyn boy who was hit by a motorist with 41 suspensions on his driver's license has died of his injuries, officials at Kings County Hospital said yesterday.
The boy, Jonathan Medina, who was the victim of a hit-and-run accident on April 16, died on Saturday, the officials said.
The motorist, Mordechai Levy, 23, of 120 Ocean Parkway, Brooklyn, turned himself in to the authorities the day after the accident, at the corner of Argyle Road and Caton Avenue in Brooklyn.


Milestone for Gay Rights: March for Gay Rights; Washington Rally Puts Faces With Issues, But Probably Won't Create Rapid Change
As did the major civil rights and abortion demonstrations of past years, today's march down Pennsylvania Avenue by hundreds of thousands of homosexuals waving rainbow flags that symbolize their cause is bound to be a turning point in a movement that until recent years was largely obscured from public view.
But while the giant civil rights march of 1963, the anti-war rallies after that, or the abortion demonstrations of 1989 and '90 are defined as significant occasions in modern history, there is little evidence that they created any immediate shifts in public or political opinion.


Pritzker Prize for Japanese Architect
Fumihiko Maki, a Japanese architect celebrated for the refined detailing of his large civic buildings, is the recipient of the Pritzker Architecture Prize for 1993.
The award is being announced today by Jay A. Pritzker, the president of the Hyatt Foundation, which established the prize in 1979.
Mr.
Maki, who is 64 and lives in Tokyo, is to be presented with the $100,000 award and a medal in a ceremony on June 10 at Prague Castle in the Czech Republic.


Gay Marchers Throng Mall in Appeal for Rights
At once defiant and festive, hundreds of thousands of gay and lesbian Americans and their supporters rallied in the capital today, celebrating the right to be homosexual and demanding freedom from discrimination.
"Make no mistake, America," David B. Mixner, a longtime gay friend of President Clinton, who has lately been critical of him, told the crowd.
"We won't compromise our freedom. We won't go back. We will win."


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY  Airborne Fght Corp Alex.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  G.D.P. . . . 1st Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  New-Home Sales . . .
March  Friday  Factory Orders . . .
March  Personal Income . . .
March  Farm Prices . . .
March


Health Advisers Plan Exemption For Big Business
Despite strenuous objections from labor unions, President Clinton's health policy advisers have tentatively decided to let the nation's biggest companies serve as their own health insurers, bypassing the regional insurance pools that would serve as the core of Mr.
Clinton's health-care plan.
Confidential work papers from the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform say that under Mr.
Clinton's plan large employers may "elect to remain outside the purchasing cooperative" that obtains insurance for small businesses and individuals.
At least 33 million workers now get health-care coverage from big businesses, defined as companies with 1,000 or more employees.


INSIDE
Small-Business Loan Fund Is Running Out of Money
The Small Business Administration's loan-guarantee program will run out of money this week as a result of the Clinton Administration's inability to pass its economic package.
Page D1. 7 Dead in Oklahoma Tornado
As the search for victims continued, the authorities lowered the death toll from the tornado that hit the Tulsa area on Saturday.
Page A12.
Jobs Put in Jeopardy
Plans to overhaul the military and health-care industries could jeopardize President Clinton's promise to create 8 million jobs by the end of 1996, some Administration officials admit.
Page A15.
Page A8. Bledsoe is N.F.L.'s No. 1
New England made Washington State quarterback Drew Bledsoe the No. 1 choice in football's draft, and the Jets took Florida State linebacker Marvin Jones.
SportsMonday, page C1.


3 Pianists Receive Leschetizky Prizes
Hsin-Bey Lee, a 27-year-old Taiwanese pianist who lives in Cleveland, has been awarded the first prize in the Leschetizky Association's 14th New York Debut Competition.
The prize consists of a New York recital; Miss Lee's is scheduled for the afternoon of Dec. 5 at Weill Recital Hall.
Roberto Corliano, of Italy, and Cullan Bryant, of New York City, the second- and third-prize winners, received cash awards of $500 and $300, respectively.


Sports of The Times; A Draft Day Reward for the Jones Brothers
AT the microphone, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue announced, "The New York Jets take Marvin Jones." In the din of the draftniks, the Florida State linebacker turned and smiled at his brother, Fred Jones, a burly 27-year-old Miami Metro-Dade police officer in a blue suit.
"I looked at my brother," the Jets' first-round selection would say later in describing that moment.
"The long days and the hot days, it finally paid off."


Essay; 1st Quarter Report
The White House press office provided, at taxpayer expense, a handy-dandy guide to the first 100 days of the Clinton Administration, while the President went to Boston to press his 100-days defense on the nation's newspaper publishers.
I refuse to be so manipulated by an arbitrary number; instead, here is my "take," as with-it pundits say, on the first of the 16 quarters of Mr.
Clinton's term.


A Fisherman Is Shot Collecting Lobsters From His L.I. Traps
Signaling what the police say could be the start of a lobster war in Long Island Sound, three men from City Island were charged today with attempted murder in the shooting on Saturday of a fisherman as he collected lobsters from his traps off Sands Point.
The lobsterman, Able H. Miguel, 43, of Kearney, N.J., was listed in critical condition today at North Shore University Hospital after surgery.


Jordan Completes One Uphill Climb
In his own words, Michael Jordan had just played a lousy game.
But as he emerged from the training room of the visitors' locker room, resplendent in brown alligator shoes and suspenders to match, there was a gleam in his eye and relief on his face.
Finally, his longest season was over.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Scott Leius, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled George Tsamis, pitcher, from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Placed John Franco, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 17.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed John Candelaria, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rich Robertson, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Sent Brian Jordan, outfielder, to Louisville of the American Association.
Recalled Stan Royer, infielder, from Louisville.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Placed Anthony Peeler, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Alex Blackwell, forward, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Vernice Smith, guard.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Matched the New York Jets' offer sheet for Derrick Fenner, running back.


Jodi Wartels, David Krueger
Jodi Fran Wartels, a daughter of Joan King Wartels of New York and Edmund S. Wartels of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Alan Krueger, a son of Stuart and Jill Krueger of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor performed the ceremony at the Union League Club in New York.
Mrs.
Krueger, 28, is a public relations manager in New York for the Development Corporation for Israel, which sells Israeli government bonds in the United States.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a stepdaughter of Judy Wartels.


A High-Octane Offense Has a Tiger in Its Tank
Sparky Anderson, the kindly, white-haired manager of the Detroit Tigers, offered some hope for the rest of the American League yesterday.
"It's a lot of runs," he said of the Tigers' rampant run-scoring this season.
"But it's not going to happen on a daily basis. One day it's just going to stop."


Constitution Covers Tobacco Companies
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's endorsement of legislation in Congress to reduce or eliminate tobacco company deductions of advertising costs (column, April 14) is erroneous and superficial.


Corrections
An article on the Education page on Wednesday about the dispute at the University of North Carolina over where to build a black cultural center misstated the size of the building endorsed by a task force of community leaders and university officials.
It would be 48,000 square feet, not 53,000.


U.N. Visitors Say Srebrenica Is 'an Open Jail'
A United Nations Security Council mission visited the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica in Bosnia today and described it afterward as "an open jail" where Serbian forces were planning "slow-motion genocide."
Venezuela's United Nations representative, Diego Arria, who is leading the Security Council mission, said Srebrenica was very far from being the "safe area" that the Council wants it to become although the cease-fire there was still holding.


Army Deploys Tanks in Peru in Challenge to New Congress
In what perhaps is the first severe test of Peru's new Congress, the army sent tanks onto the streets of Lima last week to challenge a Congressional investigation.
The Congress, recently elected as part of President Alberto K. Fujimori's restructuring of the Government after he seized extraordinary powers, is investigating the army's role in the killings of nine university students and a professor at Enrique Guzman University last year.


Dip in Short-Term Rates Is a Sign of Uncertainty
The rates on Treasury bills dipped last week to their lowest level since October and continued to hover at or below the Federal Reserve's 3 percent target for the Federal funds rate.
But in contrast to October, when the rates on three-month bills fell to a 30-year low of 2.58 percent, the decline now does not seem to signal an expectation that the Federal Reserve will lower interest rates in the near future.
Rather, the dip last week is more a response to technical factors, including the seasonal decline in Treasury bill auctions as the Government collects its taxes.
In addition, there seems to be a wariness among some portfolio managers about the outlook for the market, which has made them put more money in cash until they have a better feel for where the market is going.
In fact, that may be the most significant signal from this move on short-term interest rates.


A Fare Card For Transit Is Lagging
Installing computerized fare boxes in New York City's buses at the same time that computerized turnstiles were being put into subway stations once seemed like a good idea to transit officials.
But it is no longer a feasible one.
Metrocard, the plastic fare-card system that is expected to replace tokens, is still scheduled to debut in a few subway stations in December and to be operating in 69 stations by the time it is formally introduced next March.


If Every Picture Tells Story, Nets Look Like Footnotes
Picture, if you will, a team that at one point this season was so good they could play with the best in pro basketball and often beat them.
A team that was cocky and good and played hard.
But picture them losing some of their best players to injuries, the victories soon being replaced by torn ligaments and broken bones.
Picture a team making the playoffs, but backing in, losing 10 of its last 11 games.
It's an unfortunate, ugly picture, but it's also a rendering of the New Jersey Nets.


March of Dimes Holds a Walkathon for Healthier Babies


Seventeen Magazine Account is Awarded
Seventeen magazine said Friday that it had selected Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York to handle its account, which had been unassigned.
Billings were not disclosed.
Among Ogilvy's duties will be the creation of a trade advertising campaign.
Seventeen is the third magazine aimed at teen-age girls to appoint a new agency recently.
YM magazine selected Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Philadelphia and Sassy magazine named Earle Palmer Brown in New York.


Devils Land a Punch While on the Ropes
Desperate to avoid a playoff sweep, the Devils found a way to defeat the Pittsburgh Penguins this afternoon and put an end to the two-time Stanley Cup champion's 21-game unbeaten streak.
From Chris Terreri in goal to the players assigned to shadow Mario Lemieux, the Devils put together a solid effort in their 4-1 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Penguins lead the first-round series three games to one, with Game 5 on Monday night in Pittsburgh.


Candace Harding, Randolph H. Post
Candace M. Harding, who owns Harding &amp; Harding Graphics Inc., a printing company in New York, was married yesterday to Randolph H. Post, the owner of R. H. Post &amp; Company, a member firm of the New York Stock Exchange.
The Rev.
L.
Denver Hart, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Carlyle hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Post is a daughter of William P. Harding of Southampton, L.I., and the late Gladys M. Harding.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Harding &amp; Harding, which was founded in 1887 by the bride's great-grandfather the late Theodore L. Harding Jr.


Tornado Demolishes Oklahoma Town
Much of this small Interstate-hugging town had been reduced to piles of tangled metal, snapped wood and scattered debris today as state troopers sealed off roads to prevent looting and National Guard troops searched for more victims of a tornado that killed at least seven people on Saturday night.
A state patrol spokesman said tonight that 86 people had been treated at hospitals for injuries, mostly cuts and burns.
Of those, 13 had been admitted, 3 of them in critical condition.


Marathoners Would Go for Electric Cars
To the Editor:
"Clean-Air Laws Push Big 3 to Cooperate on Electric Car" (front page, April 14) certainly offers promise for things to come.


How Japan Hews to Tradition of Lifetime Jobs
For three decades until a few years ago, Mitsuo Kamata worked for the Nippon Steel Corporation here, operating the huge blast furnace in which iron ore was turned into pig iron at temperatures of 3,600 degrees.
He still works for Nippon Steel, only now he sells imitation bologna made from soybeans.
How Mr.
Kamata went from steel to soybeans is a story of how one large Japanese company closed a factory without closing down the factory town.
When Nippon Steel closed its two blast furnaces here in the 1980's, the shutdown threatened to turn this isolated town, where the company at one time directly employed more than one out of four workers, into a ghost town, a Japanese sister city of an American mill town.
Cushioning the Blow
But while Kamaishi has clearly suffered -- its population, for one, has shrunk in three decades, from 92,000 to 52,000 today -- it has not faded away.
A combination of Government subsidies, industrial promotion plans and efforts by Nippon Steel itself, cushioned the blow and created jobs for many of the former steelworkers.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Absolute Entertainment Inc., Glen Rock, N.J., an initial public offering of 1.4 million shares.
Needham &amp; Co..


Vallone Defends Jobs Awards By Council Members as Proper
New York City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone said yesterday that some Council members "may have acted imprudently" in awarding jobs in a city-sponsored youth-employment program to the relatives of employees, political allies or friends.
Through a spokeswoman, Peg Breen, Mr.
Vallone denied that any members had acted improperly.
But he said that the appearance of impropriety might demand that more specific guidelines for the selection process be established.


No Headline
"Did they send the whole state, or what?" -- KAREN BILSING, as Colorado's contingent passed in the gay march on Washington.  [ B8:1. ]


Knicks Give Bulls Something To Ponder
The Knicks badly wanted 60 regular-season victories, and another victory against the Bulls.
So yesterday was not a day of rest.
Patrick Ewing played 40 minutes as the Knicks prevailed over Chicago, 89-84, and the Madison Square Garden crowd chanted "M.V.P.! M.V.P!" whenever the star center, who finished the game with 22 points and 12 rebounds, stepped to the foul line in the closing five minutes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Big companies could serve as their own health insurers under a plan being worked out by President Clinton's health policy advisers.
The plan drew strenuous objections from labor unions.
Confidential work papers from the President's health-care task force say that large employers may "elect to remain outside the purchasing cooperative" that would buy insurance for most people.  [ Page A1. ]
Military and health-care-related job growth, two of the engines that powered the boom of the 1980's, would be slowed under the President's plans to cut Pentagon spending and revamp the health-care system.  [ A15. ]


Loan Fund In Danger At S.B.A.
The Small Business Administration's popular loan-guarantee program will run out of money this week, a victim of the Clinton Administration's inability to push its economic stimulus package through Congress.
Demand from small businesses for the guaranteed loans has been growing much faster than the budget for the program, and beginning on Tuesday the agency will stop approving the loans until Congress acts to increase the budget, an agency official said Friday.


BALKAN WAR TRIAL IN SERIOUS DOUBT
Five months after the Security Council voted to investigate war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, specialists in international law have concluded that it may be impossible to prosecute any major figures.
After preliminary inquiries in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia, two lawyers with the United Nations war-crimes commission are returning to New York with little confidence that there will ever be trials of those responsible for the atrocities committed in the 22 months of war that have accompanied the disintegration of Yugoslavia.


No Quick Gain From Stronger Yen
The Clinton Administration is proclaiming the dollar's latest plunge against the yen as a windfall for America -- one that should finally shrink the nation's painful trade deficit with Japan.
"The stronger yen is the best single thing that could have happened to the trade deficit," a senior Administration official said last week.
But improvement is not likely to come quickly, even though a stronger yen pushes up the price of Japanese goods sold in United States while enabling American products to be sold for less in Japan.
Indeed, the yen might have to stay strong for two years or more, many experts say, to have much impact on American-Japanese trade.
The reason is that both American and Japanese companies are resisting any adjustment in prices to reflect the changing values of their currencies.


Dance in Review
Gloria McLean
Merce Cunningham Studio
Gloria McLean has performed with the Erick Hawkins Dance Company for 11 years.
But she has an intelligent, witty, sensuous choreographic voice of her own.
And a program of four new and recent dances she presented on Friday night was one of the most satisfying concerts of the New York season.


Markets Open In London
London's financial district and British markets were expected to be operating at a nearly normal level today, despite Saturday's terrorist bombing that killed one person and injured 44.


No Headline
Rabbi Chaim Mordechai Aizik Hodakov, the chief of staff for the spiritual leader of the Lubavitcher movement, died on Friday at Brookdale Hospital and Medical Center in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
He was 91.
He died after a brief illness, said officials at the Hasidic group's headquarters in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.


Dance in Review
Battery Dance Company  Gould Hall
As a choreographer, Jonathan Hollander picks fine music and creates tidy steps to it.
Steps and sounds go together.
But often, those steps are of little interest in themselves.


Familiar Faces Get Awards
The winners of the annual A+ Awards at the 75th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies looked quite familiar.
At a presentation here on Friday night, Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis won the A+ Creative Award for the second time in the three years of the award's existence. (Last year, when the agency did not win, it was first runner-up.)


Defusing of Pippen Short-Circuits Bulls
First, Scottie Pippen tried to get off a good shot against Charles Smith, and he simply could not.
Then he tried against Anthony Mason, and then against Smith again, and when the game that wasn't supposed to matter was over, Pippen had missed 14 of 16 hopeful flings at the rim and scored 4 points, and 2 of those were on a breakaway dunk.
That made Pippen 1 for 15 with 2 meager assists against live defenders, none of whom happened to be named Xavier McDaniel.


Sour Sixteen: Young Gets That Sinking Feeling Again
Anthony Young was on the mound, so this sort of disaster shouldn't have been all that shocking.
These things happen to Young, happen often in fact.
His pitches will be under control, his sinkerball sinking, and some silly chopper will turn into a costly infield hit.
Or one of his teammates will mess up a play.
Or both.
It happened again yesterday, at Shea Stadium, with the San Diego Padres in town.
The Mets had rallied from a five-run deficit, and Young had taken over a tied ball game in the top of the seventh inning, afraid even to hope that this would be the day that his frustrating, 15-game losing streak would finally come to an end.


After Boy Dies in Mud Hole, Fear, Prayers and Disbelief
Like many other children in this township, 8-year-old Nadia Fraser had a restless sleep Saturday night.
"I was scared that I was going to fall through the bed," she said today, standing within yards of a patch of grassy ground that mysteriously gave way on Saturday and pulled a 7-year-old boy to his death.
"I feel very sorry about the boy."


I.R.A. Says It Placed Fatal Bomb; London Markets Rush to Reopen
As officials scrambled to help banks and securities firms find temporary offices, the I.R.A. confirmed today that it had planted the deadly bomb that exploded Saturday in London's financial district.
Despite extensive damage to a number of buildings, officials expect financial markets to open Monday and to operate at nearly normal levels.
The bomb killed one person, wounded 44 others and caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage when it went off in a parked truck in the heart of the City, as the financial district is known.
Two Taxis Hijacked
Although the Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility, its statement early today made no mention of two smaller bombs in London late Saturday night; they destroyed two taxicabs but caused no injuries.
The police said men with Irish accents tried to force the drivers of two cabs to drive them to their targets -- Prime Minister John Major's official residence at 10 Downing Street and Scotland Yard's headquarters -- but leaped out when the cabs were still far from their destinations.
Both drivers fled before the bombs, which had been left in their cabs, went off.
If the bombings provoked one general reaction among the public, it was a sense that the Government and the police must step up their efforts against the I.R.A., which is waging a terrorist campaign to end British rule of Northern Ireland.
"We are not getting results," said David Mellor, a former member of Mr.
Major's Cabinet.
"The terrorists have ripped the heart out of the City of London, putting at risk lives, livelihoods and indeed the position of the City," he told the Press Association, a British news agency.
The Hunt for Clues
The explosion in the financial district left a 15-foot-wide crater in the street, shattered windows in dozens of buildings and sent shards raining down over several square blocks.
Today the police continued a painstaking search for clues among the debris as officials sought to help banks, brokerage houses and other companies minimize the impact on their business.
"The Prime Minister and I agreed that the best way to frustrate the terrorists is to have the City back at work tomorrow, and we are working hard to insure that it is," said Sir Francis McWilliams, the Lord Mayor.
Thousands of workers will be unable to enter offices in the buildings that took the brunt of the blast, including the 52-story National Westminster Bank tower, which lost most of its windows, and the headquarters of the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corporation, whose lobby was destroyed.
Most companies said that they were arranging for other office space and that they did not expect any major disruption.
Estimating Losses
Initial estimates of the damage ran as high as $1.5 billion.
But the Association of British Insurers said these estimates could prove highly inaccurate.
The group noted that the initial assessment from a bomb explosion in the City a year ago, which caused extensive damage to the Baltic Exchange and nearby offices, was also $1.5 billion; the cost of repairs proved to be less than a third of that.
Some of the cost is expected to be borne by insurance companies and by the Lloyds of London insurance market.
But much may fall to the Government, which agreed earlier this year to serve as an insurer of last resort for the many building owners who were finding it impossible or too expensive to get coverage against terrorism.
It was the most powerful explosion in London since an I.R.A. bomb went off in the area on April 10, 1992.
Several I.R.A. attacks in recent months have been aimed at causing significant disruption as well as economic damage.


Barnes &amp; Noble Superstore Prompts Volumes of Worry
Not for nothing did the writer and Nobel laureate Isaac Bashevis Singer spend most of his life on the Upper West Side.
From Lincoln Center in the south to Columbia University in the north, the neighborhood has long crackled with the passions, ideas, disagreements and noises defining the intellectual life of America's largest city.
From the perspective of one of the nation's top booksellers, the message emerging from all this cacophony could not be more distinct.


A Plea for Intolerance of Acts of Crime
"DO something!"
The frustrated cry against crime that echoed during David N. Dinkins's first summer as Mayor is reverberating again.
This time, it is being sounded by Mr.
Dinkins's own police commissioner.
Reported crime may be down, but the public's threshold for pain keeps going up.
Which is precisely the point Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan was making earlier this month when, in remarks that miffed the Mayor, Mr.
Moynihan compared New York with the more stable city he remembered 50 years ago.
In 1943, critics countered, a black man could not have been elected Mayor.
Still, more poor families were intact and only 44 New Yorkers were killed with guns.
Last year, 1,499 were.


March for Gay Rights; Thousands From New York, Marching in a Long Gay Line
At dawn this morning, a vast southward migration began.
Tens of thousands of gay men, lesbians and their supporters crowded into cars and chartered buses across the New York region -- at community centers and health clinics in Manhattan, on college campuses in New Paltz and Purchase, N.Y., at bars in New London, Conn., and in working-class towns in northern New Jersey.


Islanders and Ferraro Never Turn Down Overtime
The Islanders and the Washington Capitals have played four games in their first-round Patrick Division playoff series, but three of them have been decided in overtime, totaling an extra 75 minutes 16 seconds, more than one full extra game.
After losing the opener in regulation time, the Islanders have won the last three, all in overtime.
The most recent was a 4-3 victory Saturday night on Ray Ferraro's goal at 5:40 of the second overtime period before a capacity crowd at Nassau Coliseum.
The Islanders can clinch the four-of-seven-game Stanley Cup series with a victory here at the Capital Centre on Monday evening.


Jefferson Lived to Reverse Himself on Blacks
To the Editor:
David K. Shipler in "Jefferson Is America -- and America Is Jefferson" (Op-Ed, April 12) presents an incomplete and distorted account of Thomas Jefferson's attitudes toward blacks.
The source Mr.
Shipler uses to indict Jefferson as a racist, the "Notes on the State of Virginia" of 1785, is not the only record of Jefferson's on the subject of race.


Changes in Military and Health Spending Would Slow Job Growth
President Clinton's plans to cut Pentagon spending and revamp the health-care system would slow two of the engines of job growth that powered the boom of the 1980's: the military and health care.
Because there has been little job growth in other areas of the economy, Administration officials admit they have little idea where the new jobs will come from over the next decade.
Indeed, some officials worry that the overhaul of defense and health care could jeopardize the President's promise to create eight million jobs by the end of 1996.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Mediate Takes Playoff  Rocco Mediate birdied the fourth playoff hole to beat Steve Elkington and win the $1.5 million Greater Greensboro Open yesterday.
Mediate overcame a disastrous double-bogey on the par-5 15th and then had to save pars on the second and third extra holes before sinking a 4-foot putt for his second PGA Tour victory.
He closed with a three-under-par 69 yesterday for a four-day total of 281.
Elkington matched that figure with a one-over 73. (AP) Stockton Cruises: Dave Stockton, playing bogey-free golf for the first time this week, shot a six-under-par 66 and breezed past second-round leader Harold Henning to a four-stroke victory in the $500,000 Muratec Reunion Pro-Am in Frisco, Tex. (AP) TENNIS  Sanchez Vicario Wins  Top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario defeated second-seeded Conchita Martinez in only 71 minutes yesterday to win the $375,000 La Familia Open in Barcelona, Spain.
The 21-year-old Sanchez Vicario, ranked No. 3 in the world and off to a fast start this season, won, 6-1, 6-4, on the clay surface.
It was her third tournament victory of the season. (AP) Delayed in Monte Carlo: Rain forced a one-day postponement of the final between Sergi Bruguera and Cedric Pioline at the $1.65 million Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
The final will be a two-out-of-three format instead of three out of five.
The final will be played this morning on the center court, weather permitting, or in the afternoon on a covered court. (AP) AUTO RACING  Prost Is a Winner  Alain Prost lapped all but second-place Michael Schumacher as he drove his Williams-Renault to victory yesterday in the Grand Prix of San Marino in Imola, Italy.
His 46th Formula One career victory -- and his second this season -- moved the 38-year-old Frenchman within 2 points of leader Ayrton Senna, who did not finish in his McLaren-Ford.
Senna has 26 points.
Michael Andretti, Senna's teammate, spun during the 33d lap while in fifth place and did not complete his fourth consecutive championship race.
Prost, who fought back following a difficult start on a wet track, completed 61 laps (191.034 miles) in 1 hour 33 minutes 20.413 seconds.
Schumacher, the German driver of a Benetton-Ford, was 32.41 seconds behind. (AP) It's Wallace Again: Rusty Wallace continued his early season domination of the Nascar Winston Cup series, winning the Hanes 500 at Martinsville (Va.) Speedway yesterday for his third straight victory and fourth in eight starts.
Nobody else could stay with the 1989 series champion and current point leader, who led all but 90 of the 500 laps on Martinsville's .526-mile oval while setting a record average of 79.090 miles an hour. (AP) SOCCER  A Shutout for Mexico  Mexico battered Canada, 4-0, in a World Cup qualifying match in Mexico City yesterday as it leaped ahead of its archrival in the quest for a berth in the 1994 finals.
Mexico's victory gives it 6 points in the overall standings of the North, Central American and Caribbean region, spurting ahead of Canada, which remains at 5 points. (AP)


A.M.A. for Health Plan
To the Editor:
Contrary to an April 13 article, President Clinton's proposal for a standard package of health benefits guaranteed to all Americans is hardly a "radical idea." The American Medical Association has called for a basic benefits package for more than three years.
Our proposal even details what such a plan would cover.


Celia Slom, Greg Vimont
Celia Slom, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Slom of New York, was married yesterday to Greg Vimont, a son of Shirley Vimont of San Antonio and the late William Vimont.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Ms.
Slom, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the editor of the Medical Tribune News Service in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Nancy Quinn, Artistic Director In Youth Theater, Is Dead at 46
Nancy Quinn, the artistic director of Young Playwrights, an award-winning program dedicated to developing the talents of young writers, died on Saturday at her home in Brooklyn.
She was 46.
The cause was a heart attack, said Sheri M. Goldhirsch, the managing director of Young Playwrights.


Avery Fisher Career Grant
Anne Akiko Meyers, a 22-year-old violinist, has been named the 1993 winner of the Avery Fisher Career Grant, which consists of $10,000 for career needs.
The grants have been awarded annually since 1982 to outstanding solo instrumentalists who are United States citizens.
Among the previous winners are the pianists Ursula Oppens and Andre-Michel Schub, the violinists Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg and Joshua Bell, and the cellists Sharon Robinson and Carter Brey.
A recorded recital by Ms.
Meyers will be broadcast on WQXR (96.3 FM) on Thursday at 7 P.M.


Abroad at Home; Speak For America
In his war memoirs Winston Churchill describes a moment in the House of Commons that brought home the shame felt at Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasing Hitler.
It was Sept. 2, 1939, the day after Hitler's invasion of Poland.
Chamberlain was temporizing, still hoping to avoid war.
A member of the Labor opposition, Arthur Greenwood, rose to speak.
From the Conservative benches Leopold Amery, a Churchill supporter, cried out: "Speak for England."


The Voters Are Willing, but the Ballot Is Greek
The elderly woman, confined to her room on the fourth floor of a rundown building in Moscow's proletarian district, knew how she wanted to vote in Russia's referendum today.
"For Yeltsin," she said, firmly addressing the two young election workers who had brought her a sealed ballot box upon her request.
As they explained patiently, that meant that she would have to cross out the "nyet,"or "no," on the ballot.
However puzzling it might seem, the only way to register support for President Boris N. Yeltsin was to negate a negative -- just one of many confusing moments in this befuddled, though potentially crucial, vote.


Jets Trade Down But Still Move Up
As if they were on a trip to the corner store, the Jets didn't have to go far to get two things they needed in the first round of the National Football League college draft this afternoon.
The Jets traded their first-round pick, No. 3, to Phoenix for the Cardinals' No. 4 pick over all, obtaining the veteran running back Johnny Johnson in the deal.
Then, after the Cardinals chose Georgia running back Garrison Hearst, whom they had badly wanted, the Jets drafted Florida State linebacker Marvin Jones, whom they had wanted all along.


March for Gay Rights; Not the Biggest of All Marches
The gay demonstration here today drew hundreds of thousands of marchers.
But by the estimates of the United States Park Police, it was not the biggest protest march in the capital's history.
That one, according to the police, was a Vietnam War moratorium rally in 1969 that drew 600,000 people.
Another Vietnam protest, in 1971, drew 500,000.
A march in 1992 organized by the National Organization for Women also drew 500,000 people, according to the Park Police's calculations.


Perot Urges Calls to Clinton Denouncing Economic Plans
In a technique reminiscent of President Ronald Reagan in the first months of his Administration, Ross Perot issued an appeal tonight for Americans to flood the White House and Congress with telephone messages opposing President Clinton's policies on taxes, health care and military cuts.
Mr. Perot made his appeal at the conclusion of a 30-minute appearance he bought on NBC.


Soon, Leaves Will Grow to Add to the Shade


Jets Counting on Johnson to Fill Holes
After being shut out in the free-agent market in their attempts to pick up a veteran running back, the Jets took advantage of an opportunity in the college draft this afternoon to fill a need, picking up Johnny Johnson, a three-year veteran, in a trade with Phoenix.
"We're thrilled to have him," said Jets Coach Bruce Coslet.
"How many free agents did we try to sign last week? It was kind of obvious that we needed a veteran running back."


One Fullback Waits in Brooklyn
He could have been one of them, leaving home in East New York for midtown Manhattan and the beginning of his new life, surrounded by his family, wearing a suit and a new hat with the name of a football team.
Or he could have already gone through the anxiety of the National Football League draft and the thrill of hearing his new club and the words, ".... select Stephen McGuire, fullback, University of Miami."


Digging Up the Dirt In Academia's Groves
Doggedly submitting entries year after year, most magazines wait a long time before winning a National Magazine Award, the Oscar of the magazine industry.
Last week Lingua Franca, a precocious three-year-old, beat out all other magazines with circulations below 100,000 to win a general excellence award.
It was a stunning victory for the little magazine that is based on the improbable premise that higher education can be a sexy subject.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing
YOU can map out your itinerary for a trip to Rwanda, get recipes for cooking a complete Tuscan dinner (including focaccio with rosemary), be inspired by the calming advice of a spiritualist or frightened out of your wits by a master of horror -- all without leaving the comfort of your favorite reading chair.
It's not just the reading of these books that you can do at home.
You can do the browsing and the buying of them there, as well.


Review/Television; A Benevolent Journey to Peru's Poor
The journey on tonight's offering from "Travels" is a short and unusual one for this PBS series, but it runs deep.
The camera follows Ann Winifred Goulden, an Englishwoman in her mid-70's, on a daylong, bone-rattling truck ride from Piura, a small town in northern Peru, up into remote mountain villages, bringing supplies, advice and love to their impoverished people.
Ms.
Goulden found her vocation while on vacation in Piura in 1959, when she came upon a sickly child who had been left in the street to die.
Since then she has nursed hundreds of underfed, diseased, abused children, and has also led efforts to build roads and schools that might ease their lives.


Review/Rock; Making Music From Noise and Noise From Music
"Silence!" Blixa Bargeld growled during Einsturzende Neubaten's set at Roseland on Friday night.
An instant of silence followed, then a metallic crash.
"Muzik!" he barked.
A sustained shriek of guitar feedback and a bashing, lumbering beat answered him.
Einsturzende Neubaten, a German band whose name means Collapsing New Buildings, has been making music from grating noises since 1981, helping invent industrial rock and creating some of the most ominous recordings of the rock era.
The five-man group has bashed on scrap metal, tortured its guitars, screamed, whispered and often abandoned the comfort of a steady beat; it knows how to extend suspense by sustaining the hush after an explosion, and how to use the space between a piercing high noise and a low rumble to suggest vast desolation.
Singing and declaiming primarily in German, Mr.
Bargeld writes about flames and wounds, about decay and negation and loss.


Defiant Bosnia Serbs Reject Peace Plan
Bosnian Serbs refused early this morning to accept a United Nations peace plan to end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, bringing down tough new sanctions upon Yugoslavia that are intended to choke off all commerce with that country.
The failure to act followed an all-night session of the self-styled Bosnian Serb parliament in which more than two dozen speakers rose to denounce the accord negotiated by Lord Owen and Cyrus R. Vance, the European Community and United Nations mediators.


Review/Opera; A Mezzo's Renown Raises the Stakes At an American Debut
Credit the new Houston Grand Opera staging of Rossini's "Barbiere di Siviglia" with moments of singular aptness.
In Willy Decker's production from the Bonn Opera, directed here by Anthony Pilavachi, the first glimpse is of a pensive Rosina, seen lighted in a second-story window of Dr.
Bartolo's dreary-looking residence, long before she utters a note.
This Rosina is, after all, the singer everyone has come to hear: Cecilia Bartoli, the sensational 26-year-old Italian mezzo-soprano, in her American stage debut.
Even if she had a stronger cast around her, Miss Bartoli, seemingly God's gift to Rossini, Mozart and London Records, would be the star.


Books of The Times; Peering Behind the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas Matter
The Real Anita Hill The Untold Story By David Brock 438 pages.
The Free Press/Macmillan.
By titling his impressive investigative study "The Real Anita Hill: The Untold Story," David Brock makes it seem as if he has written an expose of the person he considers the villain in the mesmerizing 1991 confrontation between Supreme Court Justice-designate Clarence Thomas and the woman who accused him of having sexually harassed her a decade earlier.
This impression is not entirely misleading.
Mr.
Brock's book is extremely damaging to Anita Hill's case.
Having closely scrutinized the sworn testimony of both principals in the conflict (although neither was interviewed for this book), the author found Judge Thomas's to be valid on every point while Professor Hill's was shot through with "false statements."


Iraq's Bomb -- an Update
Soon, possibly this week, the U.N. will report that its inspectors in Iraq have found yet another cache of strategic equipment for making nuclear weapons.
Their chief inspector at the International Atomic Energy Agency, Maurizio Zifferero, should be embarrassed.
He announced in September that President Saddam Hussein's atomic weapons program was "neutralized" and "at zero." He even said that Iraq had "decided at the higher political level to stop these activities."
Saddam Hussein never told the I.A.E.A. about the newly discovered equipment, as required by U.N. resolutions.
And he continues to rain down threats and intimidation on the inspectors, indicating that he has more to hide.
In March 1992, Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, told inspectors that Iraq had not relinquished the right to build weapons of mass destruction.


Dance Benefit Tonight
Gregory Hines and Pamela Koslow will serve as hosts of "States of Grace," a benefit for Dance Theater Workshop, tonight at 7:30 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
The performers include the Ralph Lemon Company, Susan Marshall and Company, the Parsons Dance Company and Tim Hadel, with music by G. E. Smith and Friends and the Footwarmers Trio.
Tickets are $50.
Reservations: (212) 691-4823.


Yankee Stadium's Neighbors Don't Always Cheer for Ball Park
To the Editor:
Your April 12 article about Yankee Stadium suggests it is a treasure in an otherwise bleak area of the Bronx.
I, and many other people in this area, beg to differ.


Evelyn Cooper and Stuart Finkelstein
Evelyn Ann Cooper, a daughter of Herbert and Marianne Cooper of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday to Stuart H. Finkelstein, a son of Hilary Finkelstein of Forest Hills, Queens, and Albert I. Finkelstein of New Tripoli, Pa.
Rabbi Philip Bentley performed the ceremony at the Woodbury Jewish Center in Woodbury, L.I..
Mrs.
Cooper-Finkelstein, 24, graduated and received a master's degree in communications from New York University.
Her father is the president of the Dynalytics Corporation, an engineering concern in Hicksville, L.I.
Her mother is an associate professor and the director of the Graduate School of Library and Information Studies at Queens College.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  YELTSIN APPEARS TO WIN VOTE  Russian voters gave what looked to be firm support for Boris Yeltsin, while demanding new elections for the Congress of People's Deputies.
The first official results are not expected until today.
A1  To support Boris Yeltsin, voters have to negate a negative.
A10


Treasury Activity to Include Auction of Five-Year Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week include the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today and auctions of two-year notes tomorrow and five-year notes on Wednesday.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.83 percent, with the rate on a six-month bill at 2.92 percent.
In when-issued trading ahead of the auctions, the new two-year issue was being offered at a price to yield 3.73 percent and the five-year issue at a price to yield 5.06 percent.


Ms. von Ferstel, Mr. Lobenthal
Alexandra von Ferstel, was married yesterday to Nicholas Ward Lobenthal, like her a lawyer in New York.
The Rev.
Anne Hallstein, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Ms. von Ferstel, who is 29 and is keeping her name, is an associate at the firm of Coudert Brothers.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from Fordham University.


Europeans Back Off Vote on Air Strikes To Contain the Serbs
In another reflection of Western Europe's hesitation and divisions over the Balkan war, European Community ministers meeting over the weekend backed off from supporting a proposal to approve the use of air strikes against Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The decision on Sunday by the community's 12 foreign ministers came after a review of policy options that has led some officials to conclude that only selective air strikes against Serbian targets in Bosnia will increase pressure on the Serbs to halt their offensive against Muslims in the former Yugoslav republic.


Fran Hawthorne, Peter Segal
Fran Hawthorne, an editor at Institutional Investor magazine, was married yesterday to Peter Segal, a vice president and a director of the Garrett Wade Company, an importer and distributor of woodworking tools, both in New York.
Rabbi Linda Motzkin performed the ceremony at the Park Slope Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Hawthorne, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Edward and Lillian Hawthorne of Camarillo, Calif.
Her father, now retired, was the chief scientist of the space and communications group of Hughes Aircraft Company in Los Angeles.
Her mother, also retired, was the associate dean of student affairs at the School of Social Work at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles.


Man Carrying BB Gun Is Killed in Brooklyn
A man was shot and killed late Saturday in Brooklyn after turning on three police officers with a BB gun, the police said yesterday.
The officers thought the weapon was a semiautomatic handgun, the police said.
The authorities were unable to identify the man, who appeared to be 35 to 40 years old.
As is the case in shootings by police officers, the incident will be investigated by a departmental firearms review board and the District Attorney's office.
The shooting occurred about 10:30 P.M.
Saturday on Sheffield Avenue and Wortman Avenue in East New York after the officers, responding to a report of a man with a gun, saw a person who answered the description.
When the man saw the officers approach, he ran, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
As they chased the man on foot, Sergeant McCluskey said, he turned in their direction with a gun in his hand, and the officers opened fire.
The man did not fire his weapon, Sergeant McCluskey said.
The officers fired six rounds.
The police recovered a Daisy BB gun that resembled a semiautomatic handgun, he said.


Iraq's Bomb -- an Update
Soon, possibly this week, the U.N. will report that its inspectors in Iraq have found yet another cache of strategic equipment for making nuclear weapons.
Their chief inspector at the International Atomic Energy Agency, Maurizio Zifferero, should be embarrassed.
He announced in September that President Saddam Hussein's atomic weapons program was "neutralized" and "at zero." He even said that Iraq had "decided at the higher political level to stopthese activities."
Saddam Hussein never told the I.A.E.A. about the newly discovered equipment, as required by U.N. resolutions.
And he continues to rain down threats and intimidation on the inspectors, indicating that he has more to hide.
In March 1992, Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, told inspectors that Iraq had not relinquished the right to build weapons of mass destruction.


A News Niche Grows in New England
When The Associated Press gave its annual broadcasters' awards earlier this month, the Boston television market got a surprise.
Beating out the three local network affiliates for best newscast was New England Cable News, which had been on the air less than a year.
For New England Cable News, a 24-hour-a-day news and talk-show service modeled after Cable News Network, the award was affirmation that the 100-person news operation it had built from scratch in this Boston suburb was sound.
Now the network, a $10 million joint venture of the Hearst Corporation and Continental Cablevision, faces a tougher task: getting people to tune in.
A Plethora of Options
To an audience already crammed with network and local news offerings, newspapers and countless newsmagazines, and even CNN itself, why add regional CNN?


As States Rush Into Gambling, Experts See Risks
The nation's riverboat gambling industry, hesitantly resurrected from Puritanical oblivion two years ago by Iowa, is now booming forth on the waters of cutthroat interstate competition that gambling experts warn could prove ruinous for revenue searchers and bettors alike unless the states establish boundaries and common wagering standards.
Fifteen casino boats are already afloat on the Mississippi and Gulf Coasts, and at least 30 more are expected this year as states and localities scramble to benefit from a vastly altered public attitude toward gambling.


For the Middle East, a Fresh Start
The Middle East peace talks that resume in Washington tomorrow won't matter much unless they can extricate themselves from the stalemate of the last 18 months.
That's possible only if the participants, especially the Palestinians and the Israelis, are now willing to take real risks for peace.
Four months of sterile arguments over Israel's deportation of 400 Hamas militants offer little encouragement on that score.
Yet behind-the-scenes diplomacy orchestrated by the Clinton Administration gives some reason for hope.
Taking over from an Administration that got the peace process off to a brilliant start, but then seemed to lose its focus, the Clinton team made reviving the talks a top foreign policy priority.
Without much fanfare, it has helped nudge some of the preconditions for productive talks into place.


Memorial for Dr. Healy
A public memorial tribute to Dr.
Timothy S. Healy, the president of the New York Public Library who died last December, will be held on Wednesday at 11 A.M. under a tent in Bryant Park at Avenue of the Americas and 42d Street.


New Voices for a Changed World
One of the hottest fax wars in Washington rages over the future of Voice of America and its independently operated rivals in Munich, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.
The Clinton Administration plans to continue the Voice but phase out the two Munich stations, saving $644 million over five years.
That makes sense.
Although The Times has supported continuation of the Munich stations in the past, we have now concluded that deficit reduction demands a willingness to sacrifice even worthy projects whose prime days have passed.
Eliminating the Munich stations can only be justified if Voice of America foreign-language services are expanded and given a sharper edge.
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty aggressively cover news
within
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, whereas the Voice covers world and U.S. news.
Given the instability of new democracies and their inexperience with press freedom, external coverage of their affairs is still needed.


B.C.C.I. TRIAL LOOKS AT INVESTORS' TIES
Prosecutors in the fraud trial of Robert A. Altman have begun laying the groundwork they say will show that Mr.
Altman knew that four Arab investors he represented in the takeover of an American bank holding company were illegal front men for the Bank of Commerce and Credit International.
John W. Moscow, the assistant district attorney who is prosecuting the case in New York State Criminal Court, told jurors shortly after the break for Easter and Passover that testimony would show that Mr.
Altman knew about B.C.C.I.'s activities in the United States, and when he knew it.


CHRONICLE
Then there is the perspective on age taken by ALEXANDRA DANILOVA, 88, the legendary dancer, once the prima ballerina assoluta (a title she has compared to five-star general) at the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo.
Thanks to a typographical error, a book review in this month's Dancing Times, a British magazine, listed her as the "late Alexandra Danilova." The review of "I Remember Balanchine," a compilation of interviews put together by Francis Mason and published by Anchor Books/Doubleday, was written by Beth Genne, a lecturer in art and dance history at the University of Michigan.


E. Douglas Hamilton, A Libel Lawyer, 92
E.
Douglas Hamilton, a New York City libel lawyer for 66 years, died on Friday at St.
Francis Hospital in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 92.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


Giants Choose a Confident Pass Rusher
He played only one year of high school football, and that in Mannheim, Germany, where his father was stationed in the United States Army.
He started four years in college, but at Texas Southern in Houston, a level below the top college competition.
But Mike Strahan had something the Giants wanted.
He could rush the passer, and made 19 sacks last year, so the Giants made the 21-year-old defensive end their first choice today in the National Football League draft.


The Road to Reconciliation With Vietnam; Live P.O.W.'s
To the Editor:
There is something disturbing in your reports on a newly found 1972 North Vietnamese document in which the Vietnamese say they hold far more American prisoners of war than they acknowledged at the time.
On April 13 you quote Zbigniew Brzezinski that "the great likelihood is that the Vietnamese . . . shot them." Really?
Based on what information?
And on April 14 you echo that the men "are now almost certainly dead," but cite no sources or evidence.


Dance in Review
Rosalind Newman  Bessie Schonberg Theater
It is always a pleasure to see Rosalind Newman dance, with her special mix of delicacy and guts.
Irving Burton, her uncle and a veteran dancer and choreographer in his own right, is an inspired delight.
But the program Ms.
Newman presented on Saturday night, in which she and Mr.
Burton performed, was a disappointment.


Review/Theater: Blood Brothers; Separated at Birth, Mainly by Social Class
Hardened New York theatergoers who expect British musicals to hit town powered by big bucks, Technicolor spectacle and deafening amplification may be taken aback by "Blood Brothers," the latest West End export to reach Broadway.
"Blood Brothers" opens with a tableau of its title characters laid out as corpses.
The eveninglong flashback to follow unfolds largely in the dank brick welfare housing of depressed northern England.
The offstage band is small and tinny enough to hold forth in a garage.
There is not much dancing, or, for that matter, much to dance about.
Which is just how Willy Russell, the author of the show's book, music and lyrics, wants it.
First produced in London in 1983, "Blood Brothers" is a Thatcher-era attack on the British class system that wears its austerity on its sleeve, bourgeois frills be damned.
Mr.
Russell, the Liverpool-born author of "Educating Rita" and "Shirley Valentine," would rather be sincere than slick.
His musical has the rough-hewn proletarian flavor of British dramas of the angry-man era of the late 1950's and early 60's, and that authentic chips-with-everything spirit has been transferred to the snug Music Box Theater without any infusions of Broadway glitz.


Comedians to Appear At the Toyota Festival
Comedians ranging from Whoopi Goldberg and Robert Klein to Jerry Lewis and Buddy Hackett are to appear through New York City at the Toyota Comedy Festival from June 3 to 12, the event's producers announced on Tuesday.


The Road to Reconciliation With Vietnam
To the Editor:
I don't know whether the document found in Soviet archives about Vietnam's holding back American prisoners of war is authentic or not.
Some of the previous evidence about P.O.W.'s turned out to be forged, but I agree with Leslie H. Gelb (column, April 15) that if this document proves accurate, a minimum requirement for reconciliation with the Vietnamese would be their admission of guilt.


From Valley Girls To Sunshine Boys, A Deal on 'Yonkers'
Martha Coolidge and Neil Simon are, professionally, quite an odd couple.
Mr.
Simon, of course, is the enormously successful playwright whose characters populate a world that's largely New York and a sensibility that's predominately Jewish.


States Joining In Combating Illegal Guns
Frustrated with what they called ineffective Federal gun-control laws and enforcement efforts, New York State officials have begun working directly with other states to identify and prosecute major firearms traffickers.
The effort has focused on five states that have been the main sources of unlicensed guns in New York State: Virginia, Florida, Ohio, Georgia and Texas.
Since late last year, a new unit of the New York state police has been working closely with its counterpart in Virginia to trace guns and investigate suspected suppliers.


Candlelight Vigil Pays Tribute to Victims of Crime


With Arabs Out, Israel Questions Its Own Labor
Sergei Krakovsky took it personally when Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin talked the other day about returning the country to its hard-laboring Zionist origins.
Scornfully, Mr.
Rabin spoke of "a culture of idleness" that he said had developed among Israelis, a problem much discussed here since Israel sealed off its occupied territories nearly a month ago.
With few Palestinians now able to get to work in Israel, tens of thousands of farming and construction jobs have gone begging.


A Value-Added Tax; It Could Pay for a Health-Care Plan And Then Some, but the Hurdles Are High
The value-added tax being considered by the Clinton Administration faces challenges beyond the political ones.
It would also be difficult to set up, expensive to administer and hard to make equitable, because it would hit poor Americans hardest.
But, boy, what a revenue raiser.


Shanghai Journal; Chinese Find Their Voice: A Radio Call-In Show
The managers of the Caoxi Vegetable Market knew that city health officials would never notice if they dumped garbage on the ground.
But they hadn't figured on talk radio.
"The garbage is strewn about, attracting rats," sputtered a caller whose remarks were broadcast live over Radio Orient in Shanghai, the hottest station in the country.
"It's ugly. And it's unsanitary. Imagine! Rats right next to food stalls!"


Market Place
PRESIDENT CLINTON visited in February.
George Lucas signed a joint development agreement earlier this month.
Time Warner Inc. has reportedly come calling, seeking a partner in the interactive television business.
And on Thursday, Wall Street took notice, sending shares in Silicon Graphics Inc. up nearly 20 percent.
A maker of work stations -- powerful desktop computers used primarily to process complex graphic images -- Silicon Graphics has long been the tool of choice for mechanical engineers, architects and other designers who must deal with three-dimensional objects.
The company achieved fame in Hollywood after its work stations were used by Mr.
Lucas's special effects unit, Industrial Light and Magic, in films like "Terminator 2," where the liquid metal cyborg was created on Silicon Graphics machines.


No Fair, Gary, You Peeked!
New York's tough-team image may no longer just apply to the Knicks.
Not after yesterday, when a confrontation between Mets catcher Todd Hundley and Padre third baseman Gary Sheffield touched off a bench-clearing brawl just minutes into the game.
The angry moments came in the top of the first inning at Shea Stadium with one out, the bases empty and two Padre runs already in, courtesy of a Tim Teufel home run.


Draft Day Quickly Turns Into Trade Day
Two prize quarterbacks were nabbed first, as expected, three top running backs fell in line and several surprise entrants -- especially defensive backs -- managed to push their way into the first round of the National Football League draft yesterday at the Marriott Marquis in Manhattan.
But the most popular first-round trend was this: If you liked what you saw, you moved up and you grabbed it.
You made that trade.


Newspapers Redefining Themselves
The publishers of the nation's major newspapers are meeting here today and this is some of what they are talking about: selling advertising in telephone books and using new technology to supply soap opera updates.
Many publishers have found that they cannot make as much money as they were accustomed to making the old-fashioned way, so across the country they are entering businesses that are sometimes so far from the traditional that they barely involve news -- or even, for that matter, paper.


Anti-Smoker Presses Shea Billboard Battle
To understand how a billboard promoting cigarettes in Shea Stadium has come to be a political thorn for Mayor David N. Dinkins, it is helpful to think of Spider-Man, the comic-book vigilante forever at odds with city leaders.
The billboard is a Marlboro advertisement under the huge video screen in left-center field, making, anti-smoking advocates say, a dangerous connection between smoking and athletic prowess.
Two congressmen, three borough presidents, 20 City Council members and scores of citizens have pressed the Dinkins administration in recent weeks to invoke a clause in the Mets' contract with the city to have the billboard removed.


Pope Goes to Albania and Warns of 'Aggressive Nationalism'
Popes do not come to Albania very often.
Indeed, the last one who tried, Pius II, died on the way in 1464.
So Pope John Paul II's arrival in this city on a lake today was something of a moment in a land that until a few years ago was the world's only officially atheist state, its most isolated and the most rigid in its Stalinism.
The people lined the streets in the familiar way of a papal visit, crammed onto small balconies in the crumbling concrete tenements of Europe's poorest country.


World Economies


Tess Cogen, Professor And Lawyer, Dies at 88
Tess Cogen, a lawyer, psychotherapist and college professor, died on Thursday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
She was 88.
The cause of death was Alzheimer's disease, her family said.
She taught family life and sex education at Pace University for nine years before becoming professor emeritus.


Electronic S.E.C. Filings Mandatory for 500 Companies
Starting today, about 500 companies will be required to submit documents to the Securities and Exchange Commission using the agency's long-delayed electronic filing system.
Two years behind schedule and $20 million over cost, the S.E.C.'s electronic data gathering, analysis and retrieval system -- Edgar, for short -- is intended to eliminate most of the 10 million pages of public-disclosure documents the regulatory agency receives each year.


Justice for Yankel Rosenbaum
The conviction of two police officers in Los Angeles in the beating of Rodney King reminds New Yorkers that they have their own civil rights case back home.
Yankel Rosenbaum was murdered two years ago during the Crown Heights riots for no reason other than he was Jewish, and nobody has been found guilty of that terrible crime.
Shortly after a Brooklyn jury acquitted a black teen-ager who had confessed to the stabbing and then recanted, the Justice Department ordered a Federal inquiry.
That was seven months ago.
What's happened since?
Robert Abrams, New York's Attorney General, and City Council President Andrew Stein called Attorney General Janet Reno to ask.
She assured them, they said, that the investigation would be thorough.


Vying for Comptroller: It's More Political Maneuvering Than Issues
Make no mistake.
The competition to fill the unexpired term of the State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, will be decided less by issues of substance than by political considerations like electability and ticket-balancing.
But issues have wandered nonchalantly into the campaign from time to time.
For instance, Carol Bellamy, one of the front-runners, has proposed eliminating the comptroller's autocratic control over the state's $56 billion pension fund.
She supports creating a board of trustees to oversee pension investments, with the comptroller as the head of the board.


Officers and Gentlemen? Hardly.
Strippers.
Sexual intercourse and oral sex in hotel suites, near the tennis courts, on the patios.
Eager performers and an enthusiastic crowd of spectators.
Women, among them 15 female military officers, forced to run a gantlet of drunken gropers.
Sounds like an X-rated movie, doesn't it?
Or, given the more than 800 photographs detailing this debauch, the ultimate pornographic manual.
Instead, it is the Pentagon's report on the hijinks that made the 1991 convention of the Tailhook Association so much "fun" for so many of its participants.
Better yet, the trip itself was a freebie: the Navy spent $190,000 to fly the conventioneers, 1,500 retired and active-duty aviators, to Las Vegas.


Buying Barnegat Bay For Natural Necklace
Piece by piece, salt marsh by salt marsh, environmentalists and the Federal Government are pushing to preserve the last tracts of undeveloped shoreline along Barnegat Bay, the shallow 75-square-mile estuary that is one of the least heralded but most important coastal resources in the northeastern United States.
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service, aided by local and national conservation groups, has expanded its Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge northward along the New Jersey coast to acquire open marshland squeezed between condomimiums and expensive waterfront homes that have spread along the rim of the bay over the last four decades.


Iraq's Bomb -- an Update
Soon, possibly this week, the U.N. will report that its inspectors in Iraq have found yet another cache of strategic equipment for making nuclear weapons.
Their chief inspector at the International Atomic Energy Agency, Maurizio Zifferero, should be embarrassed.
He announced in September that President Saddam Hussein's atomic weapons program was "neutralized" and "at zero." He even said that Iraq had "decided at the higher political level to stopthese activities."
Saddam Hussein never told the I.A.E.A. about the newly discovered equipment, as required by U.N. resolutions.
And he continues to rain down threats and intimidation on the inspectors, indicating that he has more to hide.
In March 1992, Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, told inspectors that Iraq had not relinquished the right to build weapons of mass destruction.


Rebecca Mosher, William Dietrich
Rebecca Emily Mosher, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul W. Mosher of New Scotland, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Frank Dietrich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Dietrich of Butler, Pa.
Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky performed the ceremony at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Faculty Club in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Dietrich, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
A Howard Hughes Medical Student Research Training Fellow, she is completing her M.D. studies at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Albany.
Her mother, Paula Mosher, is a psychotherapist and clinical assistant professor in psychiatry at Albany Medical College.


A Hard Look at Home Shopping's Family Ties
For many years before helping to found Home Shopping Network Inc., Roy M. Speer, the company's chairman, savored the role of free-wheeling entrepreneur, taking advantage of opportunities wherever he found them.
But the troubles now roiling the cable television retailer based here suggest that Mr.
Speer may have since fallen prey to the entrepreneur's classic mistake: blurring personal interests and those of a publicly held company.


Liora Shir, Steven Yalof
Liora Shir, a sales executive, was married yesterday to Steven Justin Yalof, an operations manager.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Yalof, 26, works in New York for Gottex Industries, a swimwear manufacturer, which was founded by her maternal grandparents, Leah and Armin Gottlieb.
The bride graduated from Syracuse University.


Last Hours in Waco: A special report.; Inside the Cult: Fire and Terror on Final Day
As the walls of the Branch Davidian compound shook last Monday, Ruth Riddle sat in her second-floor bedroom, reading the Bible.
In the cafeteria downstairs, Remos Avraam was eating cereal when he heard the first thrusts of a tank slam against the building.


RUSSIANS APPEAR TO HAND YELTSIN A VICTORY IN VOTE
Voters across Russia gave what looked to be a firm vote of confidence to President Boris N. Yeltsin today in the long-awaited referendum on the country's future.
But even before the results were in, opposing sides in the country's power struggle girded for battle over them.
Preliminary indications were that Russians had turned out in large numbers and had rallied strongly behind Mr.
Yeltsin, while demanding even more strongly new elections to the Congress of People's Deputies, which has obstructed Mr.
Yeltsin's economic programs and nearly ousted him in March.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
IT could be that the future of premium-priced brand-name products is inextricably linked to the future of media.
Whether advertisers and their agencies have the capabilities to exploit properly the opportunities likely to be offered by revolutionary changes like interactive television and electronic superhighways came under scrutiny at the 75th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, which ended here on Saturday.


Executive Leaving Galeries Lafayette
Deepening the pall over the lackluster fortunes of Galeries Lafayette's first store in the United States, Eugenia M. Ulasewicz, the energetic young merchant who opened the New York store 18 months ago, said yesterday that she would leave the French retailer in May to join Saks Fifth Avenue.
George J. Graf, who is Ms.
Ulasewicz's second-in-command at the New York unit, will replace her as president and chief executive.
Ms.
Ulasewicz, 39, will join Saks in May as a senior vice president with responsibility for 12 stores, including the company's No. 1 branch, in Chicago.


Knicks Scramble Cast and Conquer Crises
The Knicks began playoff preparations here today as a team that will be dissatisfied with anything less than a National Basketball Association championship.
It remains to be seen whether they will reach their ultimate goal, but as their regular season unfolded, they became more cohesive, more consistent and more confident.


Dudley, Out of Round 1, May Be Done With Nets
The Nets will enter the playoffs without one of their valuable commodities, backup center Chris Dudley, who is not being activated for the first round because the stress fracture in his right foot hasn't completely healed.
This means New Jersey will probably have to rely heavily on Dwayne Schintzius, a young and talented 7-footer but someone who still has a lot to learn.
William Hamilton, an orthopedic surgeon who has treated with Dudley since early April, said that the player's right foot simply hadn't healed yet and needs more time.
Dudley said yesterday that he would probably be able to play should the Nets get past the Cleveland Cavaliers, but that, for now, there was still pain in the foot.


Supreme Court Roundup; Soliciting by Accountants Is Upheld
The Supreme Court, in the latest of a series of decisions giving constitutional protection to commercial speech, ruled today that states cannot bar accountants from soliciting prospective business clients.
Voting 8 to 1, the Court struck down a rule of the Florida Board of Accountancy that prohibited certified public accountants from making "any direct, in-person, uninvited solicitation" for new business.
The prohibition, which had been declared unconstitutional by two lower Federal courts, applied to telephone calls and personal visits.


Convenient Electronic Filing Cabinet
IF your Windows desktop is as cluttered as your real desktop, it is time to say "Here, boy," to Golden Retriever.
Despite its name, this program is no dog.
Using the metaphor of a filing cabinet, it allows documents to be stored the way we store paper documents, in folders within drawers.
A new version, 2.0b, has just been released.


Dinkins's Budget Proposal To Show Worst-Case Cuts
The budget proposal that Mayor David N. Dinkins is scheduled to release on Monday is likely to contain a contingency list of as much as $200 million in service reductions, a senior mayoral aide said yesterday.
Mr.
Dinkins and his advisers are still working out many final details of the nearly $32 billion executive budget that he is to present next week to the City Council for the fiscal year that begins July 1.


In April, Ports in Storms Come in Various Shapes


Strange, Violent Physics Born in the Death of Stars
FOR astronomers and astrophysicists 1993 has become the year of the supernova.
One reason is the appearance on March 28 of a rare, bright supernova called SN1993J, which is pouring a rich harvest of discoveries into an array of the world's best telescopes on the ground and in space.


4 in Drug Ring Arrested in Raid On Queens Cocaine Warehouse
Detectives raided a cocaine warehouse in Rego Park, Queens, seizing more than 850 pounds of cocaine and arresting four people whom the authorities described as mid-level managers of a drug ring linked to the Medellin cartel, the District Attorney's office said yesterday.
The suspects, two men and two women, were arrested Friday afternoon after detectives monitoring the house at 65-43 Dieterle Crescent watched the men unloading two large crates of cocaine from a red van and placing them into a garage on the property, the District Attorney's office said.


Gooden Gets Hit Before He Can Pitch
The telephone in Al Harazin's office rang shortly before 7 last night.
The word was that Dwight Gooden, scheduled to start against the Dodgers at 7:40, had injured his right shoulder in a clubhouse accident at Shea Stadium.
The general manager of the Mets asked one question: Was it serious?
The answer was direct: no.
That was enough for Harazin, and perhaps for New York.


By Design; Soft Summer Pants
Observers of the social scene say that chiffon pants have become the season's nighttime "uniform." That makes sense, since wearing pants in the evening is sort of new again, and if the top half of the outfit is right, semi-sheer pants can go from the most formal occasion to the most relaxed, with the wearer feeling she's decked out in the latest look.
What is more interesting, though, is the way the slightly see-through pant has taken off for day wear.
For example, Barneys New York has trouble keeping in stock a version made of two layers of viscose chiffon.
It has an elastic waistband and sells for $440.
Customers find them soft and floaty, yet opaque enough to wear comfortably to the office.


Cult's Surviving Children: New Lives, New Ordeals
Scott, Jake and Chrissy Mabb, ages 11, 9 and 7, watched on television last week with their father in South Dakota as fire destroyed the Branch Davidian compound that had been their entire world.
William Mabb, their father, said he was shocked by their eerily calm response.
"Mom said a year ago they might have to burn it down," the two boys told their father.
The three were among the 21 children who were allowed to leave the compound in the first five days after the deadly shootout with Federal agents on Feb. 28.
Twenty-four other children remained behind and died in last Monday's inferno, which arson investigators said today was set by cult members.  [ Page A18. ]


Kevin Oldham Memorial
A memorial service for the composer and pianist Kevin Oldham is to be held at 3 P.M. on Saturday at Marble Collegiate Church, Fifth Avenue at 29th Street.
Works by Mr.
Oldham for chorus, voice and piano are to be performed by the church's choir; Karen Kushner, a pianist, and Carl Halvorson, a tenor.
Mr.
Oldham died on March 11 at the age of 32.


Health Care Reform Should Be Inclusive
To the Editor:
The President's health care task force may recommend that automobile and workers' compensation medical insurance be included in a unitary system (front page, April 16).
But you warn this might upset "lawyers, doctors, labor unions and insurers" and invite their opposition.
Maybe so, but how can a plan that exempts
any
part of the system end its inflationary cost shifting?


Observer; Unachievers
I was startled to read in Art Buchwald's syndicated humor column the other day that he does not play golf.
I know for a fact he plays polo, because when I first met him years ago in Srinagar he challenged me to a chukkar.
I had to confess I couldn't even ride a horse, much less play polo.
So he challenged me to water polo, and I had to admit I'd flunked high-school swimming.


A.T.&amp; T. In a Deal In Japan
After years of trans-Pacific trade frictions over telephone equipment, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced today that it had tentatively agreed to sell a dozen of its most advanced central office telephone switches to Japan's main telephone company.
The deal is the first instance of A.T.&amp; T.'s selling telecommunications equipment to the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Company, which is the world's largest local telephone company and is two-thirds owned by the Japanese Government.
Today's transaction came after years of pressure applied by the United States to get N.T.T. to break its traditional reliance on Japanese suppliers.
Under Washington's Eye
In recent weeks, American officials had let N.T.T. and the Japanese Government know that they were closely watching the talks.


Gambino Son Goes on Trial As Racketeer
A year after he agreed to give up part of his trucking business in a Manhattan corruption case, Thomas Gambino went on trial yesterday on charges that he engaged in racketeering in Connecticut by controlling major gambling and loan-sharking operations there.
Mr.
Gambino, whose late father, Carlo, gave a Mafia group its name, is charged with supervising the Gambino group's Connecticut faction and its involvement in usury operations and an elaborate illegal sports-betting enterprise.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Mary-Claire King; Quest for Genes and Lost Children
MARY-CLAIRE KING, a geneticist of international renown and neutronic stores of energy, is sitting in her sunny, unprepossessing office at the University of California in Berkeley, talking about the current monarch of her many passions.
She is trying to find the gene for hereditary breast cancer, a gene that could be of great significance to hundreds of thousands of women in the United States who are at great risk for early onset of the disease.
She has been seeking the gene for 17 years, weathering the skepticism of her colleagues, and even sometimes her own doubts.
Not long ago she found the approximate location of the gene, and now she and her students are homing in on the trophy proper.
She wants it very, very badly, and she believes her laboratory is very, very close.


THE N.F.L. DRAFT: TEAM BY TEAM
The team-by-team selections of the 1993 N.F.L. draft.
Players listed by round, position, school and overall pick in parentheses: ATLANTA FALCONS
1, Lincoln Kennedy, ot, Washington (9); 2, Roger Harper, db, Ohio State (38); 3, Harold Alexander, p, Appalachian State (67); 5, Ron George, lb, Stanford (121); 6, Mitch Lyons, te, Michigan State (151); 7, Darnell Walker, db, Oklahoma (178); 8, Shannon Baker, wr, Florida State (205).
BUFFALO BILLS
1, Thomas Smith, db, North Carolina (28); 2, John Parrella, dt, Nebraska (55); 4, Russell Copeland, wr, Memphis State (111); 5, Mike Devlin, c, Iowa (136); 5, Sebastian Savage, db, North Carolina State (139); 6, Corbin Lacina, ot, Augustana, S.D. (167); 7, Willie Harris, wr, Mississippi State (195); 8, Chris Luneberg, ot, West Chester, Pa. (223).


U.S. Congress, Glad Yeltsin Won, Ponders Aid
President Boris N. Yeltsin's victory in the referendum on Sunday produced expressions of relief today from the White House, the State Department and Congressional supporters of the proposed $1.8 billion aid package for Russia, which would have been killed by a vote of no confidence.
"This is a very, very good day, not only for the people of Russia, but for the people of the United States and all the people of the world," President Clinton said today during a ceremony in the East Room of the White House where he greeted members the University of Arkansas track team.


A Springtime of Grief: Shall We Add Bosnians?
To the Editor:
When the Turks massacred the Armenians early in this century, the world stood silently by.
Now, every April, we commemorate the dead of that evil.
When the Nazis murdered the Jews, later in this century, again the world stood idly by and again, every spring, we mourn Hitler's six million victims.
As the Serbs torture and kill the Bosnian Muslims, the nations of the world debate the course of action to take.
But, like their predecessors earlier in this century, the nations of the world do nothing.
Once more genocide is being played out on the European continent.
Our grandfathers' generation can hide behind the excuse of a less informed world; they did not know what the Turks were doing.
There was no television to beam the atrocities into their homes every night.


CHRONICLE
There are some people who rarely miss getting the right kind of attention at the most opportune time.
Take JANN WENNER, the founder of Rolling Stone and chairman of its owner, Straight Arrow Publishers.
He is planning to bring out a new magazine in August, Family Life, aimed at helping parents in their 30's and 40's "become more intensely involved with their children."
So what are the top-ranking editors at Straight Arrow doing to pitch in?
A laudable number expect babies between now and Aug. 15, the date of the magazine's introduction.


DiMaggio Is a Bit Under the Weather
JOE DiMAGGIO canceled a visit to his parents' hometown in Sicily after suffering a chest problem, his spokesman said yesterday.
DiMaggio has "some kind of a bug that hit him upon his arrival" last Thursday, said JOHN SALAMONE.
"DiMaggio had chest congestion but it is nothing serious. He is doing fine."
Salamone, who is accompanying the 78-year-old Hall of Famer on his Italian visit, said DiMaggio felt ill Saturday night after dinner in Rome and decided to cancel his trip to Isola delle Femmine, a small town near Palermo, Sicily.
The town had planned a ceremony to make him an honorary citizen.
DiMaggio also canceled side trips to towns in central Italy yesterday and today, including a visit to a new golf course, tour organizers said.


Therapist Is Pressed by Judge in Allen Case
Dr.
Jaime Inclan, a psychologist specializing in family therapy, was in the midst of a long explanation of terms like "sibling subsystems" in the "post-modern family structure" yesterday when the judge in the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow custody trial tried to steer him back to the issue at hand.
"You talk about the need for constancy," Acting Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said to Dr.
Inclan.
"What happens to constancy when this person who used to be the sister is now also the daddy's girlfriend?"


All Hallows Guard Heading to Manhattan
Manhattan College, coming off its first National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball tournament appearance in 35 years, announced its first signing of the spring yesterday when TARIK THACKER of All Hallows signed a national letter of intent to play for the Jaspers this fall.
Thacker, a 6-foot-2-inch point guard who earned all-Archdiocesan and all-Division honors the last two years at the Bronx high school, averaged 17.5 points and 5.2 assists a game this year in leading All Hallows to the Archdiocese of New York Class A championship.
He chose Manhattan over Bowling Green.


A Throwback to a More Complex Time


Market Place; As banks show alluring profits, some traders' ardor melts away.
LAST week was a valedictory time for American banks as one after the next announced earnings above even Wall Street's heady expectations.
The market rewarded this by trashing bank stocks.
The Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods bank index fell 13 percent from its high set two weeks ago, leaving it up only 1 percent for the year.
Those investors who have followed the banks since they started to rebound from their loan problems two years ago have been dumbfounded by the swift decline.


No Headline
"One of the most important stops on the organ is the room. This is why people sing in the shower and not the bedroom." -- BARBARA OWEN, a historian, on the new organ at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church on Manhattan's East Side.  [ C13:4. ]


BRIEFS
Debt *
Aluminum Co. of America is offering $175 million of 4 5/8 percent notes due in 1996 at 100, to yield 4 5/8 percent, through First Boston Corp.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, is offering $100 million of 6.625 percent subordinated notes due in 2003 at 99.798, to yield 6.654 percent, through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


On Beach, The Threat Is More Than Tides
AMONG other things, the beach house at 824-B Dune Road has been a summer gathering place for the Fedder family, a haven for their grandchildren after building sand castles on the sun-baked beach and a nighttime refuge for star gazing from the deck cooled by breezes from the Atlantic and Moriches Bay.
It's where Joseph Fedder, a 57-year-old salesman in Manhattan's garment district, and his wife, Sandy, 55, a worker in a medical billing office, had hoped to retire, spending the summer and early fall beside the sea, retreating briefly to Florida for the winter.


Talking About the Riots That Tore Los Angeles
Even after so many showings, the pictures of last year's Los Angeles riots, like those of the beating of Rodney G. King, retain their power to shock.
Once again tonight, television brings back the fires, the lootings and the assaults, the sight of an American city out of control.
It is an urban nightmare that won't go away.
"L.A. Is Burning," a probing 90-minute "Frontline" report, turns the cameras on unintegrated groups of blacks, whites, Hispanic-Americans and Korean-Americans, who talk about what they saw on the screen and witnessed for themselves.
They do not represent an official opinion sampling, yet they reveal the breadth and depth of the racial and class divisions in Los Angeles and -- to a lesser degree, one must hope -- throughout much of the rest of the United States.


Chess
The Hudson International Tournament, staged April 13 to 23 at the Pace University Campus Center in Pleasantville, N.Y., was won by the 25-year-old Latvian grandmaster Aleksandr Shabalov.
He topped one of the strongest fields in an American tourney by scoring 6 1/2-2 1/2 in the 10-man invitational event and was awarded the $2,000 first prize.
Grigory Kaidanov, a Russian emigre who lives in Lexington, Ky., took second place with 6-3.
Joel Benjamin, a Manhattan grandmaster, and Alexander Wojtkiewicz, the current Polish champion, shared third place with 5 1/2-3 1/2.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W.
.
D.
Pts.
Shabalov
4
0
5
6 1/2
Kaidanov
4
1
4
6
Benjamin
4
2
3
5 1/2
Wojtkiewicz
3
1
5
5 1/2
Yermolinsky
3
2
4
5
Edelman
3
4
2
4
Ehlvest
2
3
4
4
Goldin
2
5
2
3
Hellers
1
4
4
3
Sherzer
2
6
1
2 1/2
In terms of quality, Kaidanov's games were pre-eminent.
Indeed, he was the early leader until he lost to Benjamin with two rounds to go.
Here is an example of his powerful attacking play, against the Maryland international master Alexander Sherzer in Round 2 on April 14.
Sherzer's chief comment was, "I confronted him with a new move, but he discovered a strong plan against it."
The Aberbakh Attack against the King's Indian Defense, 5 Be2 and 6 Bg5, prevents 6 . . . e5 in view of 7 de de 8 Qd8 Rd8 9 Nd5, which wins material.
It also retards the development of the white KN to keep the way clear for supporting such thrusts as g4 or h4.
If Black omits 6 . . . h6, as Sherzer does in this game, then, after 6 . . . c5 7 d5 e6 8 Qd2, he is no longer able to drive off the white QB, although he can still slip out of the pin with 8 . . . ed 9 ed Qb6.
Kaidanov's 11 Nh4 is the introduction to a formerly hotly disputed line of play that begins with 11 . . .
Ne4 12 Ne4 Be4 13 f3.
After 13 . . .
Qb2 14 Rc1 Qd2 15 Kd2 Bd5 (15 . . . Bf5 16 Nf5 gf 17 Bd3 leaves Black in a poor endgame) 16 cd Re8 17 Rb1 Re5 18 f4 Rd5 19 Kc1 Nc6 20 Rb7 Rd4 21 Bf3 d5 22 Rd1 Rd1 23 Kd1, the consensus indicated by the Encyclopedia of Chess Openings, Vol.
E, second edition is that White enjoys considerable advantage.
For example, 23 . . . h6 24 Bd5 hg 25 Bf7 Kh7 26 Bg6 Kh6 27 fg Kg5 28 Rg7 will win for White.
Sherzer said: "It was to avoid such trouble that I thought up 11 . . . Bg4. This move was not wrong. My mistakes came later." Kaidanov proceeded aggressively with 12 f3 Bc8 13 O-O-O!?
Sherzer said: "The error was 17 . . . f5, opening my own king position. I should have played 17 . . . Ne5 at once." That way, on 18 h4, he would have been able to counterattack with 18 . . .
Qb4 19 b3 b5 with reasonable chances of success.
Sherzer did indeed have counterattack in mind when he played 17 . . . f5 18 h4 fg 19 fg Ne5, but Kaidanov's attack with 20 h5! came more swiftly than he had reckoned on.
After 20 . . .
Rf2, Kaidanov charged to the attack with 21 hg!, ready to give up his knight with 21 . . .
Rg2 to smash through with 22 Qh6! hg 23 Qh8 Kf7 24 Rh7 Kf6 25 Qg7 Kg5 26 Qh6 Kf6 27 Ne4 mate.
Sherzer had relied on keeping his opponent tied down after 21 . . .
Nc4, but Kaidanov sharply broke loose with 22 gh Kh8 23 Nh4!, threatening 24 Ng6 mate.
Sherzer could not play 23 . . .
Kh7 because of 24 Bd3, picking up a rook, so he tried 23 . . .
Nh5.
But after 24 Ng6 Kh7 25 Rh5 Kg8, Kaidanov produced the annihilating 26 Na4!
On 26 . . .
Qb5, there would have followed 27 Qh6 Kf7 28 Qh7 Kf6 29 Qe7 Kg6 30 Rg5 Kh6 31 Qg7 mate.
But also after 26 . . .
Nd2 27 Nb6 Re2 28 Na8, Sherzer had no way of putting up a fight, 28 . . .
Bg4 meaning nothing after 29 Rg5.
Thus, he gave up.
In last week's column, the diagram should have shown the black king at h8 and a black pawn at f5.
KING'S INDIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
Kai'nov
Sherzer
1
d4
Nf6
2
c4
g6
3
Nc3
Bg7
4
e4
d6
5
Be2
O-O
6
Bg5
c5
7
d5
e6
8
Qd2
ed
9
ed
Qb6
10
Nf3
Bf5
11
Nh4
Bg4
12
f3
Bc8
13
O-O-O
Nbd7
14
Bh6
a6
15
g4
Ne8
16
Bg7
Ng7
17
Ng2
f5
18
h4
fg
19
fg
Ne5
20
h5
Rf2
21
hg
Nc4
22
gh
Kh8
23
Nh4
Nh5
24
Ng6
Kh7
25
Rh5
Kg8
26
Na4
Nd2
27
Nb6
Re2
28
Na8
Resigns


Review/Theater; Lynn Redgrave Portrays Emotional Emptiness In Royal Theater Family
When it comes to theatrical dynasties, the Redgraves share a stage with the Kembles and the Barrymores.
The center of the family was Sir Michael Redgrave, son of an actor and an actress and the progenitor of an ensemble of talented actors and actresses.
His younger daughter, Lynn Redgrave, tells the Redgrave story in "Shakespeare for My Father" at the Helen Hayes Theater.
This one-woman show is a revealing and often rueful account of life without father in a stagestruck family.
During Ms.
Redgrave's childhood, her parents were often absent, away on tour or, in the case of her father, at home working obsessively on his next role.
The paternal slights were many, beginning with the fact that Redgrave failed to mention Lynn's birth in his journal.
More attention was paid to her outgoing older siblings Vanessa and Corin.
In family photographs, she says, she is "the glum one." Against odds and without parental encouragement, she became a star in her own right.


Ho Chi Minh City Journal; The Smiles for Americans, and Other Paradoxes
The contradictions of Vietnam are evident everywhere, as the Communist Government tries to combine a free-market economy with rigid, one-party rule.
But they are most palpable in this city, which has been Communist for 18 years.
Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, has made rapid progress in the 1990's to undo the dour monotony imposed since 1975 by the stern party bureaucrats from the North, who came down to show their brothers the virtues of Marxism-Leninism.


CHRONICLE
NEIL SIMON was named Man of the Year by the New York Friars Club at a black-tie dinner for 950 people at the Waldorf-Astoria on Sunday, and there were plenty of recognizable faces -- including 40 on the dais -- to honor him.
CHEVY CHASE was master of ceremonies, and the crowd included Bernadette Peters, Larry King, Gwen Verdon, Tony Randall, Jack Klugman, Manny Azenberg and Sid Caesar, who praised him in ersatz versions of French, German, Italian and Japanese.


Attempted Kidnapping By Coach Stuns Pupils
Most of those who knew him did not want to discuss Gary Wilensky yesterday.
The tennis instructor who taught New York's most privileged daughters had taken his own life, leaving as his legacy a sordid tale of sexual obsession and violence and a trail of shocked acquaintances.
"We don't even want to think about it," said a student, who like most declined to give her name.


Gazans Suffering Under Israeli Closing
On the eve of a new round of Middle East peace talks, Radwan Mattar was thinking less today about the negotiations than how he would sell the 28 pounds of sardines he had just loaded onto a horse-drawn cart.
Mr.
Mattar admits to knowing only a bit more about sardines than he does about nuclear physics.


CHRONICLE
For a while, WILLIAM KENNEDY SMITH was one of the more visible members of the Kennedy family.
Then, he slipped back into relative obscurity after his acquittal on rape charges.
Since then, he has completed almost a year of the residency at the University of New Mexico Medical School that was postponed for a year pending the outcome of the trial in Palm Beach, Fla., in 1991.
He has has been spending this month at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, an academic affiliate of the Northwestern University Medical School, studying traumatic brain injury.
In February, he worked in Somalia in three locales: Mogadishu, Baidoa and Belet Huen.


New Eritrea Restores Life To a Campus
When Andebrhan Giorgis was named president of Asmara University in July 1991, a few months after the overthrow of the Marxist government in Ethiopia, the institution was an empty, echoing building.
The Ethiopian military had stripped it of everything the year before, transferring teachers and students, books, computers, laboratory equipment, school records, even kitchen utensils to southern Ethiopia.
Now, not even two years after Asmara was captured by the guerrilla fighters of the Eritrean People's Liberation Front, and with the approach of this northern region's independence from Ethiopia, Asmara University has managed to rebuild itself from scratch.
It is in no small part a testament to the perseverance of Mr.
Andebrhan, a former Harvard University graduate student and guerrilla fighter; but it also reflects the priorities of the front, which has always treated education as a cornerstone of the movement.


Critic's Notebook; Damping 60's Fire of 'Tommy' for 90's Broadway
Broadway is grateful for the Who's "Tommy," the staged rock opera that opened to generally admiring reviews on Thursday at the St.
James Theater and set a box-office record the next day.
It has a thrilling score, eye-popping stage and visual effects, and a secure place in the memory of the baby-boomers every Broadway entrepreneur would love to draw.
"Tommy," the hopeful buzz goes, will be the show that finally brings Broadway into the rock era, ending the generation gap that makes so many Broadway shows the province of tourists and the elderly.
Its storytelling moves at the pace of MTV, with video screens providing instant "set" changes behind jump-cutting action onstage.
Although a few dissenting voices have been raised (notably John Lahr's in The New Yorker), nearly everyone else seems to like it.
Everyone, that is, except people who cared about "Tommy" in the first place.


A Resounding Yes for Mr. Yeltsin
In a political endorsement of surprising dimensions, Russians have cast aside apathy and cynicism and rallied to President Boris Yeltsin in his struggle with Parliament.
Choosing hope over pain, they overwhelmingly renewed Mr.
Yeltsin's mandate.
A majority even endorsed his tough economic reforms.
Some two-thirds of those registered showed up at the polls, a moving testament to democracy.
They voted yes to Mr.
Yeltsin, yes to his economic reforms, no to early elections for president and yes to early elections for Parliament.


On My Mind; Guide for Cleansers
For their work to be effective and lasting, administrators of ethnic cleansing must of course study, understand and follow proven professional guidelines.
The following techniques have shown themselves particularly useful.
Therefore it is imperative that they be considered in drawing up an efficient cleansing operation and applied in feasible combination.


18 Costa Rican Judges Held Hostage in Court
Eighteen judges on the Supreme Court were taken hostage in their courtroom today by masked gunman whose identities and motives were unknown, the Minister of the Interior, Luis Fishman, said at a news conference this evening.
The judges, part of the full panel of 22 magistrates, were preparing to convene their weekly session when the gunman intruded, about 1:30 P.M., Mr.
Fishman said.
A court secretary and another man were also held, he added.


Yeltsin, Fresh From His Victory, Is Attacked by Political Enemies
President Boris N. Yeltsin's opponents moved quickly today to discredit the results of Sunday's referendum.
According to incomplete returns, a solid majority of Russian voters backed both Mr.
Yeltsin and his program of economic change.
An unexpectedly large turnout, estimated at 65.7 percent, helped Mr.
Yeltsin score a popular victory over the Congress of People's Deputies, the bulwark of his conservative opposition, which was brusquely rebuffed by voters.
But even with 93.5 percent of the vote counted, it was clear that the referendum had failed to resolve Russia's political wars, and instead only opened a new front.


Orchestrating a Pipe Organ, Piece by Piece
One day last November Leslie Ross, a master organ builder from Essex, England, was standing on the worn terrazzo floor of the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, surveying the first disorderly shipment of 10 tons of organ frame, wind chests, mechanism and assorted hardware that lay strewn before him.
If all went well over the next months, Mr.
Ross and his crew of five technicians would transform this chaos of gear into the largest mechanical-action organ ever built in New York.
"Let's hope it all fits together," said Mr.
Ross, a stocky, 45-year-old artisan with an instinct for the wry.


Schools Could Sure Use Those Old Computers
To the Editor:
How shortsighted is our method of disposal for out-of-date computers ("Recycling Answer Sought for Computer Junk," front page, April 14).
Stripping the computers for their metal and removing the semiconductor chips for recycling renders the computer a shell -- a worthless, space-consuming piece of junk destined for the nearest landfill.
I have a better suggestion.


Awkward, Yes, but Prairie Bayou Is Poised as Favorite
Even the name has a down-home twang: Prairie Bayou.
Nothing noble, like Secretariat or Majestic Prince.
The people at the Loblolly Stable name their race horses for places in Arkansas, mostly towns or cities, like Pine Bluff.
This horse is named for a bayou between Little Rock and Hot Springs.


'Redwood Curtain' Closing
"Redwood Curtain," a play by Lanford Wilson, is to close after Sunday's matinee at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street, Manhattan.
The Sunday matinee of the play, directed by Marshall W. Mason and starring Jeff Daniels, Debra Monk and Sung Yun Cho, will be the 40th regular performance; it had 11 previews.


Q&amp;A
Gilding the Yam
Q.  What is the difference between a yam and a sweet potato?
A.
The true yam and the sweet potato belong to different plant families, said Dr.
Mike Cannon of the department of horticulture of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
2.85
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.83
3.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.92
3.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.54
5.48
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.83
6.79
8.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.77
7.70
9.04
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.99
5.93
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Mouse That Does More Tricks
THE MICROSOFT CORPORATION, a company better known for its software, has introduced a completely redesigned version of its best-selling computer mouse for Microsoft Windows-based personal computers.
Some people may be surprised to learn that Microsoft sells $250 million worth of mice each year.
Others may be surprised to learn that it is possible to spend $10 million and two years on designing a new mouse, but that is just what Microsoft did in creating its new pointing system, a company official said.


Cable Concerns In Latin Move
In a continuing effort by cable-programming companies to expand their markets, QVC Network Inc. and Grupo Televisa S.A. said yesterday that they had agreed to create a television shopping operation that would serve Spain, Mexico and other areas of Latin America in Spanish and Brazil in Portuguese.
The companies provided few details of the venture, which they will begin on Nov. 1.
They also plan to offer the service in Spanish-speaking areas in the United States.


Queens Nude Club Agrees to Relocate
After months of angry and raucous protest outside a nude dancing club in Forest Hills, Queens, the landlord of the property said yesterday that he would pay his tenant $125,000 to transfer his lease to someone who will operate a comedy club there instead.
The landlord, Lawrence Silverstein, said he would also relieve his longtime tenant of $32,000 in past-due rent as part of the deal.
He said he had not been aware that tenant, Stelious Stephanou, planned to operate a nude club until it opened in February.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Purchased the contract of Barry Jones, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Placed Terry Leach, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to April 24.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Purchased the contract of Matt Young, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
Sent Mike Christopher, pitcher, to Charlotte.
Named Jackie Huggins purchasing agent.


Software Pact For Alliance
The Hewlett-Packard Company and the Convex Computer Corporation plan to exchange software technology as part of their strategic alliance to marry desktop work stations with supercomputers.
The companies said today that Hewlett-Packard, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., would license its Unix-based computer operating system to Convex, which is based in Richardson, Tex.
In turn, Convex would license software to Hewlett-Packard for future products based on a concept known as massively parallel processing.


Everett F. Drumright, 86, Is Dead; Envoy to Taiwan in Tense Period
Everett F. Drumright, who retired as United States Ambassador to Taiwan in 1962 after 32 years in the Foreign Service, died on Saturday at Pomerado Hospital in Poway, Calif.
He was 86 and had lived in Poway since retiring.
He had been ill for a brief time, his family said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi and 2 Other Seeded Players Out  There were two minor upsets and a big withdrawal yesterday at the A.T.&amp;T.
Challenge in Duluth, Ga., outside of Atlanta.
Andre Agassi, seeded second behind top-ranked Pete Sampras and the four-time defending champion, withdrew because of tendinitis in his right wrist.
In first-round matches, Ronald Agenor beat fifth-seeded Todd Martin, 7-6 (7-4), 7-5, and Jeff Tarango defeated No. 8 Aaron Krickstein, 2-6, 6-1, 6-3. (AP) Title for Bruguera: Sergi Bruguera, seeded 11th, defeated Cedric Pioline, 7-6 (7-2), 6-0, in the rain-delayed final of the Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
Yesterday's match, postponed Sunday by rain, was interrupted for 90 minutes by a downpour and then was moved from the center court to a covered secondary court.
The unseeded Pioline had rallied from 5-0 down to trail by 6-5 in the first set when play was halted. (AP)


I.M.F. Warns of Sluggish '93 Growth
The world economy will experience sluggish growth for the third straight year and could suffer a new slowdown if the major industrial nations fail to take stronger steps to bolster growth, the International Monetary Fund said today in an economic forecast.
The I.M.F. said the United States economy would grow by 3.2 percent this year and next, but it predicted a dismal year of economic stagnation in Europe and unusually slow growth in Japan.


Backer Spielvogel Shifts Executives
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc. announced yesterday, as expected, a reshuffling of top executives as it continued to address the problems at its American operations.
Michael Bungey, 52, who became president and chief operating officer at Backer Spielvogel Worldwide in January, will assume additional duties as chairman and chief executive of the Americas region, as well as chairman and chief executive at Backer Spielvogel in the United States.
He will deal more directly with the American agency's difficulties in replacing lost accounts and introducing American-based clients into the global Backer network.


COMPANY NEWS
EASTMAN KODAK CO., Rochester, has completed the acquisition of Vortech Data Inc. of Richardson, Tex.
Terms were not disclosed.
SPHINX NATURAL RESOURCES INC., Fort Smith, Ark., said it was acquiring 40 percent of Malvy Technology of Paris for $13 million.


Many Lloyd's Investors Facing Loss of Fortunes
In 1979, Clive Francis, a former fighter pilot who grew wealthy buying apartment buildings, followed generations of his countrymen in investing in Lloyd's of London, the world's pre-eminent insurance market.
Becoming a Lloyd's "name," as the investors are known, was seen by Mr.
Francis and others as a virtual ticket into the upper crust of British society, where the wealthy put their fortunes in the hands of Lloyd's to watch them grow because that was the way it had always been done.


Bridge
Players learn early in their bridge lives that interfering with an opposing no-trump is a dangerous occupation.
The opponents are well placed to double for penalties, and the interferer has little to gain against a normal strong no-trump.
If an opponent has a balanced hand with 16 points or so, the chance that you can make game is very slight, barring really freakish distribution.
But the weak no-trump, now increasingly popular in tournament play, is a different proposition.
Danger lurks on both sides: you can miss a game by passing, and run into trouble by bidding.
Most tournament players err by being too active, and did so on the diagramed deal from a knockout team event at the Fall Nationals in Orlando, Fla., last November.


A Warm Welcome for N.Y.U.'s Irish Center
Irish life and culture in New York are being celebrated this week with a series of educational, arts and broadcasting programs linked to the dedication of the Lewis L. and Loretta Brennan Glucksman Ireland House at New York University.
The new center will be devoted to Irish culture and contemporary Irish affairs.
Led by bagpipers, Albert Reynolds, the Prime Minister of Ireland, and other dignitaries marched across Washington Square Park for a ribbon-cutting ceremony yesterday afternoon at Ireland House.
The renovation of the historic town house, at 1-A Fifth Avenue in Washington Mews, was underwritten by Mr.
Glucksman, an N.Y.U. alumnus and trustee, and Mrs.
Glucksman, a member of the arts and science board of overseers at N.Y.U.


Gay Rights Groups Jubilant But See March as Just a Step
Floating from the euphoria of a weekend rally that drew hundreds of thousands of homosexuals to the capital, leaders of gay and lesbian groups today weighed how to build on that momentum to advance their cause in Congress and with the American public.
Meanwhile, conservative groups, which in the face of defeats on abortion have increasingly turned to gay rights as a target, vowed to intensify their pressure on lawmakers.


Frank Vanderlip, Philanthropist And Investment Banker, at 86
Frank Arthur Vanderlip Jr., a New York investment banker and philanthropist, died on Friday at the John Douglas French Center for Alzheimer's disease in Los Alamitos, Calif.
He was 86 and lived in Somers, N.Y., and on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said Henrik N. Vanderlip, a nephew.


Reviews/ Television; Real People With Babies On the Way
In the often hazy reality of prime-time entertainment, few events are exploited more adroitly than the birth of a baby.
Ratings sagging?
Get yourself a pregnancy.
From Lucy to Murphy, the ploy seems fail-safe, although, as the subsequent sag in "Murphy Brown" may indicate, not necessarily conducive to long-range survival.
Homing in on the obvious, an hourlong ABC special called "We're Expecting," tonight at 10, follows three couples as each goes through the special experience of having a first child.
Reading Louis H. Gorfain's script, Connie Selleca is the warmly reassuring host, promising a journey that will be "wondrous, exhausting, exhilarating."


Old Peril of Abandoned Mines Stirs Calls for Action in West
For decades, the West tolerated dangerous abandoned mines and piles of toxic mine wastes as necessary, if ugly, byproducts of an industry that provided thousands of jobs and billions of dollars for the region's economy.
But momentum is gathering in state capitals, in Washington and in mining communities like this one for new safeguards.
Across the region, attention is focusing on new evidence of water pollution from mine wastes containing lead, arsenic and cyanide.
There has also been concern over the number of people killed by falls into abandoned mines -- 73 from the late 1970's through 1991, by the Department of Interior's count.


Britain Shows Growth After 3-Year Downturn
After a painful downturn that lasted nearly three years, Britain's economy appears to be on the mend.
Figures released today show that growth in the first quarter was sufficiently strong for analysts and the Government to proclaim the recession over.
The most widely watched gauge of economic activity, which excludes the volatile oil and gas sector, showed growth in the quarter of six-tenths of a percent over the fourth quarter of 1992, when the economy did not grow at all.
It was the best showing since the first quarter of 1990 and left Britain in the unaccustomed position of being a star among the besieged European economies.


Rogers of Wake Forest Joins N.B.A. Draft
Wake Forest forward RODNEY ROGERS, the Atlantic Coast Conference player of the year, made it official yesterday: he will enter the National Basketball Association college draft, passing up his senior year.
"I thought it was time to go on to the next level," said Rogers, a 6-foot-7-inch, 235-pound forward from Durham, N.C., who averaged more than 21 points this season for the Demon Deacons.
In three seasons at Wake Forest, Rogers scored 1,720 points, an average of more than 19 a game. (AP)


Washington Relieved
President Boris N. Yeltsin's victory brought expressions of relief from the White House, the State Department and Congressional supporters of aid for Russia.
"This is a very, very good day, not only for the people of Russia, but for the people of the United States and all the people of the world," President Clinton said.
Article, page A8.


DU PONT (E.I.) DE NEMOURS &amp; CO. (N)
Du Pont's 14 percent rise in first-quarter profits was fueled by a big increase in earnings at the Conoco subsidiary.
The comparable results for the period last year were before the applications of accounting changes.
The per share earnings exceeded the expectations of analysts, who had been estimating that the company would be within a range of 50 to 65 cents a share.


Pistons Dismiss Rothstein as Coach
The Detroit Pistons yesterday fired Coach RON ROTHSTEIN after one season on the job.
Although they closed the season with a 116-110 victory over New Jersey on Sunday, the Pistons failed to make the playoffs for the first time in a decade.
Rothstein, TOM WILSON, the club's president, and BILLY McKINNEY, director of player personnel, met yesterday morning.
"We talked at some length about the problems, both real and perceived, that we all sort of lived through this year," Wilson said.
"We all sort of looked at this and said, 'If we're going to go on in a positive direction change is the only thing to do.' "


Bombed Again by I.R.A., London Goes to Work Undaunted
It was stiff upper lip across much of London today, the first day back to work after a bomb devastated the capital's financial center on Saturday, closing nearly two dozen streets, shredding the metal facades of office towers and burying sidewalks in ankle-deep glass from thousands of shattered windows.
"City Keeps the Flag Flying," The Evening Standard proclaimed tonight, with a photograph showing a Union Jack waving before a bombed-out skyscraper.


Officer Shot in Head Shows Improvement
Officer Mary Clare Capotosto, who was shot in the head last week by a suspect in custody in the 70th Precinct station house and was in a coma for days, has been making what physicians and police officials yesterday called an amazing recovery.
The 29-year-old officer's condition was upgraded yesterday from critical to "stable and improving," said a spokesman for Kings County Hospital, John Spearman.


Gee, So I.R.A. Investors Aren't Irrational
To the Editor:
The front-page article on the record increase in individual retirement accounts (April 15) was so incomplete as to almost defy belief.
It acknowledges that the sharp dropoff in contributions after the spring of 1987 was due to the tax act of 1986, but the belief seems to be that this was due entirely to the loss of the deductibility of the I.R.A. contributions themselves.
No mention is made of the fact that the 1986 law also sharply lowered the highest marginal tax rates, thus reducing the relative advantage of not having to pay taxes on the annual income from those original contributions.


Patterns
For Black Women
Targeted marketing may have hit a nerve.
Spiegel Inc. and Ebony magazine are mailing E Style in September to 1.5 million black women.
It is a 64-page catalogue, (E stands for Ebony) described as a "true product breakthrough, in that garments have been specifically developed for the first time to satisfy the fit and fashion needs of today's African-American women." Translation: The clothes are more generously proportioned in the hips and thighs.
"Spiegel has done its homework," said Linda Johnson Rice, the president and chief executive of Johnson Publishing, which owns Ebony, Jet, and Ebony Man.
"What they've done is taken a random selection of black women with different body types and analyzed them, so that when the clothes are manufactured, they fit the needs of black women."


TELEVISION CONVERTER BOX TO HAVE PC COMPATIBILITY
The Microsoft Corporation, the Intel Corporation and the General Instrument Corporation are planning to announce a cable television set-top converter box today that will be compatible with personal-computer standards, industry executives said.
The joint venture is among the projects that reflect the computer industry's eagerness to blend the power of computers with television.
The first version of the General Instrument converter box will be on the market before the end of the year.
It will be priced at about $125; a card that adds personal-computer and Windows compatibility will cost an additional $200 to $300.


U.S. Chides Europe Bank On Spending
The United States chastised the head of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development today for lavish spending of taxpayer money, but said it would continue to support the institution's efforts to promote the development of capitalism in Eastern Europe.
The United States is the largest financial backer of the European Bank, which was set up by Western governments two years ago to promote private enterprise in the former Soviet bloc.


Disputed Tests Set On Vaccine For AIDS
A BITTER scientific debate over the best way to test an experimental AIDS vaccine was recently resolved when, by mutual agreement, responsibility for the tests was shifted from the Department of Defense, which planned to conduct tests among members of the armed services, to the National Institutes of Health.
Under the new plan, the vaccine, which is known as GP-160, will be tested against other experimental AIDS vaccines rather than alone as the Defense Department had announced it planned to do.
None of the vaccines under development are intended to prevent infection by the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.
It is thought that they might slow the virus's development in those already infected.


Shultz's Advice to Clinton: Attack the Serbs at Once
George P. Shultz, the former Secretary of State, said today that the United States should immediately begin air and naval artillery strikes against Serbian military targets, even doing so alone if the European allies decline to take part.
Mr.
Shultz, who was Secretary of State for six years under President Reagan, accused President Clinton and the leaders of the United Nations of inaction on Bosnia, saying they utterly fail to understand the need to combine diplomacy with force.


Italy's Chief Banker Is Nominated for Interim Premier
After days of horse-trading and confusion, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro named the governor of the central bank, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, today as Italy's new Prime Minister, marking a formal break with decades of rule by party insiders and their appointees.
If he receives Parliament's endorsement, the 72-year-old banker will head a stopgap administration facing major challenges: to trim the budget, enact sweeping political reform and then bow out after early elections.


Thom McAn Narrows Review
The Thom McAn Shoe Company in Worcester, Mass., said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on the creative portion of its account to three agencies, from five.
Billings were estimated at $1 million to $1.5 million.


No Overtime, No Dice for Islanders
The Islanders-Capitals series got hot, nasty and a little wild tonight as Washington won, 6-4 at the Capital Centre.
The game featured multiple explosions of individual goal-scoring, stick-swinging and temper.
The result left the Islanders up by three games to two in the four-of-seven, first-round Stanley Cup match that resumes Wednesday night at the Coliseum.
But they are worried about the health of the hands of yet another key performer.
Al Iafrate scored three goals for Washington, which led by 5-1 midway through the third period but barely survived a comeback by an Islanders team that had won the previous three games in overtime.
Ray Ferraro scored four times for the Islanders, who cut the lead to 5-4 before Washington scored into an empty New York net in the final minute.


After a Sinkhole Death, Digging for Clues
Hammad Sharif walked slowly across the yard in front of his home today to the hole that pulled his 7-year-old son to his death on Saturday.
As he walked between the township's Mayor and the Middlesex County Prosecutor, a power hoe began digging out the area, searching for clues to the tragedy.
On Saturday neighbors held Mr.
Sharif's legs as he reached into the hole, trying in vain to get a grip on his son, Kwami, who had been playing with his twin brother, Kwasi, moments before the ground gave way.


Review/Opera; Adding Plot to an American Classic
As is well known by now, Virgil Thomson's 1934 opera "Four Saints in Three Acts" has neither four saints nor three acts.
What it does have is an exuberant Gertrude Stein libretto, along with a score drawing on church hymns, American folk songs, town band sounds, calliope melodies, barbershop quartets and Sunday school ditties, all in service to, well, it has never been too clear what.
On Saturday night at Christ Church United Methodist on the Upper East Side, the Mannes Opera Ensemble presented a staging of Thomson's most performed opera, offering another view of what "pigeons on the grass alas" has to do with "the difference between saints forget-me-nots and mountains," and why either phrase should be part of this extraordinarily fresh and irreverent work ostensibly about the lives of Spanish saints.
Another performance is to be given tomorrow night.


New PC Chip Is Shipped By Motorola
Motorola Inc. said today that it had begun shipping samples of the Power PC microprocessor.
The chip, jointly developed with I.B.M. and Apple Computer, is meant to compete with Intel's new Pentium chip as the standard for the next generation of personal computers.
Motorola said the Power PC chips, expected to appear in an Apple desktop computer by early next year, would be priced much lower than analysts had expected and at about half the price the Intel Corporation is expected to charge for the Pentium, which is not as powerful as the Power PC.


Accessible Puccini
The Metropolitan Opera Guild is to present three performances of Puccini's comedy "Gianni Schicchi" next month as part of its Growing Up With Opera series.
As a way of making opera more accessible to new audiences and young people, the story of greedy relatives scheming to inherit the family fortune has been transposed to present-day Florence.
Performances are to be on Sunday, and on May 8 and 9 at 2 P.M. at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse of Hunter College, 68th Street at Lexington Avenue.
Tickets are $25; reservations: (212) 769-7008.


Reynolds To Cut Prices Of Cigarettes
Responding to a price cut in Marlboro cigarettes announced earlier this month by the Philip Morris Companies, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company said yesterday that prices of its leading premium brands, Winston and Camel, would be comparably reduced for at least one month.
In a promotion to begin in June, Reynolds intends to charge retailers $4 less a carton, with the savings to be passed on to consumers.
In Marlboro's slightly different strategy, the $4 discount was given to retailers, who can decide how much to pass on to consumers.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about United States policy in Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incorrectly to a speech on Dec. 15 by Robert M. Gates, then Director of Central Intelligence.
Mr.
Gates did not describe his private briefings of President Bush.


Books of The Times; Rage and Reason in the Crisis of Black America
Race Matters
By Cornel West
105 pages. Beacon Press. $15.
In the last few years, Cornel West, a professor of religion and the director of Afro-American studies at Princeton University, has been collecting accolades from the worlds of academia, journalism and politics.


Accounts
*
The Finnish Tourist Board, New York, to Cox Advertising, New York, to handle its tourism account, which was inactive.
Billings were estimated at more than $1 million.


Downhill Ride
In a thriving economy, Fruehauf Trailer would be expected to thrive.
But the truck and tractor-trailer maker has performed like the economy -- sluggishly.
Moreover, Business Week has questioned Fruehauf's accounting practices, and quarterly results are expected to be much worse than last year's.
Yesterday, the stock was hit especially hard.


RUSSIANS DESCRIBE EXTENSIVE DUMPING OF NUCLEAR WASTE
The dumping of highly radioactive wastes at sea has been banned worldwide for more than three decades, and the ban has been expanded to other forms of nuclear waste.
Now a Russian report has detailed how the Soviet Union repeatedly broke those rules, making it clear that Moscow lied in asserting that it had never dumped radioactive waste into the oceans.
The document paints a picture even darker than the rumors and half-truths about oceanic dumping that began to swirl as the Soviet Union collapsed.
It turns out that a vast amount of highly radioactive waste was dumped by the Soviet Union: twice the combined total of 12 other nuclear nations.
But the threat to marine life is unclear since no records are yet available on the exact composition of the radioactive refuse and no one knows for sure if containment vessels are intact or leaking.


Polo Returns to the Lawns of Long Island; After Decades of Decline, the Sport Is Regaining Prominence
Grab your mallets and your hip flasks.
Have the groom saddle the ponies and tell the valet to chill the champagne.
There is jolly sporting news, at long last, for Long Island's smart set:
Polo is back.
It isn't quite what it was from the 1920's to the 40's, when the gilded clans of the Gold Coast, the Whitneys and the Guests, the Hitchcocks and the Phippses, played matches in their own lavish backyards, when the Duchess of Windsor or the Maharajah of Jaipur might pop in to present a sterling silver loving cup or knock the ball around for a chukker or two on one of the Island's 50 polo fields.
U.S.
Open in Polo Land
Nevertheless, after decades of decline, during which polo clubhouses were bulldozed for expressways and fields subdivided for housing developments, the sport is being played again on vast, lush lawns from Old Westbury to the Hamptons.
Strings of polo ponies are being put through their paces in paddocks along Long Island's North Shore.
Membership in the Meadowbrook Club, the Island's premier polo club, has risen from 14 to 42 in three years, placing it near its goal of 50 and among the 10 largest in the country.
Two new polo clubs have been established on the Island in the last few years.


C.I.A. Acted Properly In the Romero Matter
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis has stated that the Central Intelligence Agency knew who killed San Salvador's Archbishop Oscar Romero (column, April 2).
Mr.
Lewis stated categorically that at the direction of Robert Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, the information had been withheld from our intelligence oversight committees.
Mr.
Lewis is categorically wrong.


Religious Martyrdom at Waco Was Predictable
To the Editor:
Was the Justice Department's disastrous decision to bring down the Branch Davidian compound the result of poor advice?
In the hand-wringing after the Waco debacle, amid pronouncements by Federal Bureau of Investigation officials and so-called cult experts, I am struck by the absence of commentary by religious scholars.
We have heard authorities pronounce on David Koresh's state of mind, viewing him as a psychotic, a criminal or a cult leader.
But what if he were recognized to be driven by a religious conviction?
Then the tragic outcome would have been no surprise.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japan's main telephone company will buy a dozen A.T.&amp; T. telephone switches.
The first A.T.&amp; T. sale to Nippon Telegraph and Telephone came after years of U.S. pressure.  [ Page D1. ]
Huge losses at Lloyd's of London are forcing the underwriters of policies to pay up, sometimes with their entire wealth.  [ D1. ]


Panel Gives California Hope on Keeping Bases
The chairman of the Presidential commission that will determine the fate of scores of military bases has told state officials that bases elsewhere in the nation may be reviewed in the coming weeks as possible replacements for some in Northern California that are scheduled to be closed.
The possibility of expanding the scope of the commission's review was raised by the panel's chairman, James A. Courter, during a four-day visit to Northern California that included visits to eight military bases in the region and two days of public hearings here.


CLINTON SAYS U.S. MUST HARDEN LINE TOWARD THE SERBS
Only hours after the Bosnian Serbs once again rejected peace proposals, President Clinton said today that it was clear that the United States and its allies needed "a stronger policy" in the Balkans and promised to decide on a new course of action within the next few days.
A senior American official said the most likely strategy would be a program of limited bombing, intended to produce a cease-fire in place and a new round of negotiations.
With European nations insisting upon American leadership, both Britain and France indicated over the weekend that they would probably prefer bombing to any of the other military options under study.


Help for the Poor Who Work
President Clinton has vowed to eliminate poverty among families with a full-time worker.
To back that pledge, he proposed a $27 billion increase over five years in the earned income tax credit -- which lowers taxes for low-paid workers or pays them cash if they are too poor to pay taxes.
The credit insulates the poor from Social Security payroll taxes and, looking ahead, higher energy taxes.
It thus acts to untax the poor who work.
But Congress is groping for ways to evade Mr.
Clinton's budget shears, and there are rumblings that some members will try to grab money from the tax credit in a desperate attempt to save a favored spending program or knock down tax hikes.
Those temptations are worth fighting.
Mr.
Clinton's plan to make work pay is wise and fair -- and critical to welfare reform.


Museum Opens With Firm Grip On the Emotions
Skip Krenke walked slowly through the dark cattle car and ran a hand over its wooden slats, feeling the scratches made by people as they were transported to their deaths a half century ago.
He looked around and whispered, half to himself, "a hundred people in here." Stepping out, he held a friend by the shoulder, as if he might fall.


I.B.M.'s Report Card From New Chief
After less than a month on the job, Louis V. Gerstner Jr. met the I.B.M. shareholders today -- and they gave him an earful.
The 2,300 stockholders who filed into the Tampa Convention Center through airport-style metal detectors were mostly retirees.
Many had settled in Florida, often with a tidy holding of the International Business Machines Corporation's shares for financial security.


Washington -- by Way of Stonewall
The modern gay rights movement started a quarter of a century ago, when police raided the Stonewall Inn, a cross-dressers' bar in Greenwich Village.
The incident led to three days of civil disobedience, much of it by men in drag.
Stonewall convinced gay men and lesbians that they were under attack and that they needed to organize for political action and demonstrations, like the one last weekend in Washington.


Deportees Stage Sit-In Facing Israeli Guns


Vaccine Protects Mice Against Form of Tumor
IN a new approach to tumor-vaccine development, Stanford University researchers have fused two proteins to create a vaccine for B-cell lymphoma that immunizes mice against a recurrence of the disease.
One of the researchers, Dr.
Ronald Levy of the Stanford University School of Medicine, said the vaccine worked by helping the immune system "unmask the tumor" and by stimulating the production of antibodies to fight the malignant cells.
He and Dr.
Mi-Hua Tao, who now works at the Institute of Biomedical Sciences in Taiwan, fused a molecule of immunoglobulin, a weak immunogen produced by the host's malignant B cells, with a drug called granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, or GM-CSF.
The drug is used to stimulate regrowth of the bone marrow in marrow-transplant patients and also enhances the body's ability to recognize antigens.


NBC Has Picked An Unknown Writer To Replace Letterman
NBC has hired a 30-year-old unknown comedy writer, Conan O'Brien, to replace David Letterman as the host of its "Late Night" comedy and talk show.
Mr.
O'Brien's only previous appearances on television have been as an unbilled background player in some sketches on "Saturday Night Live."
Mr.
O'Brien, who previously worked for NBC as a "Saturday Night Live" writer and has most recently been a writer and a producer for the Fox comedy "The Simpsons," will inherit one of the most visible jobs in television.
"Late Night" commands up to $70 million a year in advertising revenues.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CLINTON VOWS ACTION ON SERBS  President Clinton said the United States and its allies needed "a stronger policy" in the Balkans, and a senior American official said the most likely strategy would be limited bombing to force a cease-fire and a new round of talks.
A1  Canadian troops are being pressed to leave a Muslim enclave.
A6


Corrections
An article in the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about Cynthia Blair, author of the novel "Temptation," gave an erroneous location, supplied by the publisher, for a book signing.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M. in the Roosevelt Field mall, she will be at B. Dalton, not Barnes &amp; Noble.


BOEING CO. (N)
A 22 percent decline in first-quarter profit, to $325 million, reported yesterday by the Boeing Company was below the consensus of Wall Street analysts.
But Frank Shrontz, the chairman, said at the annual meeting that Boeing's financial strength would carry it through the airline industry's downturn.
The $420 million profit for the first quarter of 1992, used to calculate the decline, was before restatement for the adoption of accounting standards for retiree health benefits.
With the restatement, Boeing had a loss of $582 million in the 1992 quarter.


New Light Is Shed On Moon's Brightness
ON nights when the Moon is full, it appears brighter than it does at any other time.
For more than a century, scientists have attributed the full Moon's brightness to a process called shadow hiding, in which the Sun shining directly on the Moon minimizes any shadows.
But a new study overturns this well-established theory.
Published in the current issue of the journal Science, it shows that a phenomenon known as coherent backscatter is mainly responsible for the enhanced glow.


For Bellamy, Asserting Fiscal and Electoral Credentials for Comptroller
Carol Bellamy, a leading candidate for state comptroller, spent more than an hour at a legislative hearing today telling lawmakers her views on auditing, pension investments and debt reform.
She even impressed legislators by knowing that P.U.C., an actuarial method used to calculate pension contributions, stands for projected unit credit.
But the most important part of Ms.
Bellamy's presentation today may have been the chart she handed out showing how many votes she won in each of New York's 62 counties in 1990.


Jets Turn From Draft to Dreams
Seconds after the Jets took linebacker Marvin Jones of Florida State with the No. 4 pick in the first round of the National Football League college draft on Sunday, Joe Theismann, one of the announcers for ESPN, placed New York in next season's American Football Conference championship game.
"Kiss of death," said Jets Coach Bruce Coslet.


Coke Plans to Buy 30% Stake In Mexican Soft Drink Unit
The Coca-Cola Company announced today that it would spend $195 million to buy a 30 percent stake in the soft drink operation of Fomento Economico Mexicano S.A., the Monterrey-based company that holds Coke's biggest foreign franchise.
The move raises Coca-Cola's stakes in what has become one of the most important theaters of its global struggle with Pepsi-Cola International.
Mexico's per-capita cola consumption is second only to that of the United States, and the nation's thirst is expected to grow for years, with or without ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Sports of The Times; Sir Charles Is Gonna Be Outrageous
EVERY time I try to type that the Knicks are going to win the playoffs, I start hearing voices.
Or rather, I hear one particular voice.
That voice takes me back to Barcelona, Summer of '92.
A babble of Catalan Olympic workers, after a basketball game, hanging around the interview room.
Suddenly there was this voice in English: "Shut your foreign mouths!"


Corrections
A subheading on April 16 about the killing of a member of the radical Abu Nidal group in Lebanon referred incorrectly to a Palestinian feud there.
It is between Al Fatah, which is part of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and the Fatah Revolutionary Council, which is not.


Jail's Use of Special Restraints Is Condemned by Rights Group
The shackling of inmates in the Onondaga County Jail here is "a form of cruel and inhuman treatment, prohibited by international and medical standards" and "in some cases, it may constitute torture," a national human rights group said today.
The group, the Boston-based Physicians for Human Rights, called for an investigation by the United States Attorney General.
Earlier this year, a report by the New York State Commission of Correction also condemned the way prisoners are restrained at the jail here.


It Only Takes One Shot In Overtime for Canadiens
Canadiens 5, Nordiques 4
Montreal took only one shot in overtime, and it was Kirk Muller's goal for a 5-4 Canadiens victory over the Nordiques in Quebec last night.
Montreal now has a 3-2 lead in the Adams Division semifinal.
Muller took Vincent Damphousse's pass on his forehand and ripped a low shot that caught goalie Ron Hextall on the move at 8 minute 17 seconds of overtime.


Selloffs by Italy Reduced To Olive Oil and Gelati
Amid the political upheaval in Italy, the Government is trying to sell some huge, state-owned companies including an ice cream maker and the producer of the best-selling olive oil exported to the United States.
The aims of the intended sales are to unravel decades of state involvement in the economy, reduce a $100 billion budget deficit and also take aim at the $1.2 trillion national debt.


Why Fight a Drug War Without Methadone?
To the Editor:
"Clinton Continues Old Drug Policies" (front page, April 12) omits the one proven treatment modality in the war against drugs.
Methadone treatment programs were pioneered in New York City 30 years ago and have now been evaluated around the world.
They invariably show a dramatic reduction of illicit drug use and associated antisocial behavior.
They also appear to reduce the spread of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
So effective is this treatment that most physicians consider it to be unethical to offer double-blind research trials without methadone in both groups.


Paper Says Budget Director Sees Fight on Economic Plan
Leon E. Panetta, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, said today that President Clinton faced an uphill battle with Congress over passage of his economic plan.
Mr.
Panetta's prediction was reported tonight in The Washington Post.
He had met with reporters at a lunch organized by Newsday.


Struggle to Survive in Town That Steel Forgot
Molten metal still flows in a handful of buildings on the seven-mile stretch of the Ohio River bank here where a sprawling Jones &amp; Laughlin steel complex once employed as many as 17,000 workers.
But if the nation had a hospital for communities, this struggling town 25 miles northwest of Pittsburgh would have been sent to intensive care.
The LTV Corporation, which bought Jones &amp; Laughlin in 1968, has only 600 employees here now.
They work in a tin mill that coats steel made elsewhere.
Farther north, in a former LTV building, a machine maintenance and repair concern shares space with a small steel finishing company.
Then there is J &amp; L Structural Inc., a private concern that in 1987 acquired an LTV mill that makes 14-inch steel bars used primarily in mobile home construction, and a dock facility for shipping and receiving goods by water.
It employs about 130 people.


Tense U.N. Forces Hold Fast as Serbs Demand They Quit Enclave
Nine days after a unit of Canadian troops entered the besieged enclave of Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia and proclaimed the town a United Nations-protected "safe area," Serbian military commanders whose troops surround the town are continuing to demand that the Canadian soldiers be withdrawn.
A United Nations military spokesman dismissed the Serbian demand as "vociferous rhetoric" and said it had been rejected.
"We are there, we know what we have to do, and we will do it," said Comdr.
Barry Frewer, a Canadian Navy officer who is spokesman for the United Nations military commander in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France.


A Springtime of Grief: Shall We Add Bosnians?; Safe Haven Zones
To the Editor:
Public revulsion is finally forcing sluggish governments to contemplate forceful measures to halt the ongoing genocide in Bosnia.
We believe the least violent way of doing this is to immediately establish "assertive" safe haven zones in Bosnia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia.
Srebrenica has been declared a "safe area" by the United Nations Security Council but the area, surrounded by heavily armed Serbian paramilitaries, has no real means of protection.
We write as members of the Citizens' Committee on Bosnia-Herzegovina, associated with the John Jay College of Criminal Justice's Center on Violence and Human Survival, which has been studying the concept of assertive safe havens.


Ditka Set to Become an NBC Analyst
MIKE DITKA, the former Chicago Bears' head coach, has signed a one-year, contract worth $600,000 with NBC to be a studio analyst on "The N.F.L. Live" pre-game show.
In a twist that reinforces the network's desire to make use of the volatile, high-profile Ditka's perceived star power, NBC also made him a course reporter for seven golf tournaments.
In taking NBC's offer, Ditka, who did some studio work for NBC during the playoffs and Super Bowl, rejected CBS's offer to become a game analyst and to have a show on WBBM-TV, the CBS Chicago affiliate.
"The N.F.L. Live" will change this fall, with its long-time host, BOB COSTAS, being replaced by JIM LAMPLEY, the host of NBC's golf coverage.
NBC will have an option to keep Ditka, but will not stand in his way if he gets a coaching offer.


Executive Changes
R.
R.
DONNELLEY &amp; SONS CO., Chicago, named Paul A. Masterton senior vice president and director of mutual funds for its Financial Printing Services Group.
He is based at R. R. Donnelley Financial's world headquarters in New York.
LASALLE PARTNERS, Chicago, a real estate services and investment firm, named R. Bruce Robertson head of the Client Services Group for its eastern region.
He is a former president of Dillon, Read Real Estate Inc.


ARCO (N)
ARCO Inc. attributed its strong gain in first-quarter profit to higher prices for natural gas and crude oil and to higher profit margins for gasoline and other refined products on the West Coast.
Net income of $260 million compared with a loss of $212 million in the first quarter of 1992.
Results for the 1992 quarter were restated for accounting changes; a profit of $180 million had been reported last year.


INSIDE
Premier Named in Italy
The Italian President named the governor of the central bank as the new Prime Minister, marking a break with decades of rule by party insiders and their appointees.
Page A3.
A Successor for Letterman
NBC has chosen Conan O'Brien, a little-known 30-year-old comedy writer, to be the new host of "Late Night," starting this summer.
Page C13.
Lloyd's of London Debacle
Huge losses at Lloyd's of London have forced underwriters of insurance policies to pay up, sometimes with their entire wealth.
Page D1.


TANDY CORP. (N)
The Tandy Corporation posted flat earnings of $35.1 million for the first quarter, the first period that it operated solely as a retail company.
It reported results of its manufacturing arm, TE Electronics Inc., separately.
Tandy plans to spin off TE Electronics to shareholders in July.
Rising sales for the slimmed-down Tandy, as well as a slight gain in operating profit, were signs of improving results "over recent quarters," said John V. Roach, chairman and chief executive.
Gross profit margins fell by 2 percentage points, to 43.1 percent, compared with the comparable quarter a year earlier.


Stocks Drop Again on Economic Concerns
The stock market demonstrated a determined descent yesterday, having shambled downward last week, closing lower for the sixth consecutive trading session with barely a flicker of upward movement.
All major indexes were down, and the only major gaining stocks were gold-mining companies, although less so than on Friday.
The market opened the week by largely ignoring good news about Boris N. Yeltsin's apparent victory in Sunday's Russian referendum, which would aid Germany and thus European economies.
Investors paid more attention to bad news about the American economy.
The National Association of Realtors said sales of existing single-family homes dropped 2.9 percent in March, nearly triple the 1 percent decline expected by analysts.


SmithKline Chief to Retire in Year
Robert P. Bauman, who created SmithKline Beecham, a trans-Atlantic success story, by combining two lackluster health-care companies, will retire as chief executive in April 1994, the company announced yesterday.
He will be succeeded by Jan Leschly, who has headed SmithKline's $5-billion-a-year pharmaceutical business since 1990.
"We did everything we said we'd do," Mr.
Bauman said, when asked to explain his decision to quit at age 63.


'Moe' Is Closing
"Five Guys Named Moe," a musical by Clarke Peters, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Eugene O'Neill Theater, 230 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
The Sunday matinee of the show, directed by Charles Augins, will be its 445th regular performance; it had 19 previews.


A Less Than Happy Homecoming
It was supposed to be their dream come true, not their worst nightmare.
But wishing and hoping, both Darryl Strawberry and Eric Davis have learned, do not always turn fantasy into reality.
Certainly not last year, in a season that was injury-racked for both of them.
And thus far, not this season, as the two boyhood friends from Los Angeles still try to bring to fruition all the promise their hometown reunion once held, not only for themselves but for the Dodgers as well.


Judge Takes First Step to Replace Board
In the first step toward a new form of government for Nassau County, a Federal judge today gave county officials and others until June 10 to present plans to replace the county's Board of Supervisors.
The judge, Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court here, had ruled on April 14 that the weighted voting system used by the Board of Supervisors is unconstitutional because it violates the principle of one person one vote.


Historical Society Budget Priority in Doubt
Luis R. Cancel, New York City's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, has given the lowest priority in his suggested budget to the $6.3 million bailout plan for the New-York Historical Society, a highly placed city official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Mr.
Cancel, who on March 31 praised the society's financial rescue plan as "a proper framework," denied the allegation yesterday but refused to discuss the budget proposal he had submitted to Mayor David N. Dinkins, calling his statement to the Mayor "a privileged conversation."


Avon Products is abandoning its old-fashioned image in an appeal to contemporary women.
DING-DONG goes the doorbell.
"Who is it?" asks the woman inside.


Devils Can't Stay Even, So They're Out
For the second day in a row, the Devils played well against the Pittsburgh Penguins.
No matter.
For the fourth year in a row, they failed to advance beyond the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
The Penguins, the two-time defending champions, exploded for two goals 21 seconds apart in the third period and went on to a 5-3 victory that ended the Devils' season.


Corrections
A front-page article on Thursday about protests over the invitation of President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia to the opening of the new Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington referred incorrectly to the group that provided a translation of his book "Wastelands: Historical Truth." It was the American Jewish Committee, not the American Jewish Congress.


Short Sales Outstanding Increase 2.2% on Nasdaq
Short-sellers made lots of errors and hit few home runs in the latest monthly period, even as the number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose to record levels.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that for the period from mid-March to mid-April, the short interest in all Nasdaq securities totaled 509.1 million shares, a 2.2 percent increase from the previous period's level of 498.3 million shares, which was also a record.


U.S.-German Crew Launched Into Orbit
With a blast of fiery exhaust and billowing vapors, the space shuttle Columbia rocketed into orbit today to begin a much-delayed German science mission with a busy nine-day schedule of biological and materials-processing experiments in the microgravity environment of space flight.
The launching occurred exactly on time, at 10:50 A.M., much to the relief of German and American space officials.
The flight had been postponed repeatedly since February to replace equipment, and last month came within three seconds of liftoff, only to be held up by a stuck engine valve.


Can We Take Him Home for a Pet?


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Friday, with an article about the opening of a new Manhattan store by Takashimaya U.S.A., omitted the identity of the woman with Jiro Shi nohara, the company president.
She was Corliss Tyler, senior vice president and general merchandise manager for Takashimaya New York.


Nassau G.O.P. Party Chief To Be Head of County OTB
Nassau County's most powerful Republican, Joseph N. Mondello, said today that he was stepping down from the County Board of Supervisors to become chairman of the Nassau Offtrack Betting Corporation, but would remain the leader of the county's Republican Party.
The $139,000-a-year OTB position, regarded as a rich patronage plum, was essentially Mr.
Mondello's for the asking, since he largely controls patronage in this Republican-dominated county.


Abbott Trade? For Now, It's the Great J.T. Heist
J.
T.
Snow would flip on the radio during the winter and invariably land on a sports talk show.
He would listen and absorb some verbal abuse.
Eventually, Snow, whose father is co-host of a morning sports show, avoided the medium altogether because he grew weary of hearing opinions about the trade.
It was the same with newspapers.
Instead of devouring the sports pages, Snow glossed over them.
He had gazed at enough headlines questioning whether the Angels had made an ignominious error by trading the saintly Jim Abbott to the Yankees for three minor league players.


Panel Urges Bigger Raise For Teachers
A state fact-finding panel has urged the Dinkins administration to give city teachers a wage increase slightly higher than most other city workers, and both sides said yesterday that the nonbinding recommendations could spur a settlement in a bitter 19-month labor dispute.
City officials said that they were heartened that the proposal of the three-member panel closely mirrored the settlement reached with other city workers and that the panel accepted the argument that the salaries of teachers should be closely tied to those of other city workers.


At Least 75 Are Killed as Indian Airliner Crashes
An Indian Airlines Boeing jetliner crashed soon after takeoff in western India today, killing at least 75 people on board as it broke into pieces and burst into flames.
The flight was carrying 118 passengers and crew members, an airline official here said, when it crashed about four miles from Aurangabad, 200 miles northwest of Bombay.


Has Year Of Gelding Finally Arrived?
In the 118 years they have been running the Kentucky Derby, only seven geldings have won the race.
No gelding has won it in the last 64 years.
But Prairie Bayou, the favorite for this year's Derby, is a gelding, and many racing people are literally betting that he will add a footnote to Derby history next Saturday at Churchill Downs.
If so, he would become the first gelding to win since Clyde Van Dusen won it in 1929.
Some celebrated geldings have run in the Derby since then, but didn't win it.
Forego ran fourth to Secretariat in 1973.
Best Pal ran second to Strike the Gold in 1991.


New Suspect In Bacterial Resistance: Amalgam
WHEN penicillin first became used as a drug, it was a sure-fire means of massacring bacteria.
But the microorganisms have fought back with a vengeance.
As many as half of all bacteria that cause urinary tract infections, for example, are now impervious to penicillin and other common antibiotics because the bacteria have developed resistance.
The cause of the development of resistance is something of a mystery but microbiologists have now come up with a surprising new suspect: dental fillings.


Investigation Into Press Leaks Begins in Trade Center Blast
Federal officials began an inquiry yesterday to identify the unnamed law-enforcement officials who provided information for an article in The New York Times on the World Trade Center bombing in the face of a Federal judge's order barring prosecutors and the defense from discussing the case with news organizations.
Several law-enforcement officials were questioned, according to officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Green Quarterbacks Are Looking Ripe
In theory, it sounds nice.
New England and Seattle draft the quarterbacks projected as the best college football has to offer, and then both teams talk about building for the future and not rushing their new stars.
It is simply theory.
Drew Bledsoe, with New England, and Rick Mirer, with Seattle, will play plenty in the 1993 season.
Who would be surprised if both quarterbacks start for the opener?


Corrections
A report in the Westchester Weekly's calendar column on Sunday about bus tours of the landmarks of 1776 misstated the telephone number for reservations at the Pound Ridge Historical Society.
It is (914) 764-4538.


Corporate Issues Drop Off in April
The breakneck pace of new corporate issues early this year has slowed sharply this month, although interest rates remain near the 1993 low reached in early March.
According to the Securities Data Company, there were 105 new corporate issues in the month through last Friday for a total of $16.41 billion, which is less than half the amount of each of the previous three months.


In Salons, Styles Aren't So Stark
As retailers returned to Seventh Avenue showrooms to place their orders after viewing the fall fashion openings last month, they were often pleasantly surprised.
The clothes that seemed so strange and, well, spooky, in the shows were much more accessible on the hangers.
Black still dominates, but there are often as many styles in the beige-to-gray range of neutrals.
While many store buyers yearn for a more sparkling choice of colors, at least they will not have only black reflected in their fall fashion merchandise.


Survival Is Struggle In a Forgotten Town
Aliquippa, Pa., is one of many American company towns that have been devastated by plant closings and other cutbacks.
In Aliquippa, the Jones &amp; Laughlin steel works now employs only 600 workers, compared with 17,000 a few decades ago.


METRO DIGEST
DIFFERENT VISIONS OF UTOPIA
On a spread as vast as all of Manhattan, a Swedish insurance company wants to build a utopian city for 35,000 inhabitants and 20,000 workers, a complex that would dwarf all but a few towns between New York City and Albany.
That vision for Sterling Forest, a privately held woodland 40 miles north of New York City, is diametrically different from the one preservationists have long had for the property.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SORDID TALE OF OBSESSION
Most of those who knew Gary Wilensky did not want to discuss him.
When the tennis instructor who taught New York's most privileged daughters took his own life, he left behind a sordid tale of sexual obsession and violence and a trail of shocked acquaintances.
B3.


Outer Critics Circle Names Award Winners
Wendy Wasserstein's comedy "The Sisters Rosensweig" won the Outer Critics Circle Award yesterday for best Broadway play of the 1992-93 season.
"Tommy," with music and lyrics by Pete Townshend, was named best Broadway musical.
Robert Klein and Madeline Kahn, both of "The Sisters Rosensweig," were named best actor and actress in a play, and the director, Daniel Sullivan, won the play's fourth award.


White House Memo; As Perot Jabs, White House Appears to Bob and Weave
They insist that the timing was coincidental, but officials at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis ordered the removal of two portraits of a young midshipman named Ross Perot from an alumni display earlier this month only days before President Clinton paid a visit.
If only Mr.
Clinton could so easily remove the specter of the Ross Perot of today.
His grinning presence seems to be hanging over the White House these days like an annoying, uninvited visitor.


Hearing-Aid Makers Are Warned on False Claims
The Food and Drug Administration announced today that it has warned six major hearing-aid manufacturers and distributors to stop making misleading claims about certain aspects of their products' performance or risk regulatory penalties.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, Commissioner of the drug agency, said his agency sent letters on April 16 to many of the nation's leading hearing-aid makers, warning them that their advertising and labeling were misleading and had created unrealistic expectations about their products.


Energy Tax? A Better Way.
President Clinton has proposed a tax, soon to be submitted to Congress, that focuses on the energy content -- the British thermal unit -- in each form of energy.
There would be a special, higher surcharge on oil.
The tax, a major element of the economic program, was initially projected to collect $72 billion over five years.
It is a tax designed by politicians for politics.
Its purpose is to get revenues from oil without a gasoline tax.
The tax is designed to be so murky the public probably wouldn't blame Washington for pass-along effects.


Economy Aids a Compromise Over Developing Forest Land
Here on a spread as vast as all of Manhattan, a Swedish insurance company wants to build a utopian city for 35,000 inhabitants and 20,000 workers, a complex that would dwarf all but a few towns between New York City and Albany.
That vision for Sterling Forest, a privately held woodland 40 miles north of New York City, is diametrically different from one preservationists have long had for the thousands of rugged acres of hemlock and white cedar that are home to black bears, coyotes, bobcats, foxes and timber rattlesnake.
A Deal Is Under Way
Both visions, however, are running up against the sour economic reality of the 90's.
In the 1980's, developers could dream of projects on a mighty scale, and preservationists could plan Arcadias for hiking and fishing and the protection of wildlife.
But the 1990's, with a sputtering economy that impoverishes both landlords and public park preservers, is forcing a new approach: compromise.


Editorial Notebook: Hereditary Politics in Alabama; Can Little Jim Harness the Big Mules?
In his report on the latest gubernatorial follies in my native Alabama, the Times's Peter Applebome got it right.
The conviction of Guy Hunt and his subsequent eviction from the Governor's Mansion was unusual only in that the hapless Mr.
Hunt was punished for his crimes against good government.
That is not the norm in Alabama.
What is normal is that the sons always rise, no matter what the needs of the state.
Hence the new Governor is James Elisha Folsom Jr., the amiable and not very energetic namesake of the legendary Big Jim.
The younger Folsom thus beats George C. Wallace Jr. to the state house.
If Alabama has to have a hereditary governor, Mr.
Folsom probably represents the better outcome.
Mr.
Wallace Jr. has had a tormented public and private life and seems almost crushed by the weight of his father's grandiose sins against racial harmony.


Arson Investigators Say Cult Members Started Fire
Arson investigators issued a preliminary report today concluding that members of the Branch Davidian cult started the raging fire that consumed 86 lives in 30 minutes last Monday.
But lawyers for several cult members and legal experts are asking if the investigation, which is being overseen by the Texas Rangers, is impartial.
All the members of the arson team were recommended by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms -- which planned and carried out the initial raid in the compound, and four of whose agents died in that Feb. 28 raid.


A Secretary Pressed Ahead, Recasting Education Agenda
When Terrel H. Bell became President Ronald Reagan's first Secretary of Education, he inherited a job that the President had vowed to eliminate.
Mr. Bell, among others, is glad he did not.


It's Tucker And Lewis And a War Of Words
In his fashion, Don King cited the Bible, Rostand and Shakespeare.
But Tony (TNT) Tucker simply cited his fists yesterday in one of those obligatory pre-fight scenes of angry stares, putdowns and slightly askew literary allusions.
All the rhetoric will be put to rest on May 8 when Tucker, the contender, fights Lennox Lewis, the champion, in Las Vegas, Nev., for the World Boxing Council heavyweight title.


Islanders Upset Over Slashing
The Islanders, upset with a slash to the wrists of Steve Thomas by Kevin Hatcher during Washington's 6-4 victory on Monday night, requested today a league disciplinary investigation into what they call flagrant actions by the Capitals' defenseman.
Although X-rays showed no broken bones, Thomas was listed as a questionable starter for Game 6 Wednesday at Nassau Coliseum.
According to General Manager Don Maloney of the Islanders, a previous slash by Hatcher had mangled the knuckles of Benoit Hogue in Game 3, an injury the team chose not to publicize.


Company That Shut Factory Has Returned From Mexico
In 1989, Quality Coils closed its factory here and moved production to Juarez, Mexico, in search of cheaper labor.
Now, the company has returned, saying that decision actually cost it money.
"What we learned down in Mexico is that the up-front wages might look a lot less expensive," the company's president, Keith A. Gibson, said.
"What we found is that the Connecticut worker is by far more productive."


Opposition To Northeast Bank Merger
The fight over the Bank of New York Company's aborted acquisition of the Northeast Bancorporation has gotten nastier.
In a lawsuit made public yesterday, the Bank of New York moved in Federal court to block Northeast's imminent merger with the First Fidelity Bancorporation.
In 1983, Bank of New York bought one million nonvoting shares of Northeast and agreed to buy the Stamford-based bank.
But in 1989, Bank of New York canceled the agreement, citing a rejection by the Federal Reserve Board.
Northeast sued for breach of contract.


Lintas Looking For Creative Change
Lintas New York is interviewing a number of high-level creative executives to work on accounts like Diet Coke and I.B.M., F. Stone Roberts, president and chief operating officer, said.
Mr.
Roberts was replying to reports this week in trade publications that the agency was looking for a creative talent to assume the duties of creative director on Diet Coke from Tony DeGregorio, executive vice president and chief creative officer.


Corrections
Weather listings from Jan. 7 through last Thursday carried incorrect daily temperature and precipitation readings for San Juan, P.R., because of a computer programming error at WSI, a weather data supplier.
Readers wishing corrected figures may write to the News Desk, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Critic's Notebook; A 'Ring' Trance Breaks As Valhalla Shuts Down
It sounds smug but it's true: hearing Wagner's "Ring" stretched out over weeks or months is really not hearing the "Ring" at all.
Doing it Wagner's way -- four operas encompassing a week -- re-creates the slow-moving avalanche he had in mind.
It takes about 19 hours for Valhalla and all its accumulated weight to come crashing down on our heads, but midway through "Die Walkure" time and pressure begin to work their restorative powers.
Wagner's various motifs become the listener's friends, assuming with each transformation a deepening personality.
If in the end we are crushed by sheer reiteration, we are curiously renewed as well.
Minimalism, Wagner's mirror opposite, claims this same medicinal property.


Funeral Held for Sinkhole Victim


College Students Go to Trenton to Lobby for Aid


Market Place; Will rising insurance stocks continue to lift USF&amp;G
EVER since the destruction by Hurricane Andrew in southern Florida last August, the stocks of property casualty insurers have headed skyward.
In the perverse world of insurance, losses could mean higher prices and thus eventually higher earnings.
One of the biggest winners has been the Baltimore-based USF&amp;G, a painfully troubled insurer at the end of the 1980's that was already in the midst of a turnaround when the big storm struck.
Between changes instituted by new management and euphoria over insurance stocks, USF&amp;G shares rose from 6 in 1991 to as high as 19 5/8 this spring.
The stock gained 3/8 yesterday, to 17 7/8.


Corrections
A rock review on Monday about a German band's performance on Friday night at Roseland rendered the group's name incorrectly.
It is Ein sturzende Neubauten.
A picture caption with the review misidentified the band's drummer.
He is F. M. Einheit, not Nu Unruh.


Review/Music; Samba Meets Pop and the Crowd Goes Wild
About halfway through her concert at the Ritz on Friday night, the Brazilian singer Daniela Mercury let three pre-teen-age samba drummers take over the stage.
In folkloric concerts, the arrival of roots-conscious children is precisely the moment when sentimentality drives a stake through the heart of a show: one is expected to bemoan the loss of tradition and applaud the youths' valiant attempts to fight off encroaching international pop culture.
But Ms.
Mercury had other ideas.
The three, beating out a complicated and ferocious samba pattern, were supported by a stadium rock production, including flashing lights, fog banks and a booming sound system.
It was a pop spectacle, and it was authentic, and the crowd went haywire.
Ms.
Mercury, a young singer from Bahia, packed the Ritz, and it was hard to imagine a better party anywhere.
Men were holding women on their shoulders, and the entire audience was swaying to the music, singing along with the songs, or dancing.
Ms.
Mercury sings with a voice that can move easily from pure pop tones to a hoarse, African style.
She and her two dancers worked tightly choreographed routines, and Ms.
Mercury pretty much proclaimed herself to be sex on two feet, all in a nicely civilized, consensual adult way.
She's a star: but in a domestic touch, her publicity biography mentions that she has two children.


'Justice' in Glen Ridge
Christopher Archer and Kevin and Kyle Scherzer, along with a few other high school jocks, lured a girl into the basement playroom of a house in Glen Ridge, N.J., in 1989 by promising her a date.
Another 17-year-old might have found the invitation suspect, but not this girl.
Her I.Q. is 64, which means her mental capacity and social skills are those of an 8-year-old.
There, as night fell on suburbia, the boys inserted a baseball bat, a broom handle and a stick into her vagina.
"Go further, go further," they urged each other, and laughed when one of the gang called the girl a "whore."


Knicks Pass Riley's Quiz
Some people expect the Knicks to sweep the Indiana Pacers -- easily.
Yet, the Knicks are trying to avoid any degree of overconfidence, which is one of many reasons why Coach Pat Riley took the team away from New York to prepare for the playoffs.
"We can't be making plans to be somewhere in June when we have this week ahead of us first," Riley said today as the Knicks continued their minicamp at the College of Charleston.
"It's a difficult time for our guys from a state of mind. Complacency is a very insidious disease. We have to get ourselves right."


Burying Urgent Mental Health Issues in Kitsch
To the Editor:
"When a Long Therapy Goes a Little Way" (The Week in Review, April 18) did little to illuminate the real issues in hammering out a national mental health benefits package.
I was outraged that a completely erroneous quote, attributed to me, presented the National Association of Social Workers' position as antithetical to what it really is.


Wine Talk
FRANCE, the nation whose name is synonymous with wine and the good life, is also the nation with what may be the world's most restrictive law controlling the advertising of wine and spirits.
Enacted in 1991, the Evin Law, as it is known, took full effect in January of this year.
It is named for a former Minister of Health, Claude Evin, who first supported it and who also imposed Draconian smoking controls on a nation of smokers.
When the legislation was proposed, in 1990, Government officials said they were motivated by statistical evidence that tobacco and alcohol accounted for 20 percent of the deaths in France.


Burying Urgent Mental Health Issues in Kitsch; Long Therapy's Value
To the Editor:
The remarks attributed to me in Daniel Goleman's article "When a Long Therapy Goes a Little Way" (The Week in Review, April 18), are incomplete and were used to support a bias I do not share.
This letter is an effort to rectify the one-sided depiction of my beliefs, and to acknowledge the pain this may have unwittingly caused patients and therapists who are constructively engaged in lengthy psychotherapies.


Many in Congress, Citing Vietnam, Oppose Attacks
While many advocates of tougher American action against the Bosnian Serbs have drawn parallels to the origins of World War II and the appeasement of Nazi aggression and brutality, the dominant analogy in Congress today was Vietnam.
A growing number of lawmakers are warning the Clinton Administration against bombing Serbian positions, fearing that it would inevitably lead to the kind of runaway deployment of ground troops that characterized American involvement in Southeast Asia.


Beyond 'Dog Ate My Homework'
Douglas A. Bernstein, a psychology professor at the University of Illinois, recently asked faculty members on an electronic-mail network for "the most unusual, bizarre and amazing student excuses" they had ever heard.
He got dozens of replies.
"As you read," he told readers of APS Observer, the journal of the American Psychological Society, "keep in mind that many of these excuses (and most that weren't funny enough to include) actually turn out to be true. As one contributor put it, 'It is easy to forget that our students have lives outside of class, and their lives are as chaotic as ours.' "


Review/Music: Shining Brow; Frank Lloyd Wright Joins Opera's Pantheon
In the suddenly trendy medium of opera, contemporary Americans are increasingly appearing as subjects.
It could only have been a matter of time before someone would fasten on the great architect Frank Lloyd Wright, one of the few Americans of this century whose life had genuine operatic scope and drama.
But who would have thought it would happen here?
There have always been interesting little outposts on the national music scene, but this has not been one of them.
Madison, the state capital and the home of the University of Wisconsin, is more an intellectual and political hotbed than a cultural center.
The Madison Opera, in particular, has been a provincial enterprise, scarcely remembered from a critic's days at the university in the 1960's.


Witness Says Lawyers Helped in B.C.C.I. Scheme
A former official of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International testified yesterday that the Washington lawyers Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman took part in a scheme to defraud Federal and state bank regulators.
The witness, Dildar Rizvi, who joined the international bank in 1972, shortly after it was formed, and left in 1992, shortly before it was closed down by regulators in seven countries, appeared yesterday in the fraud and bribery trial of Mr.
Altman in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Personal Health
NOT that long ago midwives were self-trained "grannies" who assisted women who could not afford or get to a doctor or hospital to give birth.
But in the last two decades, midwifery in the United States and even more so in Europe has undergone a professional revolution that is bringing high-quality and highly personalized obstetrical and gynecological care to ever-growing numbers of women, pregnant and otherwise.
At the same time, the rise of consumerism and the women's movement have prompted many affluent women to choose to have their babies either outside or within hospitals aided by professionally trained and certified nurse-midwives, with doctors acting as consultants should a complication of pregnancy or delivery arise.


Administration Rift Reported Over Course of Trade Policy
Deep ideological divisions and turf battles within the Clinton Administration have nearly paralyzed its trade policy, with Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen fighting attempts by the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, to move to a more confrontational approach, Administration officials say.
Because trade policy has assumed such a prominent role in the Administration, much of the Cabinet has been drawn into the fray.
The disagreements pit officials like Mr.
Bentsen, whose views are closer to traditional American support for free-trade policies, against those like Mr.
Kantor who favor tougher demands for specific concessions.
Some Crucial Issues
The policy divisions have delayed or stalled progress most clearly on five key issues: import taxes on mini-vans, world trade talks, trade in auto parts, foreign investment rules and the North American Free Trade Agreement, Administration officials said in interviews over the last two weeks.


LEADERS IN HAITI DENY DRUG LINKS
Haiti's military leaders deny that they are involved in drug trafficking and say reports of large transshipments of cocaine through the country are part of a "vast campaign to discredit and destabilize the army."
In recent days, there have been repeated reports in the American press of increased drug trafficking in Haiti since a military coup overthrew the elected President in September 1991.
An army statement, issued late Monday, specifically denied assertions in an article in The New York Times on Sunday in which international financial experts said the country's Central Bank was laundering drug profits.


PROCTER &amp; GAMBLE CO. (N)
Procter &amp; Gamble's ability to lower costs led to improved earnings in the company's third quarter despite a decline in sales.
Earnings at the consumer products giant rose 8.9 percent for the quarter, compared with the corresponding period a year earlier, although sales fell 1.8 percent.
The company said that sales were affected by the divestiture of the company's pulp and juice businesses last year and by unfavorable currency exchange rates.
Competition from private label products had "very little overall effect," Linda L. Ulrey, a company spokeswoman, said.


CLINTON RULES OUT DELAY IN UNVEILING HEALTH-CARE PLAN
Rejecting the urgent pleas of top economic advisers, President Clinton sided with his wife and his health-care team today and insisted that he would not postpone the presentation of his health-reform program next month.
Even though Congress is unlikely to start work on the health-care plan until next year, many of Mr.
Clinton's top economic aides, most prominently Leon E. Panetta, the White House budget chief, had argued that the Administration should not even unveil the proposals until fall.


Screening of All Newborns Urged for Sickle-Cell Disease
Issuing new guidelines for diagnosing and treating sickle-cell disease, a Federal panel recommended today that all newborns be screened for the blood condition, regardless of race.
The expert panel, which spent two years studying what is known about sickle-cell disease, said that although the disorder was most prevalent in African-Americans, looking for it only in blacks would miss too many other children who should be treated.


GIDDINGS &amp; LEWIS EXPECTS MACHINE TOOL ORDERS TO RISE
A day after its chairman and chief executive suddenly resigned, Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc., the nation's largest machine tool maker, said it expected new orders to rise.
Executives of the company, which is based in Fond du Lac, Wis., said yesterday that orders of $175 million would be sufficient to reach the 1994 earnings forecast of $1.80 a share.
The company said orders would increase in the second and third quarters.
Giddings &amp; Lewis shares rose $1.75, to $22.25, in Nasdaq trading yesterday, after falling $6.75 on Monday.
The company said William J. Fife Jr. resigned because of policy differences with the board, the board's concerns about certain transactions with Mr.
Fife and the company, and a lapse in communication between Mr.
Fife and company management.


Sampson to Play and Coach in Hong Kong
RALPH SAMPSON, a former National Basketball Association All-Star, will play and coach in Asia's first men's professional basketball league.
DOUGLAS MARAN, executive director of the Asian Basketball Association, said yesterday that the 7-foot-4-inch Sampson will play for Hong Kong when the six-team league makes its debut this summer.
The league will also include teams from China, Taiwan, Korea, Indonesia and the Philippines.
The league will schedule at least 20 games and begin play in late July, Maran said.


Shake-Up Not in Sight As the Devils Depart
The Devils had their team picture taken this afternoon at Byrne Meadowlands Arena,just a day after their elimination by the Penguins in Pittsburgh.
And although several players might have been wondering whether they would be part of the picture next season, the Devils' president and general manager, Lou Lamoriello, warned against any drastic player changes.
The team's management and coaching staff are on even more solid ground, despite New Jersey's failure to advance past the first round of the playoffs for the fourth straight year.


New Head For A.T.&amp; T. Products Unit
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has gone outside its ranks and named Carl S. Ledbetter Jr., a mathematician, computer executive and self-described gadget junkie, to head its $2 billion consumer products operations.
Mr.
Ledbetter, 43, has been a corporate vice president at Sun Microsystems Inc. since 1991.
He previously held senior posts at the Control Data Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation.


10 Years After a Scathing Report, Schools Show Uneven Progress
If ever the work of a blue-ribbon panel seemed destined to gather dust, it was "A Nation at Risk," the 65-page report of the National Commission on Excellence in Education, released at the White House 10 years ago this week.
The panel was appointed by Education Secretary Terrel H. Bell, whose department President Ronald Reagan wanted to abolish.
Mr.
Reagan's initial endorsement of the report was lukewarm.
And with the economy fitfully recovering from recession, there seemed little prospect that the public would want to spend more money on education.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
CLAIRE M. FAGIN, dean of the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing from 1977 to 1992, will become the first nurse to head an Ivy League school.
She has been named interim president of the University of Pennsylvania, stepping in for Sheldon Hackney, who has been nominated by President Clinton to be chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.


Lawrence Calcagno, Abstract Painter, 80
Lawrence Calcagno, an artist who came to prominence during the heyday of Abstract Expressionism in the 1950's for his series "The Black Paintings," died on Thursday in State College, Pa., while visiting relatives.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan and Taos, N.M.
The cause was brain cancer, said Reine Hauser, associate director of the Anderson Gallery in Buffalo, which had often displayed his work.


Lillian Batlin Garvey, Family Physician, 77
Dr.
Lillian Batlin Garvey, a family physician who practiced on the Upper East Side for 47 years, died on Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 77 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was bone marrow disease, her family said.


Costa Rica Gunmen Free Ailing Justice And Ease Demands
Armed gunmen holding most of this country's 22-judge Supreme Court hostage released one justice today after he complained of ill health, Government officials said.
Jesus Ramirez, one of 19 judges and 5 others being held in a second-floor courtroom, left the building in mid-morning, a spokesman for the Ministry of Public Security said.
The police said 22 men and 2 women were still being held.


Richard B. Donchian; Commodities Specialist, 87
Richard B. Donchian, an early leader in the commodities futures market, died Saturday at a hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 87 and lived in Pompano Beach, Fla.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Ooh, What a Little Cinnamon Can Do
CINNAMON is often used in Greek cooking; so, adding a little to an ordinary dish of chicken in tomato sauce provides a Greek accent.
Today's menu is based on a traditional Greek dish that calls for a whole chicken and long cooking.
You can achieve a similar result in less than 30 minutes.
The cinnamon serves another purpose as well.
Cinnamon is a sweet spice.
Like nutmeg, it makes food seem sweet even when there is little sugar in the dish.
The combination of cinnamon and just one teaspoon of sugar tempers the normal acidity of the tomatoes in the sauce.


Pepsico Registers an Earnings Gain of 11%
Pepsico Inc. reported an 11 percent rise in first-quarter profit yesterday, reflecting double-digit profit growth in each of its divisions -- soft drinks, snack foods and fast-food restaurants.
Earnings of $260.4 million, or 32 cents a share, compared with profit in the comparable quarter last year of $235 million, or 29 cents a share.
Revenue rose 13 percent, to $5.1 billion, and operating profit grew 16 percent.
The 1992 results did not include the effects of an accounting change for retirement benefits, which produced a net loss for the earlier quarter.


Fire in Virginia Leaves 75 Homeless and 2 Seriously Injured


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Recalled Rico Rossy, infielder, and Dennis Rasmussen, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
Placed Frank DiPino, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Al Leiter, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Scottt Brow, pitcher, from Knoxville of the  Southern League.
National League
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Placed Steve Finley, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Basketball  United States Basketball League
DAYTONA HOOTERS -- Named Warren Walk director of marketing.
WESTCHESTER STALLIONS -- Signed Chris Washburn, center.
Football  National Football League
CHICAGO BEARS -- Agreed to terms with Shane Matthews, quarterback.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Allen DeGraffenreid, wide receiver; Mark Staten, offensive lineman; Brad Lebo, quarterback; Ron Williams and Mike Faulkerson, running backs; Clarence Sevillian, wide receiver; David Frisch, tight end; Artis Ford, defensive end; Darius Hadley, defensive back; Brian Piotrowski, offensive tackle; and Brad Smith, Gary Casper, and Karmeeleyah McGill, linebackers.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Fired Reed Johnson, personnel director.
Announced the resignation of Bobby Marks, scout.
Announced the retirement of Hugh Davidson, scout.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Steve Rohrscheib, quarterback.
NEW YORK JETS -- Waived Sheldon Canley, running back.
Agreed to terms with Mick Barsala, linebacker; Robert Davis and James Spencer, defensive tackles; Marcus Perry and Greg Sherwin, offensive tackles; Rick Sayles and Chris Spencer, wide receivers; Damon Pieri, safety; and Jamie Redmond, cornerback.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Vince Jordan and Michael LeSure, wide receivers; Yonnie Jackson and Alan Cross, tight ends; Kurt Loertscher, linebacker, and Randall Parsons, center.
Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Marvin Pollard, defensive back, and Eric Henley, wide receiver.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Signed Marquel Fleetwood, quarterback, and Darvell Huffman, wide receiver.
SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Signed Garry Frank, offensive tackle, and Greg Gilbert, linebacker.
SASKETCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Signed Shawn Graves, quarterback.


Ex-Commissioner of New York Named Drug 'Czar'
Lee P. Brown, the former Police Commissioner of New York City, has been chosen to be President Clinton's senior official for drug policy, officials in Congress and law enforcement said yesterday.
White House officials would not confirm the choice of Mr.
Brown to become director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, but officials in Congress and law enforcement said they had been informed of the President's decision by Administration aides.


The Pop Life
Country in the City
Having won over much of the rest of the United States, country music may be poised, finally, to conquer Manhattan.
At least that is what the producers of "Country Takes Manhattan" are hoping.
Radio City Music Hall Productions has corralled some of country's top performers -- including Dolly Parton, Billy Ray Cyrus, Wynonna, Mary-Chapin Carpenter, Clint Black, Travis Tritt, Willie Nelson, the Highwaymen and Trisha Yearwood -- for this 10-day country-music festival, beginning May 14.
The festival will be at a variety of locations, including Radio City, Carnegie Hall, the Beacon Theater and Central Park.


Review/Film: The Execution Protocol; Giving a Humane Face To Capital Punishment
The Potosi Correctional Center near Mineral Point, Mo., is a clean, well-lighted place.
From the outside, it looks like a compound of big, functional, not ungraceful cement-block bunkers that sits in the middle of a broad grassy plain from which each tree, bush and weed has been removed.
The view is Spartan, almost abstract, but then the people at Potosi don't often look out.
Attention is focused inward.
Potosi, the subject of Stephen Trombley's haunting new documentary, "The Execution Protocol," was built to house some 300 inmates convicted of capital crimes.
It prides itself on being as up to date as any prison in the United States as well as one of the most humane.
In a Shavian twist, it's the humaneness of the place that Mr.
Trombley, an American-born, English-based film maker, finds to be so merciless.


Experts to Review Clinton Health Plan
President Clinton has named 47 doctors, nurses and other medical experts to assess his plan to revamp the nation's health care system before he sends it to Congress this spring.
The White House did not announce formation of the panel until Monday, but a member of the group said today that members held their first meeting two weeks ago.


Foreign Investment, Key to New York City's Growth; Unlocking Japan Trade
To the Editor:
In his Op-Ed article "It's Clinton's Turn to Bargain With Japan" (April 15), Clyde Prestowitz identifies the composition of trade between the United States and Japan as the area of most concern in U.S.-Japan trade relations.
He suggests that the best way to address this concern is for Japan to adhere to prior agreements to purchase more auto parts from U.S. firms.


Key Stuns The Angels With 1-Hitter
Jimmy Key could feel it.
Maybe this would be the night he would do it.
The Angels were taking silly swings, balls were rolling off the ends of their bats and dribbling around the infield.
Some never made contact.
A fly ball was an occurrence.
Maybe this would be the night for Key's first no-hitter.
Not quite.
The flirtation with a no-hitter was more of a fling as Key held the Angels hitless for five innings, kept the prominent zero entrenched on the Anaheim Stadium scoreboard and forced his teammates to avoid him when he arrived in the dugout.
The fling ended when Gary DiSarcina began the sixth inning by lining a fastball away to center field on a 3-1 pitch.


Cut New York's Un-Welcome Tax
The tax on an average hotel room in New York City is a staggering 21.25 percent. That's
double
the average for other big cities and, obviously, a crippling disadvantage for the Big Apple.
Bills pending in the State Legislature would cut the tax to 16.25 percent.
It would still be the nation's highest, but a lot more sensible than it is now.
An overnight stay in New York averages $113 and change -- plus tax.
For that average room, the tax would be about $24.
For a $200-plus room in one of mid-Manhattan's upscale hotels, the tax for just one night approaches $50!
Might that make a tourist or a convention planner think twice about New York versus, say, New Orleans, where the tax is 11 percent?
Of course it would, and does.


Alois M. Nagler, 85, A Theater Historian
Alois M. Nagler, a scholar of theater history, died on Monday at his home in Wallingford, Conn.
He was 85.
He had been in failing health, said a friend, Phyllis Warfel.


Inspector Doubts C.I.A. Role in Sheik's U.S. Entry
The State Department's inspector general has told Congress that he has so far found no evidence that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman received any improper American assistance in obtaining a visa to enter the United States, according to Congressional officials.
Instead, Mr.
Abdel Rahman, the Egyptian cleric whose followers include suspects in the World Trade Center bombing, appears to have benefited only from disorganization at the United States Embassy in Khartoum, Sudan, the inspector general has said.


Market Place; Will rising insurance stocks continue to lift USF&amp;G
EVER since the destruction by Hurricane Andrew in southern Florida last August, the stocks of property casualty insurers have headed skyward.
In the perverse world of insurance, losses could mean higher prices and thus eventually higher earnings.
One of the biggest winners has been the Baltimore-based USF&amp;G, a painfully troubled insurer at the end of the 1980's that was already in the midst of a turnaround when the big storm struck.
Between changes instituted by new management and euphoria over insurance stocks, USF&amp;G shares rose from 6 in 1991 to as high as 19 5/8 this spring.
The stock gained 3/8 yesterday, to 17 7/8.


Corrections
A Washington at Work article on Saturday about Torie Osborn, executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, referred incorrectly to the role of Mario Cooper at the Democratic National Convention in New York last year.
He was the convention manager, not the floor manager.


Books of The Times; Caring for People and Saving Wildlife
At the Hand of Man  Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife  By Raymond Bonner  322 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
The main theme that emerges from Raymond Bonner's powerful front-line report on the fate of Africa's wildlife can be found in a note at the end of "At the Hand of Man," his eye-opening new book:


After 171 Years, Ulysses S. Grant Still Commands a Salute


Lintas Looking For Creative Change
Lintas New York is interviewing a number of high-level creative executives to work on accounts like Diet Coke and I.B.M., F. Stone Roberts, president and chief operating officer, said.
Mr.
Roberts was replying to reports this week in trade publications that the agency was looking for a creative talent to assume the duties of creative director on Diet Coke from Tony DeGregorio, executive vice president and chief creative officer.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the trial of Robert A. Altman on charges of bribery and fraud referred incorrectly to the bank involved.
It is the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN I first came to this country before World War II, my English was shaky.
Every vegetable, every fish, every herb presented a linguistic high jump.
In a way, however, this worked to my advantage.
I had to learn the precise English word for everything I cooked.
In the process, I learned some things that even many Americans do not know.
The terms sole and flounder are good examples.
Many North Atlantic flatfish are called sole even though they may belong to the flounder family.
Sole of all kinds is the most popular American eating fish, so it behooves cooks to know its variations.


Hartford Assembly Saves A 5¦ Deposit on Bottles
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s plan to replace Connecticut's 5-cent bottle deposit with a 5-cent-a-bottle tax was killed today by the General Assembly's Appropriations Committee, which voted to continue paying for environmental protection through existing taxes.
The committee's 28-to-20 vote on the budget today was the Legislature's first formal response to Mr.
Weicker's spending plan for the next two years.
Committee leaders said they believed their plan retains Mr.
Weicker's priorities, especially for education, and also keeps the budget at his $8.6 billion figure for the year that begins on July 1.


Shoemaker Hopes for Rare Derby Double Feat
Bill Shoemaker rode 8,833 winners during his 41 years as a jockey, and four of them were winners of the Kentucky Derby.
But he will return to Churchill Downs this week in a new role with a new goal: as a trainer trying to match the record of his old friend and rival, Johnny Longden, the only one to win the Derby as both jockey and trainer.
Longden won the Derby in 1943 as the rider on Count Fleet and came back 26 years later to win it as the trainer of Majestic Prince.
But if Shoemaker can get Allen E. Paulson's Diazo to the winner's circle on Saturday, it will be an even more dramatic achievement: he has spent the last two years in a wheelchair, paralyzed from the neck down after his van crashed down an embankment near his home in California.


Troubled Tennis Coach And His Ability to Charm
For two decades, Gary Wilensky had been dismissed from job after job.
His employers said his behavior was unbalanced, his intense attention to his young charges inappropriate.
But Mr.
Wilensky was a charmer, said friends, colleagues and former students of the popular New York tennis coach who killed himself on Saturday after trying to abduct a favorite student to a homemade prison in the Adirondacks.


Denial of Contract Urged for Bronx Agency
The New York City Comptroller's office yesterday urged the Dinkins administration not to renew two contracts with a major South Bronx community-service agency.
Its president, Ramon Velez, had failed to disclose his involvement in several businesses that were disqualified from Federal contracts after pleading guilty to bid-rigging, the Comptroller's office said.
Testifying before the Mayor's Office of Contracts, Marc Schindelheim, the associate general counsel for the Comptroller, said that the South Bronx agency had a history of "financial and administrative mismanagement" that had resulted in the termination of state and Federal financing.


4 European Airlines Seek Merger To Become the Continent's Giant
Four European international airlines said today that they had agreed to pursue a merger that would lead to the creation of Europe's largest overseas carrier.
The lines -- Swissair, Scandinavian Airlines System, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Austrian Airlines -- said they would try to establish a jointly owned company by next year, with a new name and a single balance sheet.
Swissair, S.A.S. and KLM would each own 30 percent of the new carrier and Austrian Airlines, 10 percent.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Frank McNeirney's recent recollection of the neon signs that lighted his train trip through Long Island City en route to Hempstead, L.I., some 40 or more years ago took me back to another locale just 30 years ago.
In those days we referred to the East River as "the Pepsi Cola River" and to the lordly Hudson as "the Spry River," courtesy of the signs that flashed, glistened and dominated the dark waters bordering residential neighborhoods.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Seles Returns With an Easy Victory  Competing for the first time since Feb. 21, Monica Seles easily beat Maria Strandlund, 6-2, 6-2, in the opening round of the Citizens Cup in Hamburg, Germany.
The top-ranked Seles, who was sidelined by a viral infection, kept the pressure on Strandlund throughout with her powerful ground strokes.
But her layoff showed, as she made several mistakes on easy shots on clay.
Sixth-seeded Anke Huber edged Bettina Fulco, 6-4, 6-7 (6-8), 6-2, while No. 7 Magdalena Maleeva beat Christina Singer 6-4, 7-5. (AP) Sampras Advances: Top-ranked Pete Sampras, seeded No. 1, breezed into the second round of the A.T.&amp;T.
Challenge in Duluth, Ga., near Atlanta.
Sampras beat Vincent Spadea, a former junior champion, 6-3, 6-4, in the clay-court tournament.
Fourth-seeded Brad Gilbert rallied past Ellis Ferreira, 4-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5). (AP) Davin Has Becker's Number: Franco Davin upset second-seeded Boris Becker for the second time in three weeks, winning by 6-2, 6-2 in the opening round of the City of Madrid tournament.
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg defeated Jose Antonio Conde, 6-0, 6-3, in his opener.
Davin, an Argentine ranked No. 61, outran Becker, who was guilty of several unforced errors and drew catcalls from the crowd at the end of the match.
Since returning from a two-month layoff because of a viral infection, the fourth-ranked German has won only one match in his three clay-court tournaments.
He lost to Davin in three sets in the second round in Nice, France. (AP)


Yale Study About Allen Flawed, Expert Testifies
A child psychiatrist testified yesterday that experts at Yale-New Haven Hospital had mishandled interviews and used faulty methodology to conclude that Woody Allen had not molested his 7-year-old daughter, Dylan.
Testifying at the custody trial of Mr.
Allen and Mia Farrow, the psychiatrist, Dr.
Stephen Herman, called the Yale report "seriously flawed." He said the investigators had developed questionable interpretations of many of Dylan's statements to them, inappropriately destroyed original notes of the meetings and leaped to unsubstantiated conclusions about people whom they had not even interviewed.


CHRONICLE
CHARLTON HESTON, known variously as Moses, Ben-Hur and Michelangelo, took on a new role yesterday in Paris.
In his words, "I am the announcer of the gift."
Indeed he was, announcing at a news conference in the Musee Guimet that SmithKline Beecham, the pharmaceutical company, will donate 100,000 doses of polio vaccine to CARE, the humanitarian organization.


Kevin Oldham Memorial
A memorial service for the composer and pianist Kevin Oldham is to be held at 3 P.M. on Saturday at Marble Collegiate Church, Fifth Avenue at 29th Street.
Works by Mr.
Oldham for chorus, voice and piano are to be performed by the church's choir; Karen Kushner, a pianist, and Carl Halvorson, a tenor.
Mr.
Oldham died on March 11 at the age of 32.


Bridge
After nearly 60 years of simon-pure amateurism, the American Contract Bridge League has followed various European examples and sanctioned a tournament with cash prizes.
It will begin next Tuesday at the Las Vegas Hilton and will last five days.
Since most of the prize money is provided by sponsors, it will surely attract the good players: For an entry fee of $100 a person in the Open Pairs, for example, a pair will have a chance to win a first prize of $5,000.
The total prize money will be at least $25,000. (Information is available from Jan Crossley, 702-732-2904.)


Hawks on Both Sides Are Quick to Impugn the Negotiations
Uncompromising hawks among both Israelis and Palestinians denounced the resumption of Middle East peace talks today in Washington, making it clear that if an agreement is ever reached, it will encounter strong opposition on each side.
Palestinian hard-liners called a strike that brought commercial life to a standstill in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and in Arab sections of East Jerusalem.


Consumer Optimism Improves
To the surprise of many economists, consumers became slightly less pessimistic in April for the first time this year.
The Conference Board, a New York-based business organization, reported yesterday that its closely followed consumer confidence index bounced up to 67.7 in April, from 63.2 in March, regaining nearly a third of its 15-point drop since December, when post-election euphoria peaked.


Washburn Making a Comeback in U.S.B.L.
CHRIS WASHBURN, whose brief N.B.A. career ended in 1988 because of substance-abuse problems, is making a comeback with the Westchester Stallions of the United States Basketball League.
"I've been training for over six months for this season," the 6-foot-11-inch center said Monday.
"This is an opportunity for me to demonstrate my skills and to work my way back into the N.B.A."


Corrections
A recipe last Wednesday for Caesar salad described one step incompletely.
The garlic and oil should be refrigerated as they marinate.


Looking a Gift Painting in the Dollar Sign; Paterson Examines Its Legacy of Art: How Much It's Worth and How to Restore It
During the first half of the century, industrialists and business leaders filled the Danforth Library here with gifts of books and works of art.
But as important industries left the city and its economy declined, so did appreciation for its cultural treasures.
Much of the art, including statues, bronzes, rare furniture and more than 60 paintings, is now in storage and, like the building itself, in need of maintenance and repair.
But while a makeover is planned for the 88-year-old library, an acrimonious debate is growing over the art -- what it is worth, who should care for it and even where it is.


Serbs Attack Muslim Stronghold in Northwest Bosnia
Defying growing international pressure aimed at forcing an end to the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbian fighters mounted a new ground and artillery attack today on the Muslim-held area around the town of Bihac.
Serbs opened the attack as new United Nations sanctions on the former Yugoslavia took effect.
Under the sanctions, Yugoslav assets abroad are to be confiscated, and the transporting of most foreign-made goods through the two remaining Yugoslav republics, Serbia and Montenegro, is forbidden.


Rare Threat of Stroke at the Beauty Salon
THE position commonly used for shampooing at beauty salons, with the neck tipped far backward over the edge of a sink, can diminish the blood supply to the brain, sometimes precipitating strokes in older people, a new survey has found.
In today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, Dr.
Michael Weintraub described five women between the ages of 54 and 84 who developed serious neurological symptoms requiring hospitalization after shampoos at beauty parlors.


SERVICE TO BLOCK EAVESDROPPING ON CELLULAR PHONES
Safecall Inc. plans a service that would block eavesdroppers from listening in on cellular telephone conversations.
Although cellular eavesdropping is illegal, thousands of radio scanners have been sold that allow users to tune in conversations from passing cars and people.


Euro Disney Needs to Raise Funds in Face of Loss
Faced by a persistent European recession and a mixed response to its attractions, Euro Disney said today that it would incur a substantial loss for the current fiscal year and would need to raise more money to shore up its finances.
A statement from Euro Disney, which is 49 percent owned by the Walt Disney Company, said the concern had a net loss of 1.08 billion francs ($203 million) for the six months that ended March 31.


Dinkins to Seek Service Cutbacks As $500 Million Shortfall Is Seen
The Dinkins administration acknowledged yesterday that it would be forced to reduce city services to close a half-billion-dollar budget gap it now projects for the next fiscal year.
The unexpectedly grim fiscal news put Mayor David N. Dinkins in the uncomfortable position of having to seek politically unpopular service cuts at a time when he is running for re-election.
The budget for the current fiscal year was balanced last June without significant cuts and had left some Dinkins advisers hopeful that such measures could be avoided in the new budget.


SEEKS TO DROP WARSHIP BAN
Defense Secretary Les Aspin will order the military this week to drop most of its restrictions on women in aerial and naval combat, senior Pentagon officials said today.
Mr.
Aspin is expected to issue a directive on Thursday ordering the armed services to let women fly aircraft in combat.
The Administration will also ask Congress to repeal a law barring women from serving on many warships.
Finally, each service will be directed to justify all remaining jobs that are off limits to women, including service in ground combat units.


Landmarks Panel Mired in Detail, Critics Say
Most everybody knows that SoHo, once a forlorn place of scrap metal merchants and rag sellers, is now a neighborhood of galleries and designer lofts, but few people are aware that planting trees is forbidden in most of the district.
That has to do with the way history is preserved in New York.
SoHo residents found that out when they tried to get some green in their parkless part of town, only to learn the Landmarks Preservation Commission does not allow tree planting in SoHo, because there were no trees there when the neighborhood was developed a century ago as an industrial district.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Clinton Administration's trade policy is nearly paralyzed because of deep ideological divisions and turf battles pitting the views of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen against those of U.S. trade representative Mickey Kantor.  [ Page A1. ]
SAS, KLM, Swissair and Austrian Airlines will pursue a merger that could create Europe's largest overseas carrier.  [ A1. ]


As TV Gets a New Star, It Wonders: Who Is He?
Inside NBC yesterday, it was hard to get an answer to the question that was being asked all over the television industry: "
Who
is Conan O'Brien?"
Few NBC executives knew whether he was married or single, whether he had always wanted to perform comedy while he was writing it for shows like "Saturday Night Live" and "The Simpsons," or whether he had ever hired an illegal alien to clean his apartment.


What the Check Doesn't Tell About the Price of a Meal
IF dining out in the 1980's was mostly about big plates with small portions, in the 1990's the focus is on value.
And when every dollar counts, it helps to know what you are buying.
What costs are hidden under that slab of sirloin or among the strands of fettuccine?
Whether it's steak or pasta, paying for a meal in a restaurant involves much more than merely purchasing ingredients that have been cooked and arranged on a dish.
Cooks have to grill the steak or boil the pasta, waiters have to serve it, and they all must be paid.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; NBC's choice of unknown comic causes some speculation about less revenue for 'Late Night'
THE decision by NBC to entrust its lucrative "Late Night" talk show to an unknown comedy writer named Conan O'Brien has brought out the comedian in executives of agency and media companies.
After unleashing their retorts, they expressed concern that punch lines delivered by a no-name might hurt NBC's bottom line.
"Maybe I'd break Jay Leno's legs and have O'Brien be a guest host" on "Tonight" to gain him much-needed exposure, Steve Auerbach, executive vice president of national electronic media at the DeWitt Media Inc. buying service in New York, said yesterday.


Arts Endowment Awards $53 Million
The National Endowment for the Arts announced the awarding of $53 million in Federal grants today, including more than $9 million to agencies and organizations in New York State.
Among the recipients was the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which was given $565,000 to support the International Theater Project to bring theater companies, actors and directors to the academy to perform works from their repertories.
The New York Philharmonic received $243,100 to engage young conductors, perform commissioned works and present free concerts in the city and in Suffolk and Westchester Counties.


Parks Chief's View May Help to Block Cigarette Ad at Shea
After weeks of carefully avoiding the words, Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum said last night that she thought a billboard promoting cigarettes in Shea Stadium was "not in keeping with the character and dignity of the stadium" -- a statement that may enable antismoking advocates to force its removal.
Ms.
Gotbaum was using the language of a clause in the Mets' stadium lease that empowers the Parks Commissioner to ban advertising she deems unacceptable for the city-owned stadium.
But Ms.
Gotbaum said that she did not have such authority in this case, since the clause also says that the Parks Commissioner's opinion must be "reasonable."


Finding Cult Leader's Remains: Delicate but Doable Task
Out of the ashes of the fire last week at the Branch Davidian compound near here, forensic specialists are still trying to recover and identify the remains of David Koresh, the cult leader.
Through fingerprinting, dental records, X-rays and possibly DNA testing, the authorities remain confident that positive identification is only a matter of time.
Thus far, 45 bodies have been recovered.


McEwen Is Winner of Red Smith Award
TOM McEWEN, sports editor of The Tampa Tribune for 29 years, yesterday was named the 1993 winner of The Associated Press Sports Editors' Red Smith Award for lifetime achievement.
McEwen, 70, is the only journalist in the Florida Sports Hall of Fame and has been named the state's Sportswriter of the Year 19 times.
He was The Tribune's sports editor from 1962-1991 and still writes his column, The Morning After, three times a week as a special correspondent.


Italian Panel Votes to Strip Andreotti's Immunity
A panel of the Italian Senate recommended today that the country's elder statesman, Giulio Andreotti, be stripped of his parliamentary immunity from prosecution so that magistrates can pursue an investigation into accusations that he associated with the Mafia.
A final decision will be made by the full Senate, probably on May 6, but the ruling was nonetheless a major setback both to Mr.
Andreotti's campaign to stave off a public trial and to his personal standing.


Fans Gush Over Him As Iafrate Tips His Hat
It was just after midnight, and Al Iafrate, fresh from extricating the Washington Capitals from their do-or-die playoff predicament by scoring the first hat trick of his life, was playing down his role as catalyst on a team that relies on its defense for its best offense.
"I just happened to be the guy," said Iafrate after the Capitals' 6-4 victory Monday night.
"It was all about the timing thing."


Citizen Olajuwon Rests Case
All at once, Hakeem Olajuwon is eligible for the playoffs, the next Dream Team and the United States Armed Forces.
His 12th basketball season in America has been his unadulterated best, starting suspiciously with his calling his team owner a coward but concluding spiritedly with his name on almost everyone's most valuable player ballot.
"If I am ever going to win m.v.p, this is as good of a chance as I've got," said Olajuwon, the Houston Rockets center who has lit up David Robinson for 45 points, Patrick Ewing for 42 and sent both videotapes home, express mail, to Lagos, Nigeria.


Lakers' Divac Is Fined for a Flagrant Foul
VLADE DIVAC of the Los Angeles Lakers was fined $5,000 by the N.B.A. yesterday for a flagrant foul on Seattle's NATE McMILLAN.
Divac was ejected during Friday night's game after the foul, which occurred with 7 minutes 24 seconds remaining in the third quarter.
The ejection carries an additional $250 fine.  (AP)


Mideast Talks Resume as They Adjourned: Bickering
After a four-month hiatus during which the United States changed Administrations and a sharp increase in violence prompted an Israeli crackdown on Palestinians, the Middle East peace talks resumed today at the State Department.
With rising and conflicting pressures on all parties, Israeli negotiators held separate talks with their counterparts from Syria, Jordan and Lebanon in the morning, and with the Palestinians later in the day.


It's Muffin People vs. Sony People, in a Battle Waged in Court
THIS much is certain, relations between Sony USA and Baked From Scratch are not what anyone would call amicable.
In fact, things are so dicey that Baked From Scratch has put up signs in the windows of its two muffin and coffee kiosks in the Sony Building on Madison at 56th Street saying things like, "This Cookie Will Not Crumble," and "We Shall Overcrumb."


LACROSSE
Hofstra


Review/Film: The Execution Protocol; Giving a Humane Face To Capital Punishment
The Potosi Correctional Center near Mineral Point, Mo., is a clean, well-lighted place.
From the outside, it looks like a compound of big, functional, not ungraceful cement-block bunkers that sits in the middle of a broad grassy plain from which each tree, bush and weed has been removed.
The view is Spartan, almost abstract, but then the people at Potosi don't often look out.
Attention is focused inward.
Potosi, the subject of Stephen Trombley's haunting new documentary, "The Execution Protocol," was built to house some 300 inmates convicted of capital crimes.
It prides itself on being as up to date as any prison in the United States as well as one of the most humane.
In a Shavian twist, it's the humaneness of the place that Mr.
Trombley, an American-born, English-based film maker, finds to be so merciless.


Yeltsin's Task: Turning Moral Victory Into Lasting Gain
With nearly complete tallies confirming President Boris N. Yeltsin's impressive vote of confidence in the referendum on Sunday, speculation turned today to his options in trying to turn this moral victory into political advantage.
Mr.
Yeltsin, who had much to lose, is in a significantly stronger position than he was a week ago, but his quandary remains the same.
He wants to crack the iron mold of a Soviet-era Constitution and holdover legislature, the Congress of People's Deputies, but he can do so only with extra-constitutional means.


WARNACO INC. (N)
Warnaco Inc., the lingerie and sportswear manufacturer whose labels include Warner's, Olga and Chaps by Ralph Lauren, posted strong first-quarter profits yesterday, enhanced by the company's continuing debt reduction.
Excluding a $10.5 million charge for changes in the accounting rules governing retirement health benefits, Warnaco's net income from operations more than doubled, to $10.8 million, from $4.4 million in the period a year earlier.
In the 1992 quarter, the company took a $46.5 million charge for early reduction of debt.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 23
Apr. 16
Apr. 24
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.1
7.2
Distillate production, daily
1.3
1.3
1.2
Gasoline stocks
222.7
224.2
218.4
Distillate stocks
99.9
97.7
94.6
Crude imports, daily
6.8
6.4
6.0
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.6
1.9
Crude stocks
345.4
345.1
350.7
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
89.3
88.9
87.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Taster's Choice Pair In Paris Rendezvous
The pot thickens for the Taster's Choice couple as the pair return to television next week for part seven of their serial advertising campaign for the instant coffee created by McCann-Erickson New York.
The new commercial is the most amorous episode yet.
The flirtatious spot picks up where the sixth spot left off in January, with viewers wondering whether the couple, portrayed by the actors Sharon Maughan and Anthony Head, would meet in Paris.
Sure enough, the two do, and they share their first intimate moment -- a kiss. (Those expecting more intimacy need to be reminded this is not cable television.)


U.S. Wants Group of 7 to Focus on Trade Imbalances
With an eye on Japan's huge trade surplus, the Clinton Administration sought today to shift the agenda of the Group of Seven industrial nations, pressing them to place more emphasis on reducing trade imbalances.
Two days before the Group of Seven's finance ministers gather in Washington, Administration officials indicated they would use Thursday's meeting not only to seek to speed up global growth but also to pursue one of President Clinton's principal foreign policy goals -- reducing America's trade deficit, especially with Japan.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
2.99
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.88
3.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.96
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.62
5.54
7.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.83
8.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.77
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.96
5.99
6.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


People
*
Mary Ellen Sloan, president of Meridian Communications, Lexington, Ky., was named to the new position of chairwoman and chief executive.
Don Van Erden, senior vice president of marketing, was named to succeed Ms.
Sloan as president.


Accounting Board Picks Two for Five-Year Terms
A former treasurer of a computer company and the director of bond research for a leading money management firm were named yesterday to five-year terms on the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which sets accounting standards for American companies.
John M. Foster, 44, a former vice president and treasurer of the Compaq Computer Company was named to one of two seats reserved for former corporate officials.
He resigned from Compaq in December.


Toronto Journal; Coming Up Fast, Tory Dark Horse From Quebec
She was supposed to be different, a fresh face with new ideas, a baby boomer from Vancouver who would become the first woman to be Canadian Prime Minister and lead the Progressive Conservative Party to a third straight election victory in the fall.
That may still happen, but after two television debates and a round on the hustings, the message of Defense Minister Kim Campbell is being perceived by many Canadians as short on both substance and new directions.


Many Questions Raised in Texas On Murder Case
Gov.
Ann W. Richards is reviewing a request for an emergency 30-day stay of execution for Gary Graham, a Texas inmate facing death by injection on Thursday even as his lawyers raise factual questions about the case.
"She has made no decision," said Leticia Vasquez, a spokeswoman for the Governor, adding that it was doubtful that she would decide before Wednesday evening, pending the outcome of a flurry of legal activity on Mr.
Graham's behalf.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS TO SEEK SERVICE REDUCTIONS
The Dinkins administration acknowledged that it would be forced to reduce city services to close a half-billion-dollar budget gap it now projects for the next fiscal year, putting Mayor David N. Dinkins in the uncomfortable position of having to seek service cuts at a time when he is running for re-election.
A1.
LANDMARKS COMMISSION ANGERS CRITICS
The Landmarks Preservation Commission, created after an architecturally and historically significant version of Penn Station was torn down nearly 30 years ago, is attracting critics who say that it is doing too much preventing and that useful projects are being blocked.
A1.
HOLTZMAN SENATE FUND DIDN'T COVER GALA
Elizabeth Holtzman's Senate campaign financed a primary-night reception last fall through a fund that was not authorized to spend money in the Senate race, city, state and Federal election records show.
The move appears to have violated Federal election laws.
B3.
SCHOOL BOARD RACES ACCELERATE
With New York City's school board races entering the final week, the Rev.
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition poured voter guides into churches and synagogues as campaigning by gay advocates and other liberal groups also picked up steam.
B3.
TROUBLED TENNIS COACH HAD CALMER SIDE
For two decades, Gary Wilensky, the popular New York tennis coach who killed himself on Saturday after trying to abduct a favorite student to a homemade prison in the Adirondacks, had been dismissed from job after job.
His employers said his behavior was unbalanced.
But friends said Mr.
Wilensky was a charmer.
B3.
Investigation chief defends handling of complaint by Transportation Commissioner two years ago.
B3.
Day-care center hazards reported.
B2.
Dinkins administration is urged not to renew contracts with a South Bronx community-service agency headed by Ramon Velez.
B2.
The Parks Commissioner's opinion on a Marlboro billboard may help it be removed.
B2.
Expert faults inquiry into Woody Allen molestation charges.
B4.
Lee P. Brown, the former Police Commissioner, is chosent to be Federal drug czar.
A15.
REGION  WEICKER LOSES BID ON DEPOSITS
Governor Weicker's plan to replace Connecticut's 5-cent bottle deposit with a 5-cent-a-bottle tax was killed by the General Assembly's Appropriations Committee.
B6.
D'AMATO DEFENSE PRESSES UNISYS WORKER
The lawyer for Armand P. D'Amato, on trial for mail fraud, tried to show that top officials of the Unisys Corporation knew that Mr.
D'Amato had been hired by a company employee to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, for at least seven months before moving to end the relationship.
B6.
A Connecticut company returns from Mexico, saying the lower wages did not compensate for the lack of worker productivity there.
B6.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3  Chronicle B4


Bond Market Shows Doubt Over Clinton
President Clinton has been enamored of the bond market in ways that no recent President has.
Indeed, he and his economic aides have often pointed to the drop in Treasury yields to lows not seen in well over a decade as confirmation that his economic program has been well received.
But in the last several days, the bond market has been losing some of its confidence that Mr.
Clinton will be successful in cutting the record Federal budget deficit.
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds have dropped and yields have risen.
In a sharp decline yesterday, the price of the 30-year bond was off almost a full point as the yield jumped to 6.90 percent, its highest level in three weeks.


Federal Job-Safety Law, 23 Years Old Today, Needs Updating
To the Editor:
Work can be a dangerous place.
One worker dies every hour of every day, every year -- 10,000 per year overall.
In addition, six million are injured on the job each year and 60,000 are permanently disabled.
Tens of thousands of workers die each year from long-term effects of such occupational diseases as asbestosis and brown lung.


AT TEA WITH: David Larible; A Clown Gets Top Billing By Being No One's Fool
IT is not an illusion.
Across a table, over high tea at the Mayfair Hotel on the Upper East Side, David Larible reveals himself to be a well-adjusted, considerate, self-confident and funny fellow, much like the red-nosed character he plays as the first clown ever to headline the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus.
In a world where so much of what passes for humor seems to draw on neurotic or even psychotic impulses, Mr.
Larible (pronounced lah-ree-blay) is not angry at anyone or getting even.
He does not sneer.
He does not make himself vulnerable to gain sympathy.
He is not even working out his shyness.
He is a proud clown.
Still, he makes people laugh.
How can this be?
How can anyone be funny at no one else's expense?


Foreign Investment, Key to New York City's Growth
To the Editor:
With unemployment and business activity still a serious problem in New York City, questions have been raised as to why Mayor David N. Dinkins has over the past several months chosen to lead missions to Europe and Japan.


The Suns Apparently Have Their Eyes on Dudley
Are the Phoenix Suns prepared to make a big push to get Chris Dudley should he be available on the free-agent market?
Apparently they are, and according to one National Basketball Association general manager who asked not to be identified, the Suns are even prepared to give forward Tom Chambers his walking papers, which would open a salary slot for Dudley.
The Suns won't talk about Dudley -- "I can't talk about Chris Dudley -- that would be tampering," Cotton Fitzsimmons, Phoenix's senior executive vice president, said -- but he is apparently a player they would love to have.


Christopher Explains Conditions For Use of U.S. Force in Bosnia
Seeking to reassure lawmakers and others who fear being drawn into a new Vietnam, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Congress today that President Clinton will not authorize military action in Bosnia unless he is certain the United States can avoid getting more deeply involved than it wants.
Mr.
Christopher laid out four strict tests for the use of force: the goal must be stated clearly, there must be a strong likelihood of success, there must be "an exit strategy" and the action must win sustained public support.


Stocks Climb Broadly as Dow Gains 17.56
Skittish investors, apparently relieved that the Clinton Administration was being frustrated in its spending plans or simply exasperated with the last six losing sessions, bid up the stock market on a broad front yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 17.56 points, to 3415.93.
After ignoring positive news on consumer confidence from the Conference Board and falling 14 points, the Dow surged nearly 19 points in the last hour of trading.
Computerized buy programs helped, traders said.


Review/Television; Patriots Trying to Repair A Broken Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland may not be at the top of many vacation itineraries these days, but in the minds of Glen Barr and Paddy Doherty, their city of Londonderry, rich in history and beauty, could be a grand tourist attraction.
"Sons of Derry" conveys their vision.
Unfortunately, few of their compatriots are in so accommodating a mood.
Glen and Paddy, as they are called in tonight's likable documentary, produced by two New York University professors, Terence Moran and Marcia Rock, are builders.
Paddy has plans for rebuilding the mostly Roman Catholic inner city, with a view to attracting visitors.
Glen is renovating buildings in the largely Protestant, upscale Waterside area, in hopes of keeping young couples from leaving.
And both are trying to break down the religious, economic and political walls that keep the people of Northern Ireland divided.


Brewers' Yount Undergoes Knee Surgery
ROBIN YOUNT, with only two previous trips to the disabled list in two decades with the Milwaukee Brewers, underwent arthroscopic surgery yesterday for torn cartilage in his right knee.
Dr.
PAUL JACOBS, the Brewers' physician, repaired the tear in a 35-minute operation at Sinai Samaritan Hospital in Milwaukee.
Jacobs said Yount, who had to leave Sunday's game after four innings because he couldn't run, would probably miss four weeks.


No Headline
"This truly makes an assignment based on an officer's pilot abilities, flying skills, maturity and judgment with no regard to gender." -- CAPT.
EILEEN ISOLA, an Air Force pilot who will be eligible to fly in combat under a planned Pentagon directive.  [ A14:4. ]


Some Things You Never Forget


Review/Television; One-Woman Show on Black vs. Jew
Tonight at 9, appropriately enough on the eve of the first anniversary of the fires in Los Angeles, public television's "American Playhouse" is presenting the Anna Deavere Smith play "Fires in the Mirror," a harrowing portrait of riots between blacks and Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in August of 1991.
The play had its acclaimed New York premiere a year ago at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
The director for television (stage director Christopher Ashley seems to have become a nonperson in the publicity credits) is George C. Wolfe, who is represented on Broadway with "Jelly's Last Jam" and, in previews, "Angels in America."
Tapping into a journalistic vein that in literature goes back at least as far as John Dos Passos, the television version of Ms.
Smith's one-woman show allows her to embody 19 characters, male and female, black and white, young and old, all of them caught up in the Crown Heights tragedy that left two people dead.
The dialogue is taken verbatim from interviews conducted by Ms.
Smith and, for an Angela Davis segment, Thulani Davis.
The acting sections are framed in black-and-white photographs of the real events, overlaid with music ranging from black hip-hop to traditional Jewish chants.
The production is striking.


Daughters Already at Work, and Succeeding
Sandra Goeken Martis was never encouraged to go into any one of her father's start-up businesses: not MCI Communications, the computer network for the FTD floral service, Airfone or In-Flight Phone.
Not that that stopped her.
"In the early days, I would have said he was the most sexist, male chauvinistic pig in the country," said Ms.
Martis, 35, who charitably chalks it up to her father's desire to protect her from the unkind business world.


Public Day-Care Centers Called Lax on Fire Safety
Hundreds of New York City children are using public day-care centers with fire hazards, according to engineers in the office of the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden.
The engineers investigated four centers in Brooklyn last week after being approached by a construction manager under contract to the city's Human Resources Administration.
The construction manager, Ramsis Elfiki, said at least 20 day-care centers in the city had flammable insulation and damaged ventilation systems.


INSIDE
New Clinton Drug Official
Lee P. Brown, the former Police Commissioner of New York City, has been chosen to be the Clinton Administration's senior official for drug policy, officials said.
Page A15.
China and Taiwan Hold Talks
Delegates from China and Taiwan met in Singapore for their first high-level talks, professing a desire for cordiality and cooperation.
Page A8.
Middle East Talks Resume
After a change in American administrations and violence in Israel and its occupied territories, the Middle East peace talks resumed.
Page A3.


Eritrea's Harder Test Is Peace
Eritrea, soon to become Africa's newest independent state, has fought fiercely for three decades for a bill of divorcement from its landlocked neighbor and recent ruler, Ethiopia.
Thus the near-unanimous vote was expected in this week's referendum formalizing independence.
Yet rejoicing is pretty much confined to Asmara, Eritrea's palm-lined capital.
Other African nations are watching with trepidation.
Statehood for Eritrea will mark the first time that Africa's post-colonial borders have been redrawn, and statehood will be hollow unless Eritreans and Ethiopians can come to terms with each other.


Hole-by-Hole Report On Gooden Is Lacking
Don't you hate it when announcers don't let the news intrude on their game calls?
To certain degrees yesterday during the Mets-Dodgers game, the broadcast teams on WWOR-TV/ Channel 9 and WFAN-AM barely unlocked the door to the stories of Dwight Gooden's enigmatic golf injury that scratched him from starting Monday night and Tony Fernandez's reluctantly revealed kidney stones.
We're especially glad that we don't wait to learn our team social notes from the team's sports voices.
The sources of sports fact and gossip are many and varied.
Some of them are even correct in their reporting.


A 2d Flight Out of Bankruptcy
Continental Airlines has long had a knack for posting noteworthy figures, from turnover in the corner office -- 10 leaders in 11 years -- to the number of airlines in its family tree (five).
And today it is expected to announce a first for any major airline: its second emergence from bankruptcy.
Robert R. Ferguson 3d, Continental's president and chief executive, said yesterday that he was delighted after completing the deal with Continental's investors.
"Now we are able to get back to running a regular airline," he said.
"There will be one less carrier for our big three brethren to complain about," he said, referring to criticism of the advantages enjoyed by carriers in bankruptcy protection.


Gooden's Frustration Is Brought to Boiling Point
Doc Gooden stepped off the mound and advanced on home-plate umpire Bill Hohn.
He was screaming, his finger jabbing wildly at the air, as if to punctuate his diatribe about the appropriate dimensions of a strike zone.
In the Mets' dugout, players rose to their feet in amazement, jaws going slack.
This is not vintage behavior for Gooden.
This is not even once-in-a-blue-moon behavior for Gooden.
He is a man who puts his heat in his fastballs, not in his voice.
He does not get angry, not publicly.
He does not advance on the batter's box like a madman.
And he never, ever, has to be separated from an umpire by his manager.


CHRONICLE
Put this in the category of "Matters that take up the time of judges and lawyers." Judge MICHAEL B. MUKASEY of Federal District Court in Manhattan has dismissed a lawsuit brought against the singer MARIAH CAREY by her stepfather, JOSEPH VIAN, who claimed that she had reneged on an oral contract granting him the right to market Mariah dolls.
The dolls would be modeled after Ms.
Carey and would play her biggest hits.
According to the decision handed down on Monday, Mr.
Vian, who is separated from the singer's mother, Patricia, charged that Ms.
Carey had granted him the right to make the dolls in return for his support, which included "picking her up from late-night recording sessions, providing her with the use of a car, paying for dental care, allowing her to use his boat for business meetings and rehearsals and giving her various items including unused wedding gifts from his marriage to her mother."


A View From the Fence
Behind Western Europe's reluctance to agree to air strikes or ground operations to halt Serbian attacks against Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the fear, expressed today by the European Community's peace negotiator, Lord Owen, of becoming involved in somebody else's civil war.
"Europe must not become combatants in a civil war," Lord Owen said in an interview.
"It will be very difficult for the Europeans to take American suggestions of military action seriously until your forces are also on the ground as peacekeepers."


Port Authority Forecasts Loss Of Jobs in '93
In the latest reminder of the enduring grip of the recession, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey predicted yesterday that employment in the New York region would decline further this year, with a loss of 67,000 jobs.
It would be the fourth straight year of job losses.
The Port Authority also said it expected the region to fare worse than the rest of the nation, as it has for the last five years.


Investigation Chief Defends Inquiry Over Data Contract
The New York City Commissioner of Investigation, Susan E. Shepard, said yesterday that her agency investigated complaints two years ago from Lucius J. Riccio, the Transportation Commissioner, that he was under extraordinary pressure to grant a contract to a data processing company that had been caught up in the municipal scandals of the mid-1980's.
Ms.
Shepard told a City Council committee that an article on Sunday in The New York Times was "flat wrong" when it reported that she apparently did not start a full investigation after hearing Mr.
Riccio's concerns in May 1991.
The Times article was based on city records that indicate no investigation took place.


A PC Link for Visa Cards
Visa International, the credit card organization, and Intuit Inc., the maker of Quicken and Quick Books software, announced a partnership yesterday to provide customers a way to use their personal computers to get information about their credit card use.
Subscribers to the service, offered through banks and other financial institutions, would use Intuit's software to retrieve records and to view or print out reports, graphs or budgets.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DANAHER CORP., Washington, has signed a letter of intent to purchase certain controls and instruments businesses from Mark IV Industries Inc. for $35 million.
MCKESSON DRUG CO., San Francisco, has been awarded a three-year contract, worth $100 million in sales, for pharmaceuticals and over-the-counter medications from Franciscan Health System.


Mobil's Profit Is Buoyed by Global Sales
In contrast to many other oil companies, the Mobil Corporation reported today that its European and Asian refining and marketing operations were profitable despite the sluggish global economy, helping Mobil post first-quarter net income of $490 million, compared with a loss of $319 million a year earlier.
Revenues were virtually unchanged from the period a year earlier at $15 billion.
Japan and Australia were especially strong markets for Mobil, the nation's second-largest oil company, analysts said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  CLINTON CAUTIOUS ON BOSNIA  Seeking to reassure lawmakers and others who fear being drawn into a new Vietnam, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Congress that President Clinton would not authorize military action in Bosnia unless he was certain the United States could avoid getting more deeply involved than it wanted.
A1  FEARS OF A NEW VIETNAM  While advocates for tougher American action against the Bosnian Serbs have drawn parallels to the origins of World War II and the appeasement of Nazi aggression, on Capitol Hill a growing number of lawmakers expressed the fear that the bombing of Serbian positions would inevitably lead to a runaway deployment of ground troops.
A10


As Haute Cools, Paris Chefs Revitalize The Bistro
DINNER under $40, created by three-star French chefs.
Non-smoking sections in restaurants.


For 32 Million Americans, English Is a 2d Language
The number of United States residents for whom English is a foreign tongue jumped by more than a third to 31.8 million in the 1980's, due largely to a wave of immigration from Latin America, Asia and Europe, according to a Census Bureau report.
Using data collected during the 1990 census, the bureau determined that about 14 percent, or one person in seven, of the nation's 230 million people over the age of 5, grew up or are growing up speaking a language other than English.


Walter F. Blaine, 96, An Investment Banker
Walter F. Blaine, a New York investment banker, died on Friday at a nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 96 and lived in Sea Girt, N.J.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.


Eating Well
THE full-page newspaper advertisements had a banner headline reading "SABOTAGE!" in giant letters.
And below that, in smaller type, appeared the phrase "of America's Health, Food Safety and Environmental Laws"
If you snoozed right through it, you missed an important controversy that could affect the safety of the food you eat.


Celebrities Help Launch Jerry Lisker Fund
LEE MAZZILLI, a former Met, DENIS POTVIN, a former Islander, and CAL RAMSEY of the Knicks' staff were among the celebrities yesterday who helped inaugurate the Jerry Lisker Memorial Scholarship Fund to aid children of police officers killed in the line of duty.
Lisker, the Channel 5 sports director and the former executive sports editor of The New York Post, who died March 4, had a special affinity for boxing.
Among those who showed up for the kickoff lunch at Kennedy's on West 57th Street were WILLIE PEP, MICHAEL SPINKS, CHUCK WEPNER, and MARVIS FRAZIER.


Campus Journal; A Book Is Read as Biased at Wellesley
Long before Hillary Rodham Clinton became its most famous alumna, Wellesley College was known for the civility and seriousness of its discourse, its willingness to hear all sides of a debate.
But a professor's use of a 1991 book commissioned by Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam, has touched off a furor on campus, pitting two cherished values against each other: academic freedom and academic responsibility.


D'Amato Defense Challenges What Unisys Knew and When
Armand P. D'Amato's lawyer tried to show today that top officials of the Unisys Corporation knew that Mr.
D'Amato had been hired by a company employee to lobby his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, for at least seven months before moving to end the relationship.
The questions of what executives knew and when they learned it remained fuzzy at the end of a day of testimony that ranged from one witness saying that Mr.
D'Amato pressured company officials to contribute to his brother's campaign to another's repeating unproven charges that the Senator had issued an "edict" that Unisys officials could only contact him through his brother.


Heading for the End Zone Is an N.F.L. Labor Pact
The final crossed t's and dotted i's that will bring labor peace to pro football after more than five years appear to be at hand.
"It's pretty close. Most issues have been agreed to," Jim Quinn, the National Football League Players Association's lead attorney in its free-agency battle, said last night.
"I would expect this to be settled in the next couple of days."


Imagining the Electric-Car Future
Research and development for electric vehicles have mainly concentrated on batteries, power controllers, motors and other vehicle parts.
But what about the infrastructure in which the vehicles will function?
One visionary sees battery-recharging stations being combined with other commercial establishments -- Charg-'n'-Shop might do brisk business at a shopping mall, or Charg-'n'-Eat at an Interstate highway exit.
Sketching the Future
Such visions of the future have come tumbling forth in an unusual design competition here that has as much in common with architecture as engineering.
Some 130 teams of planners, thinkers and dreamers have submitted their ideas in poster-board form for a contest with the theme "The Electric Vehicle and the American Community." Their sketches offered ideas for new products, new services and whole new industries.


Finley of Astros Placed on Disabled List
A hairline wrist fracture will keep center fielder STEVE FINLEY out of the Houston Astros lineup for at least three weeks.
Finley was placed on the 15-day disabled list Monday because of the injury to his right hand.
It is expected that Finley, who was struck by a JOHN CANDELARIA pitch in Saturday's 8-4 victory over Pittsburgh, will miss a minimum of three weeks.  (AP)


For Experts, Fire Tapes Provide Rare Evidence
Because the fire that consumed the Branch Davidian compound last week unfolded on live television, fire experts around the nation had the rare opportunity to record it on videotape and analyze its path of destruction.
As a result, some outside experts were able to say that they agreed with the preliminary results of the fire investigators, who concluded on Monday that cult members started the lethal fire.
Others, however, said the videotape was inconclusive.


Sports of The Times; The Mets Hit Into A Sand Trap
NONE of this would have happened if Vince Coleman had shouted "Fore!" in the clubhouse.
But forget that lapse of etiquette for the moment.
The Mets being the hot team they are, with an 8-10 record, you can understand how they would need to get away from baseball, even in their clubhouse, and relax a little before the Dodger game by concentrating on their golf, as they were doing Monday night.


Ethel Magafan Dead; Landscape Painter, 76
Ethel Magafan, a muralist and painter of semi-abstract Western landscapes, died on Saturday at her home in Woodstock, N.Y.
She was 76.
The cause was a series of strokes, said her husband, Bruce Currie.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Reporter's Notebook; A Glimmer Of Relief for Newspapers
There is an unannounced theme at the annual convention of the country's newspaper publishers here -- relief.
After several years of startling declines in advertising, the publishers say they see signs that their business is stabilizing, and that has lifted the mood considerably.


Making the Shot Michael Couldn't Make
An amazing thing among the amazing things that made an obscure $5-an-hour office-supplies salesman a nationally known millionaire in five seconds was that he didn't want to shoot the shot to begin with.
"Please," said Carla Morgan, a representative of the Chicago Bulls' marketing department, who had spotted Don Calhoun in the midst of the crowd that entered Chicago Stadium for the Bulls-Heat game April 14, "I want you to shoot the million-dollar shot. I love your shoes."


Spirited Race For Schools Accelerates
With New York City's school board races entering the final week, the Rev.
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition poured voter guides into churches and synagogues yesterday as campaigning by gay advocates and other liberal groups also picked up steam.
Amid the burst of down-the-stretch electioneering, the American Civil Liberties Union entered the turbulent election debate, warning its 18,000 local members that the Christian Coalition's advocacy of school prayer and other positions on social issues posed an unprecedented threat to civil liberties in the schools.


LACROSSE
Hofstra


Experts to Review Clinton Health Plan
President Clinton has named 47 doctors, nurses and other medical experts to assess his plan to revamp the nation's health care system before he sends it to Congress this spring.
The White House did not announce formation of the panel until Monday, but a member of the group said today that members held their first meeting two weeks ago.


Food Notes
Queens Restaurant Guide
A new pocket guide to restaurants in Queens has just been published by the office of Borough President Claire Shulman.
Called "Queens World's Fare," the booklet contains an alphabetical listing of 130 restaurants, using symbols to indicate price range, accepted credit cards, bar service and accessibility for the handicapped.
There is also a map of the borough, and restaurants are indexed by type of cuisine and neighborhood.
Free copies can be ordered by sending a self-addressed business-size envelope with 75 cents postage to the Borough President's Office, Room 220, 120-55 Queens Boulevard, Kew Gardens, Queens 11424.
They can also be picked up at the office.
East Side Tearoom
Espresso and biscotti are in for some interesting competition on the Upper East Side.
Toraya, a confectionary company founded in Japan in 1600, has just opened a tearoom and retail shop at 17 East 71st Street.


On the Waterfront: It Is There by Design


Vertical Lift
Rocky Mountain Helicopters of Provo, Utah, provides flights for hospitals, logging and oil exploration.
In 1990, its stock traded at more than $7 a share; it has traded at less than $3.50 since the beginning of the year.
But yesterday, after announcing a deal to restructure its debt, Rocky Mountain was the third-biggest gainer in Nasdaq trading.


Continental Air's Resurgence
Continental Airlines is expected today to announce a first for any major airline: its second emergence from bankruptcy.
Page D1.


The State Senate's Busy Censors
Talk about poor sports.
The Republicans who control the New York State Senate were less than thrilled last month when a task force led by the Democrat Franz Leichter suggested that the Senate's free-mailing privilege had been seriously abused on behalf of Republican campaigns in 1992.
Now the Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino, and his party colleagues have retaliated by censoring Senator Leichter's latest newsletter to his constituents.
Stephen Sloan, the Republican-appointed Secretary of the Senate, refused to let Mr.
Leichter's newsletter be printed and mailed unless it was revised to blunt criticism of Senate mailing practices and the secrecy that surrounds the entire legislative budget.


New York's Bleak Job Outlook
The Port Authority predicted that the New York region would lose 67,000 jobs this year, the fourth straight year of job losses.
Page B1.


Nashville Sets Unusual Deal To Acquire Route of USAir
In Nashville, the best defense is a good offense.
That is the message, at least, of an agreement by the city to pay USAir $5 million for an air route between Charlotte, N.C., and London, move the American end to Nashville and let American Airlines operate the route.


One Good Cause Does the Cooking for Another
A RECEPTION for the Department of Corrections is one thing, but last week, some of the men trained to cook in the Fresh Start program on Rikers Island ventured onto the benefit circuit.
On Thursday, they catered a reception for more than 300 people and a dinner for 190, among them the actress Susan Sarandon, the entertainer Harry Belafonte and Danny Meyer, the owner of the Union Square Cafe.
In a felicitous union of two causes, the Food and Hunger Hotline, which supports soup kitchens and provides emergency help to people in need of food, selected Catering With Conviction, run by Fresh Start for its graduates, to cater its first fund-raising party.
"I realized that we were both doing the same things -- helping people put their lives back together," said Betsy Siggins Schmidt, the associate director of Food and Hunger Hotline.
"It was a perfect marriage."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief sports article yesterday about Mike Ditka, former coach of the Chicago Bears, misstated the financial terms of a one-year contract he signed with NBC-TV.
He will be paid a minimum of $525,000.


Mandela and de Klerk Look Past Killings
In this seemingly cruelest of Aprils, Nelson Mandela has buried a slain protege, consoled the survivors of a township slaughter, wrestled with the fury of his youthful followers and implored terrified whites not to flee the country.
He had been up late comforting the wife of Oliver R. Tambo, a lifelong friend and political comrade, dead of a stroke.
Now, perched erect on the sofa of his suburban home, clad in his blue Lacoste jogging suit, he was surveying the forest beyond the trees.


New York State's Outlook Improves
The borrowing prospects for New York State, which is expected to sell about $850 million of tax-and-revenue anticipation notes in competitive bidding today, continues to brighten.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation on Monday revised to stable from negative the outlook on the state's $5.1 billion of general obligation debt.


Fernandez Sidelined, but Makes Trip
Tony Fernandez has been suffering from a kidney stone in his lower urinary tract and the shortstop will be out of the Mets' lineup until the problem is resolved and the discomfort in his right abdominal area is relieved.
Fernandez joined the team for the post-game flight to California yesterday, and the Mets said that they have no plans to place him on the disabled list.


Casino to Help Pay Fighter's Medical Bills
The casino where a boxer sustained a life-threatening injury during a title bout is creating a fund to help pay his medical bills.
SERGEI ARTEMIEV, 24, suffered a blood clot on his brain in defending his United States Boxing Association's lightweight title against CARL GRIFFITH at the Trump Taj Mahal on March 21 in Atlantic City.
Artemiev, who lost the bout, can never box again and needs rehabilitation to help regain motor strength and skill.


What Do You Mean, Stand Up Straight?
To the Editor:  Jane Brody's advice to stand up straight (Personal Health column, April 21) is well and good, but many of us with long-term problems don't know how.
What feels straight to us is unlikely to be really straight.
Although people with poor posture are often aware that they don't stand up straight, they are rarely aware of the exact problems with their posture.
I was in a workshop on scoliosis last year, and out of the 20 people there, only one could accurately describe the curvature of her back.
One reason we don't stand up straight is that we don't know what straight is!


Book Notes
A Little Help From Friends
In what is probably the least surprising literary award of the year, "The Bridges of Madison County" (Warner Books) by Robert James Waller won the 1993 American Booksellers Book of the Year prize.
Better known as the ABBY Award, it is given annually to the adult trade book that book sellers most enjoyed selling the previous year.
The book, which has been on the New York Times best-seller list for nine months, is currently the No. 1 hard-cover fiction title.
It got there, and onto lists across the country, not because of enthusiastic book reviews, heavy advertising or a major promotion campaign by the publisher.
Rather, "The Bridges of Madison County" became a best seller precisely because its tender story of a brief, passionate love affair between an Iowa farm wife and a photographer who passes through her town on an assignment to shoot covered bridges captivated booksellers, who personally lobbied their customers to buy it.


Senate Fund Did Not Pay Bill for Party
Elizabeth Holtzman's Senate campaign financed a primary-night reception last fall through a fund that was not authorized to spend money in the race, city, state and Federal election records show.
The move appears to have violated Federal election laws.
Money for the reception came from funds for Ms.
Holtzman's re-election campaign as New York City Comptroller, the election records show.
Federal election law prohibits candidates from paying for expenses related to a Federal race, like a Senate campaign, with money from a campaign for a state or city post, like comptroller.
That is because Federal fund-raising rules are much more strict than those of most states, said Fred Eiland, a spokesman for the Federal Election Commission.


Public &amp; Private; The Power of One
Now we have the numbers game.
How many gay people are there in the nation?
Ten percent?
One percent?
Four percent?
It depends upon whom you ask, what survey you read, how statisticians and sex experts crunch the numbers, which respondents tell the truth and which don't.
How many marched in Washington on Sunday for the civil rights of gay men and lesbians?
Three hundred thousand?
Half a million?
A million or more?
It depends on whether you ask the Park Police or the march organizers.
But at some level none of it matters at all.


Press Club Honors John Chancellor
John Chancellor, the longtime NBC News anchor and commentator, who is retiring this year, was honored yesterday for "distinguished and exemplary service" by the Overseas Press Club of America.
The award, which cited Mr.
Chancellor's "long-term dedication to presenting the news without the theatrical embellishments used to turn the news into entertainment," was one of 18 given by the club, which each year honors foreign reporting by print and broadcast journalists.


China and Taiwan Have First Talks
Delegates from China and Taiwan met here today for their first high-level talks, with both sides professing a desire to replace more than four decades of enmity with new cordiality and cooperation.
The two days of discussions are longer on symbolism than substance, and they are not expected to achieve any major breakthrough.
But they are the beginning of a high-level dialogue that both sides expect to develop further in the coming months and years.


A 'Learnfare' Program Offers No Easy Lessons
Ohio's strategy for keeping teen-age welfare mothers in school sounds simple: pay them $62 a month when they are in school and dock them $62 when they are not.
But what Ohio's experiment has shown is that the reasons these girls return to school -- or do not -- are as complicated as their own lives.


Review/Pop; Aretha Franklin, In Stellar Company And on Her Own
She didn't sing "Respect." And she didn't have to.
"Aretha Franklin: Duets," a tribute to the great soul singer at the Nederlander Theater on Tuesday night, lavished praise on Ms.
Franklin as stars stepped forward and declared how thrilled they were to share the stage with her.
Bonnie Raitt, Smokey Robinson, Rod Stewart, Elton John, Gloria Estefan and P.M.
Dawn joined Ms.
Franklin in a benefit concert for Gay Men's Health Crisis, the AIDS organization.
The actors Dustin Hoffman and Robert De Niro also appeared.
The concert was recorded for broadcast on May 9 on Fox.
Despite delays and retakes that prolonged the event to four hours, the concert lived up to Ms.
Franklin's magnificent voice.
Her own recent tours have been frustrating teases, offering only hints of what she can do amid second-rate pop.
Perhaps by adding competition, "Duets" brought out Ms.
Franklin's improvisational genius.
She can summon the agility of jazz, the pain of the blues, the sultriness of pop and the fervor of gospel, and while her voice is smokier now than it was in her 1960's heyday, she has all the range she needs.


Why New York's Sanitation Workers Earn More Than Police
To the Editor:
In your editorial "The Police and Election-Year Politics" (April 17), you relied strictly upon figures supplied by New York City that are misleading.
The city's comparison of police and sanitation workers' pay cavalierly ignores three weighty components of sanitation worker income: holiday pay, night shift differential and sanitation's double-time rate for overtime.
These, coupled with gain-sharing bonuses, enable sanitation workers to earn greater annual income than police officers.
While you consider this methodology "a strange way to calculate wages," economists, arbitrators and even city negotiators normally factor in the calculations used by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association to determine total earnings.
Moreover, your assertion that police officers
"earn
$11,000 more than sanitation workers do" is absurd.


New Shop for Team From Scali, McCabe
A creative team from Scali, McCabe, Sloves has left that agency to open its own shop in New York under the auspices of a Boston agency, Houston, Effler &amp; Partners.
Larry Hampel, 34, and Dean Stefanides, 37, executive vice presidents and group creative directors at Scali, McCabe for the last seven years, left to open the new agency, called Houston, Effler, Hampel &amp; Stefanides.
While at Scali, McCabe, Mr.
Hampel, the copywriter, and Mr.
Stefanides, the art director, worked on accounts like Mercedes-Benz, Nikon and Castrol Motor Oil; they are not taking them or any other clients with them.


A Shotgun Wedding Startles Milan Design
Like a couple who have been living together for some time without making a serious commitment, modern Italian design and traditional handicrafts have finally decided to tie the knot.
One might call it the shotgun wedding of the decade.


Auto Makers Ask White House for Broad Range of Help
The chief executives of the Big Three auto makers asked top Administration officials today for help on a broad range of issues including international trade, regulations, technology and health insurance.
John F. Smith Jr. of General Motors, Harold A. Poling of Ford Motor and Robert J. Eaton of Chrysler urged the joint development of a comprehensive plan to help the auto industry regain its global preeminence.


Feeling Betrayed and Hounded, Andreotti Breaks His Silence
By his own account, Giulio Andreotti is not sleeping well these days and feels he can trust no one beyond the family hearth, now that he has been accused -- wrongfully, he insists -- of consorting with the Mafia.
But most of all, as Italy's reformist tide left him beached today, the seven-time Prime Minister and one-time key power of Italian politics seemed to be fretting about when he would come to a trial that, in his reckoning, would restore respect to his name.


N.B.A. Toughens Penalties For Fights
Imagine it is Game 2 of the first-round playoff series between the Knicks and Indiana.
The Pacers' Rik Smits crashes an elbow to Patrick Ewing's temple.
Ewing pushes a forearm in retaliation.
It is a close, physical game, and tempers are running short.
Although he does not connect, Ewing throws a punch.
It is a big mistake.
He is ejected from the game -- standard National Basketball Association punishment for throwing a punch -- but he is also automatically suspended from the next game, too, and his team is suddenly put in a crippling position.


COMPANY NEWS
DATA SWITCH CORP., Shelton, Conn., has entered into an exclusive three-year distribution agreement with IBM Japan Ltd.


VAT's Offer a Way to Conceal the Tax Burden
To the Editor:
"New Tax on Goods Is Weighed to Pay for Health Care" (news article, April 15) reveals that the White House is considering the imposition of a value-added tax to raise revenue for President Clinton's health-care reform.
Having lived under a VAT for several years in England at university, I hope such consideration will prove slight.
Value-added taxes are "popular" in Europe only in the sense that a number of avaricious bureaucracies thereabouts have recognized the political expediency in obscuring the full weight of the tax burden they impose upon their citizens.
Whereas an income tax is the traditional benchmark of taxation, it is sometimes difficult to recognize the true cost to the individual reflected in rising consumer prices.


George S. Springsteen, Ex-State Dept. Aide, 70
George S. Springsteen Jr., a former State Department official, died on Saturday at his weekend home in Scientists Cliffs, Md.
He was 70 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Basking Ridge, N.J., is offering $400 million of notes due in 1995 at par through Lehman Brothers.
The interest rate is fixed at 3.35 percent for the first year, changing to a floating rate in the final year tied to the three-month London interbank offered rate.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service, AA+ by Duff &amp; Phelps and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Florida Power and Light Capital Group, a subsidiary of FPL Group, Juno Beach, Fla., is offering $125 million of 7 5/8 percent debentures due in 2013 and priced at 98.131 to yield 7.811 percent through Salomon Brothers.
Callable in five years, the debentures are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Scientists Find Clue to Peril of Volcanic Eruptions
A team of scientists has discovered a chemical clue in molten lava that appears to signal whether a volcano's eruption will be relatively short-lived or long and violent, a finding that could aid hazard prediction and save human lives.
The research was done on the Unzen volcano in Japan, which has killed 43 people since it came back to life in November 1990 and is still active today.
The volcano lies some 25 miles east of Nagasaki on the southern island of Kyushu.
It has repeatedly shaken the citizens of the nearby town of Shimabara and left many of them homeless.


Home Video
The Next VCR
Since most American households have had a VCR for a number of years, a question arises.
What is the next generation of VCR that might excite consumers the way the old machines did?
As cable operators and telephone companies develop methods of electronic delivery that will eventually be able to feed information directly to the television set, it might be argued that there will be no next VCR.
But that isn't necessarily the case.


Dinkins's Choice: Tax Rise or Service Cuts
Like its predecessors, the Dinkins administration plays the budget game each year like high-stakes poker.
For most of the winter and spring, Mayor David N. Dinkins shows as few cards as possible, trying to appear fiscally vulnerable so that his friends in Albany and Washington will offer the maximum amount of help.
Then, usually in May, the Mayor lays down his hand.
Last year he had a full house, including a surplus that eventually topped $600 million.
But this year, Mr.
Dinkins acknowledged on Tuesday -- to the sharp surprise of some of his fellow politicians -- that he had no cards.


Administration Unveils $1.3 Bilion High-Speed Rail Proposal
The Clinton Administration today announced a five-year, $1.3 billion plan that would create Federal-state partnerships to develop high-speed train service in densely populated areas around the nation.
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena said such railroads would relieve highway and airport congestion, reduce pollution and travel delays and "improve the quality of life of Americans throughout our country."


Bosnia: Talk Plus Threat
Senator John McCain of Arizona boiled President Clinton's problems down to a precise phrase.
The arguments of those who want him to bomb the Serbs are "hauntingly familiar" reminders of Vietnam.
Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina made a telling point, too.
The Reagan Administration's eagerness to bomb the Bekaa Valley and inject marines into the chaos of Lebanon led to a disastrous loss of life.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher advanced a wise formula.
There should be no American military action in the Balkans without a clear goal, a likelihood of success and a plan for getting out.
Finally, he said, there must be public support.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  WHERE THE GIRLS WERE: AT WORK
Girls here, girls there, girls everywhere.
It was "Take Our Daughters to Work Day," and countless thousands of workers across the country did just that.
Young girls tagged along with a parent or friend to that inscrutable place they often know only as "work" and gleaned some firsthand feel for the workaday world.
A1.
At a high school in midtown Manhattan, it was effectively Leave Our Sons at School Day, and the boys turned restive.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY


Stocks Close Lower, With Dow Off by 2.43
The stock market closed down yesterday as diffidently as it rallied the day before.
There were, of course, the twin shocks of Eastman Kodak's poor earnings and the abrupt leave-taking of its top financial officer.
But without those shocks, market performance would have been humdrum.
The major indexes were mixed in sluggish trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average yesterday closed down 2.43 points, to 3,413.50, after closing up 17.56 points, to 3,415.93, on Tuesday when much of the advance came in the last hour of trading.
The New York Stock Exchange composite index closed down 0.03 point, to 241.90.
Volume on the Big Board was 268 million shares, compared with Tuesday's 284.1 million shares.
Winning stocks outnumbered losers on the Big Board, 987 to 917.


Indian Army Troops Crush Revolt by Police in Kashmir
Indian Army troops stormed the police headquarters in Kashmir early this morning, crushed a police revolt in the capital, Srinagar, and freed top police and civilian officials without bloodshed.
Light artillery guns and armored personnel carriers were brought to back up the army, but they were not used and the 15-minute operation ended without violence or casualties as hundreds of policemen, armed with rifles and a few automatic weapons, surrendered without a fight.


Economic Scene; The Big Three may get a Clinton goodie, but perhaps not on trade.
"I WAS astonished that the Bush Administration overruled its own Customs Office and gave a $300 million-a-year freebie to the Japanese for no apparent reason," President Clinton told reporters at his first news conference.
"And we got nothing, and I emphasize nothing, in return."
The words were Mozart to the ears of Big Three auto executives, who want Uncle Sam to classify imported mini-vans and sporty, four-wheel-drive vehicles as light trucks -- and thus require importers to fork over a 25 percent tariff.
But the message sounded more like chalk on a blackboard to the President's economic advisers, who know that Americans did indeed get something -- mini-vans and sport utility vehicles from both America and Japan for thousands of dollars less than they would otherwise have had to pay.


Ben Schwartzwalder Dies at 83; Revitalized Football at Syracuse
Ben Schwartzwalder, who recruited a series of acclaimed running backs as he restored Syracuse to football glory during 25 sparkling seasons that included an undefeated campaign in 1959, died yesterday at Northside Hospital in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 83.
Mr.
Schwartzwalder, a resident of Syracuse who maintained a winter home in St.
Petersburg, died of a heart attack, his wife said.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Extended the contract of Buck Rodgers, manager, through 1995.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Activated Dave Stieb, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Rod Bolton, pitcher, to Nashville of the American Association.


City Council Bungles on Jobs
If there's a lesson to be learned from the New York City Council's approach to a spring jobs program for youngsters, it's that many of the pesky good-government regulations that should govern a program like this exist for a purpose.
Without them, favoritism and bad judgment take over.
A few weeks ago, the Council and the Mayor's Department of Employment split the task of finding 400 students to work in a nine-week program of city-funded jobs.
The mayor's office relied on referrals from the community organizations that handle the city's federally funded summer jobs.
The Council members freelanced.
Most Council members depended on recommendations from community and youth groups.
But others gave the jobs to relatives of friends, employees or political allies.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ACCIDENTS with power tools happen suddenly and often have tragic consequences.
Most injuries are from cuts, hurled objects and electric shock; all are preventable by following safe working practices.
Using common sense is the key to avoiding accidents.
Basically, this means not getting so preoccupied with a task that you ignore possible hazards.
Specifically, it means knowing your tools and how to use them.


Sports of The Times; Rocco's Boy Was Special Right Away
HE was a funny kid.
That's how I choose to remember Jim Valvano, who died of cancer yesterday, much too young at 47.
Everything that was still appealing in him as a coach or a broadcaster was there when he was 15, playing backcourt for his father.
He most certainly was not one of those people who becomes famous and then everybody says: "That guy? What a cipher. He was in my home room. Never said a word." This was a classic case of the child being father to the stand-up comic.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about the reopening of Alexander Hamilton Park in New Jersey referred to the location incorrectly.
It is in the township of Weehawken, not Weehawken Heights.
And it is near the site of Hamilton's death in a duel with Aaron Burr, but not at the site.


More Change In the Guard At Big Blue
Jack D. Kuehler, I.B.M.'s chief technology officer, announced yesterday that he would retire at the end of August, saying he planned to spend his remaining time promoting advanced-technology projects intended to restore profitability at the ailing computer giant.
Unlike the January resignation of the chairman, John F. Akers, the retirement of Mr.
Kuehler comes as no real surprise.
At the company's request, Mr.
Kuehler, a vice chairman, has stayed beyond the company's traditional retirement age of 60.
He will turn 61 years old on Aug. 29.


Making the most out of miscues, marketers tout their supply shortages.
CONSUMERS used to advertising campaigns in which marketers fawningly and obsequiously congratulate themselves for even the most trivial of accomplishments are doing a double take.
It has now become fashionable for marketers to sponsor ads in which they castigate themselves by celebrating their own failures.
Television commercials and print advertisements for consumer-product marketers like the Kellogg Company and Nabisco Foods serve as corporate mea culpas for misjudgments like insufficient supplies of new products and distribution snafus.
These ads offer apologies rather than puffery, explanations rather than exclamation points.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Media Business page on Monday with an article about New England Cable News referred incorrectly to the business reporter shown.
He is Mont Fennel.


Frost-Free in Manhattan: A Couple's Odyssey; Keeping Up With 1980's Refrigerator Technology Isn't That Easy, Despite the Benefits
In 1988 Milton and Mildred Lewis bought a two-door, frost-free refrigerator for $800.
Almost anywhere else that would be an unremarkable action.
In a perfect world -- or maybe just a rational one -- what followed would have been impossible.


Brother Says D'Amato Staff Set Up Favors
Armand P. D'Amato took the stand here today and admitted that he had arranged for the office of his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, to provide certain favors for a military contractor.
But Mr.
D'Amato, a partner in an influential Long Island law firm, insisted that the services provided by his brother's office were routine tasks that would be offered to any constituent, adding that he never even told the Senator that the company had hired him as a consultant.
And he denied Government allegations that he was hired by the contractor, the Unisys Corporation, solely to provide access to his brother and that he did no actual consulting work for the company.


Corrections
An article on April 19 about a conference at the University of Iowa on "Nancy Drew" mysteries misstated the location of Applewood Books, a publisher of the novels.
It is in Bedford, Mass., not New Bedford.


Left Behind, Some Boys Feel Left Out
At first they were perfectly sensitive 90's kind of guys, these boys of the midtown campus of Murry Bergtraum High School.
They said they understood that maybe girls aren't encouraged to do as many things as boys, or to be as many things as boys, and that girls faced discrimination in the past and that possibly things were still a bit unfair.
So maybe girls deserved a day to visit television studios and businesses and law offices while the boys stayed stuck in class.


Review/Organ; Amid Grandeur, a Subtle Palette
A church organ is a remarkable instrument: in its construction, its size, its cost, its sound and its function, it defines a community and its space.
So when the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola presented a dedicatory concert of its new tracker organ on Tuesday night, it was only partly out of musical interest that the line to get into the church stretched around the corner of Park Avenue and 84th Street.
A new instrument of this size is an event in musical and religious life.
When the doors finally closed, every pew was filled, folding chairs were in the aisles and the pastor publicly wished that the church had such problems every Sunday.
The audience, drawn by advance word of this largest mechanical-action organ ever installed in this city (and the largest ever built in England, by N. P. Mander Ltd.), was a reminder, before even a note was played, of the importance attached to a new organ intallation.


In Bosnia, a Grim and All-Too-Familiar Scene


Ethel Magafan Dead; Landscape Painter, 76
Ethel Magafan, a muralist and painter of semi-abstract Western landscapes, died on Saturday at her home in Woodstock, N.Y.
She was 76.
The cause was a series of strokes, said her husband, Bruce Currie.


A Crackdown Is Proposed On Overdue Child Support
Wayne R. Bryant, the State Assemblyman from Camden who wrote the law denying additional payments to welfare mothers who have another child, now proposes going after fathers who do not pay their child support.
Mr.
Bryant has introduced an eight-bill package that he says would give New Jersey the toughest law in the nation to track down and punish parents -- almost all fathers -- who do not comply with court orders to pay child support.


What to Do in Bosnia? 3 Hard Choices for Clinton
As President Clinton weighs military action in Bosnia and Herzegovina, senior officials say he is torn by two contradictory desires:
He wants to bring the swiftest possible end to a war that has already taken more than 100,000 lives.
But he also wants to set an example that aggression does not pay, and thus he is unwilling to allow the Serbs to keep the territory they have seized in a year of "ethnic cleansing."


A Shake-Up At Operator Of Hospitals
National Medical Enterprises, one of the nation's largest operators of private psychiatric hospitals, announced yesterday that two of its founders and top executives were resigning their posts amid continued investigations and lawsuits stemming from scandals in hospital operations.
The company announced that Richard K. Eamer, a 65-year-old founder of the company, would be succeeded as president and chief executive by Jeffrey Barbakow, 49, who has been an outside director of National Medical Enterprises since 1990.
Mr.
Barbakow was chief executive and president of the MGM/UA Communications Company from 1988 to 1990.


Era of Female Combat Pilots Opens With Shrugs and Glee
At Whiting Field Naval Air Station, where 75 percent of Navy, Marine and Coast Guard fighter, patrol and helicopter pilots receive their initial training, the new era of women in combat promised by the Pentagon was greeted today with jubilation by the female pilots and acceptance by their male counterparts.
Veterans saw the Pentagon's decision to eliminate restrictions on women in aerial and naval combat as folly.
But regardless of their stand on the issue, all military personnel recognize that the directive will catapult the armed forces into uncharted territory in which women may face the same perils of war as men.
New Options Called Tempting
"I get goose bumps just thinking about it," said Lieut.
Rhonda Buckner, a 37-year-old flight instructor who is scheduled to retire next year when her 20 years of service are up.
"I wish I were 20 years younger. When I came in, women didn't even work on planes, and being a pilot was an option I didn't even think about. It's remarkable, the changes I've seen."


Review/Music; A Baritone's Pleasure in the Sound of His Voice
One need only listen a short while to the baritone Dmitri Khvorostovsky to know how much pleasure he takes from the sound of his voice.
This is a singer who relishes the physicality of the act of singing: the control he has over his breath, enabling long legato lines, the ways in which he can leap across registers and land with full impact on a note, athletically certain of his balance.
There is almost no sign of strain, only a little dryness on top.
And none of this is precious or affected; the voice is naturally produced and youthfully secure in its assumption of power.
Mr.
Khvorostovsky's voice, recorded on the Philips label and heard in Carnegie Hall on Monday night, can also provide such pleasure to others: the sound, across its range, is topped by a ringing overtone.
The voice can even create, in its lower range, the illusion of being far bigger than it really is; it carries well.
Add to this an imposing physical presence and a fervent delivery, and it is easy enough to see why this young singer, born in 1962, has made such a strong impression since he first came to world attention in 1989 as the winner of BBC's Cardiff Singer of the World competition.


Bentsen Signals Official's Ouster Over Initial Raid on Cult in Texas
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen signaled today that the senior Washington official who supervised the Feb. 28 raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., would soon be asked to step down.
Mr.
Bentsen issued a statement this afternoon saying he was "deeply troubled by conflicting statements" about the raid, which began the 51-day siege that ended in flames last week.
Other Administration officials said the remarks were aimed at Stephen E. Higgins, the director of the Treasury agency that carried out the raid, in which four agents and six cult members died.


Derby Has the Quick, and the Quirks
There is a horse galloping around the track at Churchill Downs these mornings without a saddle.
He is El Bakan, "the Big Shot" from Panama.
His owner says he'll be wearing a saddle in the 119th Kentucky Derby on Saturday, but "this is the way they train them in South America."
There is another horse here named Rockamundo who ran the fastest mile and an eighth of the year for 3-year-old horses when he won the Arkansas Derby in 1:48.
People think his name is amusing.
So were the odds he beat when he won in Arkansas two weeks ago: 108-1.
He has another peculiarity besides beating long odds: He tends to hold his breath during races, like a child throwing a tantrum.
His jockey, Calvin Borel, overcame that problem by leaning down and poking Rockamundo in the belly.


Review/Music; Downtown Festival of the Hard to Classify
This year's opening concert of the Corner Store Festival at the Knitting Factory stumbled a bit, then found its way.
The festival has been an enormously successful event, politically and esthetically, for the last four years; it has featured musicians who fall between styles and therefore haven't received much attention.
And, for the most part, it has produced music that has been worth listening to, well organized and conceived.
But the festival, which started on Tuesday and runs through tonight, opened with a dull and hyperbolic set by the singer Ellen Christi.
Ms.
Christi and her band -- William Parker on bass and Rashied Ali on drums -- improvised endlessly.
Ms.
Christi moaned some, then whined some, then scatted like Sarah Vaughan.
Mr.
Parker, who plays with a thick and nicely wooden sound, snapped his strings and bowed a bit, and Mr.
Ali puttered.


Tikhonov Joins Sharks
VASILY TIKHONOV, the son of the former Russian national hockey coach VIKTOR TIKHONOV, has been hired as a consultant with the San Jose Sharks.
Tikhonov, 35, was most recently the coach of Assat Pori of Finland's Elite League.
Tikhonov will help the Sharks evaluate European talent for the National Hockey League draft, instruct Russian and Latvian players in the Sharks' system and assist in negotiations for the release of players under contract to teams overseas. (AP)


Renovating? Maintaining? You Can Look It Up
RENOVATORS and home repair enthusiasts browsing in bookstores this spring will find a smorgasbord of instructive and inspiring volumes.
Here are some of the better ones:
READER'S DIGEST NEW COMPLETE DO-IT-YOURSELF MANUAL (Reader's Digest Association, 1991, $30) is a completely revised and newly illustrated version of the 1973 classic that has become a bible of amateur home repair.


Jim Valvano, Colorful College Basketball Coach, Is Dead at 47
Jim Valvano, the fast-talking, wisecracking New York-bred basketball coach who led North Carolina State to its Cinderella 1983 national championship, died yesterday at Duke University Medical Center after a yearlong battle with cancer.
He was 47.
Valvano, who had been a basketball commentator since he left North Carolina State amid controversy in 1990, had been admitted to the hospital, in Durham, N.C., at the end of March.


Japan Grows Wary of Cambodia Role
Fearful that the rising violence in Cambodia could threaten public support for its first ventures in peacekeeping, the Japanese Government has quietly asked the United Nations to guarantee the safety of election observers or deploying them only to comparatively safe areas of the country.
The move, Japanese officials say, reflects their growing fear of a public backlash if the country's first dispatch of troops overseas since the end of World War II results in considerable casualties over the next month or two.


Stock Slide at Tambrands Continues
The stock price of Tambrands, the country's leading maker of tampons, continued a three-month decline yesterday with its worst day since the slide began.
After the company reported disappointing first-quarter sales, the stock price fell 11.5 percent, closing as the largest percentage drop on the New York Stock Exchange.
Losing $5.875 a share, the stock closed at $45.25 after trading as low as $44 earlier in the day.
On Feb. 1, Tambrands had achieved a 52-week high of $64.75.


Jets Must Do Without Monday Night Glare
The Jets have made several off-season moves to help build a premier team for next season, but it would appear the National Football League is not too impressed.
The league has excluded the Jets from "Monday Night Football," along with the likes of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the New England Patriots and the Phoenix Cardinals -- each deemed unworthy of such prime-time exposure.
Generally, these games are reserved for teams the league regards as contenders.


Bill Clinton's Hundred Days
All Presidents since Franklin Roosevelt have had their reputations stretched or shortened by a Procrustean journalistic device known as the "first hundred days." The hundred days test is, of course, fundamentally silly.
As Arthur Schlesinger pointed out on the Op-Ed page recently, Roosevelt assumed office at a time of such calamity that Congress "dared not say him nay." No President since has faced a comparable crisis.
Yet so durable is the standard that not even the White House, which might prefer to forget some of Bill Clinton's first hundred days, can ignore it.
To mark the occasion Mr.
Clinton's p.r. apparatus churned out a little pamphlet called "Season of America's Renewal," the title lifted from the President's hopeful address to Congress in February.
The Republicans responded with a less flattering exegesis, "On the Wrong Track."


Follow-Up Care for Mental Patients Is Criticized
New York hospitals routinely draw up elaborate plans for the care of mentally ill patients after their release but then do virtually no follow-up to make sure that the patients actually receive the recommended services, a state study released yesterday said.
Forty percent of the discharged mental patients whoses cases were reviewed, were unable to negotiate the complicated government and health-care bureaucracies that they rely on for help, and ended up being rehospitalized within six months, at an average cost of $36,750 per patient.


Times Offers Fellowships
The New York Times said yesterday that it would sponsor 15 management-training fellowships as part of a five-day program to be held at the annual convention of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists in June in Washington.
The fellowships are being offered in cooperation with the Institute for Journalism Education, a not-for-profit organization that promotes racial diversity in the newspaper industry.
It is the first time the institute is organizing a management training program of this sort at a journalism convention.


Remembering the Tragedy Last April in Washington Square Park


Reality (Not Real Life) Shows Up at Kips Bay
LIKE potholes, runny noses and forsythia in bloom, the Kips Bay Decorator Show House is an inexorable sign of spring.
This year, attention is being paid to what Diantha L. Nype, a spokeswoman for the show house, called "the reality factor." And indeed, reality -- in the form of boxy rooms, off-kilter fireplaces and Rooms With No View -- has made a rare cameo appearance at Kips Bay.


Belgrade Denounces Sanctions; Calls for Meeting
The President of Yugoslavia today angrily denounced new economic sanctions imposed on his country and called for a multinational summit conference to resolve the "war of annihilation" in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"These are days of profound, epochal crisis," the President, Dobrica Cosic, said at a news conference.
"The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is almost totally isolated, in what amounts to a concentration camp whose borders are patrolled by NATO planes and ships and by the world police."


New York State Issue Is Priced
New York State's spring borrowing, which temporarily bridges the gap between state operating expenditures and anticipated revenues, was priced yesterday through competitive bidding.
Several underwriters were awarded portions of the $850 million offering of tax and revenue anticipation notes due on Dec. 31.


Real Estate Funds Lure Investors
As banks, developers and others flee in terror from their troubled property investments, some people are snapping up these assets, eager to cash in on a potential recovery in real estate at a time when low interest rates make other investments less appealing.
Rather than buying properties directly, many people are investing in a real estate investment trust, a kind of mutual fund that buys real estate and passes any profits on to its investors.
These trusts, known as REIT's, are risky, and investors in them suffered spectacular losses in the mid-1970's and late 1980's.
Surge in Investment
Today, the trusts account for just a fraction of the real estate market, but they are experiencing explosive growth.
So far this year, REIT's have grown an extraordinary 25 percent, versus 21 percent for all of 1992.
The market capitalization of the 140 or so publicly traded REIT's soared to $19.7 billion at the end of March, from $15.7 billion at the end of 1992.


Corpse at Grand Hyatt
The body of a Brooklyn woman was found in the Grand Hyatt Hotel in midtown Manhattan last night, and an autopsy is planned for later today to determine the cause of death, according to the police.
Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a departmental spokesman, identified the woman as Marie Daniele, 24 years old, of 233 Withers Street, in Williamsburg.
Sergeant Barlanti said the police were called to the hotel after the body was found in Room 3431 about 7:30 P.M.
No details about why the woman was in the hotel, which is next to Grand Central Station, were available.


Church Janitors Accused of Poor-Box Robberies


Parents in Bronx District Urge Voter Turnout as a Way to Improve Schools
Every day for the last few weeks, Mildred Bonilla and a gaggle of black and Hispanic parents have hit the streets of the South Bronx in a campaign they call Mothers on the Move.
Armed with fliers and petitions, interrupting afternoon naps and lunches, they are telling parents that the coming school board elections are their best chance to challenge a political system that they say has left the schoolchildren of their hard-pressed neighborhood shortchanged.


Dance Awards Presented
Dance Magazine has given its 36th annual awards to Bill T. Jones, the modern dance choreographer and performer; Beatriz Rodriguez, a leading dancer with the Joffrey Ballet, and the ballroom dancing duo of Pierre Dulaine and Yvonne Marceau.
The awards, which are given to men and women who have made important contributions to dance, were presented at an invitation-only ceremony on Monday at the Asia Society in Manhattan.
The master of ceremonies was Kevin McKenzie, the director of American Ballet Theater.


The Number of Gay Men Doesn't Matter
To the Editor:
I am deeply concerned about the Alan Guttmacher Institute's report on gay men ("Sex Survey of American Men Finds 1% Are Gay," news article, April 15).
Social conservative groups have already voiced their self-assuredness and gay groups are scrambling to downplay the figures.
Yet William R. Grady, one of the study's authors, conceded to The Boston Globe that there were two flaws with the study.
First, 30 percent of the men asked to participate refused.
Second, participants in surveys like this one tend to give "socially appropriate" answers.
Because many have been taught to believe that homosexuality is morally "incorrect," it is likely that men will underreport their homosexual feelings and behavior.


Taco Bell Creative Search
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco said yesterday that it had begun a search for a new creative director to head its Taco Bell account, estimated at $125 million in billings.
Neal Sellman, a senior vice president who is now the Taco Bell creative director, will be moving to work on another of the agency's accounts.
The agency declined to identify which account, because the client had not yet been notified.


Designing With the Future in Mind
"TO be a product designer, students must design what could be in the marketplace five to 10 years in the future, and not design what is there now," said Richard Yelle, chairman of the product design department at the Parsons School of Design in Manhattan, which also offers courses in clay, furniture, glass, metal and textile design.
The 38 senior-class students have obliged.
For the "Senior Thesis Exhibition," which runs through May 7 at the school, the students envisioned a world where high technology is easy to use, where furniture blends old forms and new functions and where banal products like doorknobs become whimsical.


O'Neal's Debut With Pepsi Set
Pepsi-Cola commercials starring Shaquille O'Neal begin appearing on Saturday, the first since the 7-foot-1 center for the Orlando Magic signed a five-year contract with the soft-drink marketer.
They will serve as the centerpiece for Pepsi's $60 million summer promotion with Reebok International Ltd.
One television commercial, promoting the Pepsi/Reebok tie-in, shows Pepsi supplies around the world depleted every time the player gulps a Pepsi.
In another spot, the young basketball star disrupts a playground game -- but cannot intimidate a 3-foot-11-inch youngster, who warns "Don't even think about it" when the player reaches for his bottle of Pepsi.


Her Colleagues Voice Support for Anita Hill
To the Editor:
"For Oklahoma, Anita Hill's Story Is Open Wound" (news article, April 19) continues the biased coverage of Professor Hill by ignoring the support she has received by those who know her best: her colleagues at the University of Oklahoma.
Dean David Swank hardly stands alone; a petition signed by 439 faculty and staff members and students appeared recently in our local newspaper supporting an endowed chair honoring her.
The absence of this information from your account continues the bias evident during the Senate Judiciary Committee hearings.


Dominique Bozo, 58, Expert on Picasso, Is Dead
Dominique Bozo, president of the Pompidou Center and founding director of the Picasso Museum in Paris, died yesterday in Paris.
He was 58.
The cause was cancer, a Pompidou Center statement announced.


Measuring Warming
To the Editor:
Vice President Gore may know more about global warming than the President ("Mr. Clinton, Meet Mr. Gore," editorial, April 20), but the whole Administration should be aware of what is known.
Few of the nations that voted for the 1990 limit on carbon dioxide emissions have the information base to report their 1990 emissions or monitor their progress.
The United States does, and in our society of policy by court cases, if we had signed such a treaty the Government would be sued to actually comply with it.


Critic's Notebook; In the Know and Willing to Talk
All clear, cowed news fans.
The assault by television experts has subsided, and for the moment it seems safe to tune in your favorite interview shows.
But watch your head; this is likely to be just a Serbian truce.
After the invasion of experts on terrorism set off by the bombing of the World Trade Center, there was only a brief respite before the little war in Waco, Tex., called forth a swarm of experts on cultism.
These cadres, swooping straight from producers' Rolodexes onto the nation's screens, were in a thriving television tradition of know-it-alls expatiating at the summons of the evening news on why a catastrophe they never predicted could now easily be foreseen.


Review/Dance; When the Performers Choose the Moves
In "Another Story as in Falling," Trisha Brown's visually spectacular and blazingly theatrical new dance work, eight dancers in red outfits may or may not complete an 18-minute movement sequence that Ms.
Brown has taught them.
The choreographer, seeking to vary each performance of the piece, is allowing the dancers to decide on the spot whether they will execute the phrase in its entirety or only parts of it.
During the Trisha Brown Dance Company's two-week season, which opened on Tuesday night at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan), one can be sure only that in this piece, the cast might be partly obscured by the black slats of a tall picket fence at the rear.


Lima Journal; Rapists in Uniform: Peru Looks the Other Way
Staring at the floor, a 16-year-old girl slowly told a human rights worker here how, on the night of March 22, she was raped in the jungle town of Aucayacu by a Peruvian soldier.
"I started shouting, but the soldiers put a rag in my mouth," the girl said, speaking in a low voice.
"Then one started abusing me."


U.S. Tries to Calm Japan Over Role in Yen Price
A day before the Group of Seven's finance ministers gather in Washington, American officials sought today to ease Japanese anger over the value of the yen, repeating that they wanted to avoid exchange-rate volatility.
Japanese officials have complained that remarks by President Clinton and other American officials have pushed the yen to a record level against the dollar, which they fear will make their exports expensive and hurt their ailing economy.


No Headline
"Everybody knows men can do everything. They always get the credit. Now we have to get some." -- DELIA VELEZ, 12, on Take Our Daughters to Work Day.  [ B8:4. ]


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Fruit Fall
Q.
I have a semidwarf apricot tree that produces many apricots.
But in recent years three-quarters of them have fallen off while still immature.
Why? -- Marie Nocito, Lodi, N.J.
A.
Beautiful white apricot blossoms are a shimmering sight of early spring, and I think it's a shame to miss out on the delicious summer fruit.
But all fruit trees undergo a period of natural thinning, said Stella Otto, author of "The Backyard Orchardist" (Ottographics, $13.95).


From Hope to Ashes: F.B.I. Negotiator Looks Back
Right up until the fiery end, the F.B.I.'s chief negotiator, Byron Sage, and his team were trying to persuade David Koresh's followers to see their leader as a thief, a liar, a child molester and a profanity-spouting con man.
Five days before the fire, Mr.
Koresh's lieutenant, Steve Schneider, was rambling over the phone about the Bible's Book of Revelation when a negotiator interrupted.
"He asked him if he'd ever seen 'The Wizard of Oz,' " Mr.
Sage said.
"Steve said, 'Yes.' The negotiator said, 'Look behind the curtain,' and hung up."


Police Charge 3 Janitors Stole From Poor Box
The Rev.
Joseph Hertel, the pastor of St.
Francis of Assisi Church in midtown Manhattan, suspected for several months that someone was taking money from the poor boxes, but he did not know who.
Yesterday, to his dismay, city detectives and a private security agency who conducted a stakeout with surveillance cameras and infrared binoculars told him the robbers were none other than three church janitors.


A Feminist View of Landscapes: A Partnership With Nature
What do women who are landscape designers really want?
A new landscape architecture that is ethical as well as esthetically pleasing.
That was the conclusion at a symposium, "Women, Land, Design," sponsored this weekend by the Radcliffe Seminars to celebrate the 25th anniversary of its landscape-design program.
At the symposium, a feminist view emerged, not like the ponderous and theoretical gender studies that have dominated art history and literary studies in universities, but rather a lively discussion that focused on practical applications for shaping the future of the environment.


INSIDE
How U.S. Lured Palestinians
To lure the Palestinians back to the Mideast talks, Washington asked Saudi Arabia to resume aid cut off in the gulf war, senior aides said.
Page A10.
New Chairman for the S.E.C.
Arthur Levitt Jr., the American Stock Exchange's former head, was picked to be the Securities and Exchange Commission's chairman.
Page D1.
High Tech, Meet Low Key
Recession and consumer rejection of cutting-edge design produced a new look at the Milan furniture collections.
The Home Section, page C1.
Follow the Bouncing Ball
The National Basketball Association playoffs open tonight.
How does the first round shape up?
Page B18.


IN THE CHUTE WITH: Charles Sampson; 8-Second Workweek Has Its Ups and Downs
CHARLES SAMPSON winced at the lump on his leg.
Maybe it was a bruise.
Maybe it was scar tissue.
Maybe it was one of the screws that, along with 17 pins and two metal plates, keep his left calf wired together.
"It's just a little sore," he said.
Despite the discomfort, Mr.
Sampson hopped off the trainer's table, moseyed out to a makeshift stable, hoisted himself onto a highly annoyed bull and sat on the bucking beast for eight seconds as it stormed around the Astrodome in front of 60,000 people.


NBC and N.B.A. Agree to $750 Million Pact
On the eve of the National Basketball Association playoffs, the league agreed yesterday to a four-year, $750 million extension of its television deal with NBC Sports that includes an unusual revenue-sharing plan.
Acknowledging the N.B.A.'s value as prime sports programming, NBC will pay 25 percent more than its existing four-year, $600 million contract, which runs through the 1993-94 season.
That deal itself was more than triple what CBS paid for the previous four years N.B.A. deal which ended with the 1989-90 season.
Opening the Books
"When we signed the last contract, there was awesome speculation about how we'd do," Dick Ebersol, the president of NBC Sports, said at a news conference yesterday.
"We anticipated a modest profit, and we've exceeded that."


E-Systems Head Reports An Illness
The chairman and chief executive of E-Systems Inc., a military electronics company, said today that he had notified the board that he had a health problem.
But the executive, E. Gene Keiffer, said that his illness, which he declined to specify, was not life-threatening and would not require him to resign.
Separately, Mr.
Keiffer told the annual shareholders' meeting that the company wanted to reduce its military-oriented business during the next five years to about 50 percent of revenue from the current 85 percent.
He said it would lift international and nonmilitary business through acquisitions and expansion into related markets, like medical electronics.


Hillary Clinton Rejects Delay in Health Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton, who heads the White House task force on health care, rejected suggestions today that releasing an ambitious plan while the Administration's similarly ambitious budget was awaiting passage by Congress would risk rejection of both efforts.
"We're still proceeding as planned," said Mrs.
Clinton, speaking of the schedule that calls for release of the Administration's health plan by the last week in May.
"We are working as hard as we can, and there is no delay in what we're doing."


A Square-Off for a Toll-Free Prize
For months now, the rivals of A.T.&amp; T. in the long-distance telephone industry have told anyone who would listen that May 1 will be nothing less than Independence Day -- the day they liberate one of the last protected fortresses of the old Bell System.
Up for grabs is the highly profitable $7 billion market in toll-free "800" telephone lines, which allow companies like the direct-sales giant L. L. Bean to pay for customers' incoming long-distance calls.
On Saturday, new Federal regulations go into effect that will make it easier for corporations to switch their "800" lines from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company to competitors like the MCI Communications Corporation or the Sprint Corporation.
A Parade of Defectors
Today, MCI, after weeks of full-page newspaper advertisements promoting its "800" service and bashing A.T.&amp; T.'s, held a full-dress news conference in Washington to announce that some 50 big companies were switching their toll-free traffic to MCI, representing a total of $170 million in new revenue.
The new customers include Bear, Stearns, the national Blue Cross and Blue Shield organization and the National Westminster Bank.


China and Taiwan to Extend Talks in Singapore by a Day
China and Taiwan today extended their talks by one day after saying they had been unable to agree so far on several matters.
Delegates said that the two sides would still sign several agreements at the close of the talks on Thursday, but that the wording of a final communique would depend on the outcome of discussions.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about the Securities and Exchange Commission's computerized network for filing financial documents referred incorrectly to recent disruptions.
They involved a small number of computer terminals in the S.E.C.'s public reference room, not the system's main computers, which were not affected.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with the continuation of an article about the difficulties faced by people who live in mobile homes misstated the locations of two of the homes shown.
The homes at the top right and the bottom are in Rathbone, N.Y.; the one at the top left is in Cameron, N.Y.


Ray Haight; Racing Figure, 67
Ray Haight, a former racing announcer who served as director of publicity for Monmouth Park from 1971 until his retirement in 1988, died Tuesday at his home in Oceanport, N.J.
He was 67.
The cause of death was a heart attack, a track spokesman said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  GENERALS DEBATE BOSNIA STEPS  As the President nears a decision on U.S. policy in the Balkans, top generals engaged in an unusually public debate over the effectiveness of bombing to stop Serbian attacks against Muslims in Bosnia.
A1  CLINTON WEIGHS HIS OPTIONS  Senior officials say President Clinton is torn between wanting the quickest possible end to the fighting and setting an example that aggression does not pay.
A6


Seesaw Ninth Tilts Langston's Way, Leaving Abbott in Lurch
Buck Rodgers, the Angels' manager, visited the mound with two out in the ninth inning and it appeared that his starter, Mark Langston, was finally done.
He had carried a no-hitter into the eighth, but the potential tying runs were on base and Danny Tartabull was the batter.
Maybe the California manager thought it was time to reach for a fresh arm.
The meeting was short.
Rodgers did most of the talking, and the fans at Anaheim Stadium roared when he allowed Langston to remain in the game and try to finish off his shutout and preserve his two-hitter.
But Tartabull had another notion, and he seemingly spoiled Langston's gorgeous game by hammering a two-run double down the left- field line to tie the score, 2-2.
Except for the few Yankee fans, the stadium grew silent.


VAT's Offer a Way to Conceal the Tax Burden; Making It Progressive
To the Editor:
A value-added tax, which President Clinton contemplated recently, is a proper fiscal measure to pay for the health care of the 36 million uninsured Americans, reduce the budget deficit and stimulate saving and investment.
Such a consumption tax, which is paid for by the manufacturers at each stage of production, and ultimately passed on to consumers, can partially replace income and other taxes.
A European-style VAT can be progressive, with low rates for widely used basic goods and services, and high rates for luxury and unhealthy goods (tobacco, alcohol, gasoline).
In the European Community, it is a requirement for all members to have a progressive VAT (varying from 6 to 16 and 36 percent).
To ease the burden on the poor, certain items, such as food, housing and other necessities, can be excluded from VAT, as they are presently excluded from state and local sales taxes.


Review/Theater; Trying to Grasp an AIDS Tragedy
Lee Blessing's "Patient A" is a playwright's conversation with himself about the difficulties of understanding a real-life tragedy and distilling it into dramatic form.
The case is that of Kimberly Bergalis, the young woman in Florida who became infected with AIDS after being treated by her dentist.
For a time, the play seems like a delaying mechanism to avoid telling the story.
As portrayed by Jon DeVries, Mr.
Blessing is himself a character onstage.
Acting as narrator and editor, he repeatedly interrupts Ms.
Bergalis (Robin Morse), tossing in poems, statistics and observations.
Just at the point that we become annoyed with his interference in the narrative, he apologizes for that interference.
Despite all these distractions, "Patient A" moves a theatergoer to feelings of sympathy and admiration for Kimberly, and outrage at all those who took advantage of her.


Adewale Ayuba to Perform
The Nigerian singer Adewale Ayuba and his Bonsue Fuji Creation Band are to perform at Tramps tonight, replacing a fellow Nigerian, King Sunny Ade.
The one-night show is at 9.
Tramps is at 54 West 21st Street, Chelsea.
Information: (212) 727-7788.


U.S. Asked Saudis to Aid Palestinians
To lure the Palestinians back to the Middle East peace talks, the Clinton Administration recently asked Saudi Arabia to resume the financial aid that it had cut off during the Persian Gulf war, senior Administration officials said today.
One American official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the United Stateseffort had been a critical element in getting the Palestinians to resume the talks.


One Cheap Shot Claims a Star and Batters Hockey's Image
Some hockey haters think the sport is a just an excuse for bullies and brutes to get away with assault and battery.
Such a belief is a cheap shot, hockey lovers feel, but no worse than the cheap shot that Dale Hunter used to seriously injure Pierre Turgeon last night as the Islanders' clinched the opening round of the Stanley Cup playoffs with a 5-3 victory over the Washington Capitals.


Library President Remembered for His Leadership
Bryant Park was aglow with tulips and daffodils, children's laughter, sounds of music and the pleasure of sun worshipers during the memorial service yesterday celebrating the life of Dr.
Timothy S. Healy.
Dr.
Healy was the president of the Public Library at 42d Street and Fifth Avenue when he died of a heart attack on Dec. 30 at 69.
About 700 friends, colleagues and other admirers gathered under a large white tent in the park, across from the library, to remember the Jesuit priest and educator.


Four Die in Occupied Territories as Troops Fire on Protesters


Home Shopping Vendor Paid $1 Million to Settle Suit in '91
A top consultant to Home Shopping Network Inc., who also sold merchandise to the company, paid $1 million in 1991 to settle a civil suit that contended he was part of a racketeering scheme to defraud a company that financed those sales to the shopping channel.
The consultant, Francis R. Santangelo, who is also an adviser and close friend to Roy M. Speer, Home Shopping's chairman, said in a telephone interview this week that he had paid the money to resolve his part of a dispute involving American Trade Finance, a finance company based in Philadelphia that has since ceased operating.
He denied any wrongdoing in the case.


'Tango Pasion' at the Longacre Theater


U.S. MILITARY SPLIT ON USING AIR POWER AGAINST THE SERBS
While President Clinton nears a decision on a more active policy in the Balkans, top generals engaged in an unusually public debate today over the effectiveness of air strikes to stop Serbian attacks against the Bosnian Government.
In the most positive endorsement by a senior American military officer of the use of air power, Gen.
Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, told a Senate subcommittee that one option under consideration -- bombing the Bosnian Serbs' gun positions -- would be completely effective and pose "virtually no risk" to attacking American warplanes.


CHRONICLE
Is there no end to the travails of IMELDA MARCOS?
Rumors abound in Manila that the 63-year-old widow of Ferdinand Marcos plans to marry the lawyer who represents her in America, JAMES PAUL LINN, but she contends that the stories are a nasty Government plot to harass her and damage Mr.
Linn's reputation.
"I hope this is not somebody's idea of a cruel joke," Mrs.
Marcos said this week in Manila, "because I am just a poor widow who still has not buried her husband." She has had disputes with the Governments of Corazon Aquino and Fidel Ramos about where she can bury Mr.
Marcos, who died in 1989, so his body remains in a crypt on a Honolulu hilltop.


Market Place; Sunbeam, which ousted its chief, turns in a bright first quarter.
EVEN though its stock dropped 50 cents to close at $16.25, the Sunbeam-Oster Company had a much-needed good day yesterday, proving that it can build the company with new managers.
Sunbeam reported first-quarter results slightly better than analysts had expected, as earnings jumped 49 percent, to $23.8 million, and revenue increased 8.4 percent, to $289.4 million.
The earnings increase did not include charges in the 1992 quarter to meet accounting standards, which resulted in a loss for that period.


Bellamy's Comment on Cuomo Draws Rebuke
H.
Carl McCall picked up the support of a former opponent in the race for State Comptroller today, while Carol Bellamy drew a rebuke from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for comments she made about his involvement in the contest.
Mr.
McCall, the president of the New York City Board of Education, won an endorsement from Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, a Brooklyn Democrat who dropped out of the race today.
Mr.
Lentol's withdrawal left only five candidates in the contest, with Mr.
McCall and Ms.
Bellamy considered the leading contenders by most in the Legislature.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Arthur Levitt Jr. was nominated as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission by the Clinton Administration.
The selection of the publisher who formerly headed the American Stock Exchange came after long deliberations.  [ Page D1. ]
Real estate investment trusts are experiencing explosive growth, as investors seek to cash in on a potential recovery in real estate while other investment returns are lagging.  [ D1. ]


Sealy Plays a Waiting Game
Malik Sealy's voice is not lost.
Even in the din of the Indiana Pacers' dressing room, the home of a group whose bold pronouncements have often exceeded its performance in recent seasons, Sealy's words have not been ignored.


Study Says a Blood Fat Alone Rarely Hurts Heart
A study of more than 7,000 adults at 10 medical centers around the country indicates that for most people a high level of the blood fat triglycerides does not directly raise their risk of dying prematurely of heart disease.
Rather, elevated triglyceride levels seem to go hand in hand with other factors, like being overweight and having high blood sugar levels, which themselves raise coronary risk.


Dr. Edgar P. Berry, 78, a Retired Plastic Surgeon
Edgar P. Berry, who was a leading plastic surgeon and a former president of the New York County Medical Society, died on Monday at a nursing home in Sandwich, Mass.
He was 78.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


McRae's Tantrum: A Tradition Continues
Earlier this week, Hal McRae, the Kansas City Royals' manager, threw a temper tantrum after a game, set off by a "stupid question" from a radio talk-show host.
In the process, McRae grabbed objects from his desk and flung them across the room.
A reporter deflected a tape recorder and it struck another on the cheek, cutting him.
The incident appeared to have been defused only 24 hours later, but McRae will take his place with Tommy Lasorda and Lee Elia in the hall of fame of taped managerial tirades.


Tax-Exempt Yields Jump While Taxables Are Level
Yields of tax-exempt money market funds rose smartly in the latest reporting week, while taxable-fund yields were flat.
A survey covering the week ended Tuesday by IBC's Money Fund Report showed the average seven-day compounded yield for a tax-exempt fund up 7 basis points, to 2.04 percent, and the average seven-day simple yield up 6 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, to 2.01 percent.
The 30-day average compounded yield was 1.97 percent, and the 30-day simple yield was 1.94 percent.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
YOUNG children care little about privacy -- either their own or yours.
A 4-year-old will freely escort his neighborhood friends into the bathroom where you're taking a shower to ask if they can have some cookies. (A mother I know says she handled the situation with aplomb, giving the children permission, after which they left.) A 7-year-old will seldom be concerned with closing the door to her room and will freely share with her parents the events of her day.
All this changes in early adolescence, when children begin to figure out who they are as individuals.
One sign of this stage of identity formation, as developmental psychologists call it, is an increased demand for personal privacy and a growing awareness of the privacy needs of others.


Mansell Makes Plans
Although NIGEL MANSELL, the defending world champion, was scheduled to undergo back surgery last night, it may not prevent him from trying to qualify for the Indianapolis 500 pole position on May 15.
MICHAEL KNIGHT, a spokesman for Mansell's Indy-car team, Newman/ Haas Racing, said yesterday that the surgery would repair a separation in soft tissue in Mansell's lower back that was suffered when he crashed at Phoenix International Raceway on April 3.
The injury, which did not involve bone or muscle, created a cavity that was filling with blood, Knight said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Comeback Skid: Wilander Is Beaten
The comeback of former Mats Wilander was interrupted by Richard Fromberg of Australia in the second round of the $300,000 A.T.&amp;T.
Challenge yesterday in Duluth, Ga.
Wilander, who was ranked No. 1 in the world in 1988 when he won three of the four Grand Slam titles, stopped playing professionally two years ago.
He defeated seventh-seeded Luis Herrera on Tuesday in his return match, but lost, 6-3, 6-1, to Fromberg.
"Yesterday, I felt like I had time to get into a rhythm, but today his serve was bigger and the over all game was faster," said Wilander, a 28-year-old native of Sweden who won 33 tournaments including seven Grand Slam events. (AP) Korda Falls to Spain's Altur: Top-seeded Petr Korda was upset in the second-round of the B.M.W. tournament yesterday in Munich, Germany, beaten by Spain's Jose Altur, 5-7, 6-3, 6-3.
Andre Medvedev, seeded fourth and from Ukraine, also was an unexpected loser, falling, 6-7 (7-1), 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, to France's Cedric Piolane.
Korda, ranked No. 5 in the world, has been recovering from a viral infection, but refused to blame that for his loss to the world's 171st-ranked player.
"I'm just playing bad at the moment and I don't know why," said Korda of the Czech Republic. (AP)


Ex-Amex Head Gets S.E.C. Job
After long deliberations, the Clinton Administration today nominated Arthur Levitt Jr., a publisher and former head of the American Stock Exchange, as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The selection of Mr.
Levitt had been expected for weeks, but was held up by a number of factors: the required review of his finances; a politically sensitive decision to pass over an aide to Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and a backlog in reviewing candidates for a long list of other Administration financial positions that remain unfilled.


2 Dinkins Rivals, Giuliani and Stein, Woo Donors at Fund-Raisers for Mayor Race
In elegant hotels seven blocks apart, the two leading contenders to unseat Mayor David N. Dinkins held dueling fund-raisers last night, with Rudolph W. Giuliani taking in another $1 million for his Republican campaign and Andrew J. Stein reaping several hundred thousand dollars at one of a series of cocktail buffets he plans in the coming weeks.
The race for money -- and the momentum and credibility it can confer -- is much of what the campaign amounts to in these spring days, and its progress is vital to the candidates' fortunes.
That is especially so for Mr.
Stein, who has raised more than anyone but is lagging badly behind the Mayor in the polls for the Democratic nomination and has begun the costly undertaking of television advertising well before his rivals.


Bridge
The Westchester Contract Bridge Association, which has for many years played its tournaments at the County Center in White Plains, has a new home.
It is at the Church of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, 1 Cross Road, Ardsley, N.Y., and the Spring Sectional begins there tomorrow with the following schedule:
Tomorrow : Open Pairs and Women's Pairs, 1:30 P.M.; Flighted Pairs, 8 P.M.
Saturday, Stratified Pairs, 1 P.M.; Board-a-Match Teams and Stratified Pairs, 7:30 P.M.
Sunday, 49er Pairs, noon; Flighted Swiss Teams, noon and 7 P.M.; Open Pairs, 7 P.M.


Dolls Versus Trucks
To The Home Section:
I agree with Lawrence Kutner  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 15 ]  that it is beneficialfor all children, regardless of sex, to be able to play with any toys they want to.
I do think it's a shame that we seem to value traditional boys' pursuitsmore than traditional girls' pastimes.
Maybe it's true that children who playwith blocks and trucks master skills that get "rewarded," while those who playwith dolls get "shortchanged." But if we continue to promote "rewardable"skills over those related to nurturing, who's going to take care of us whenwe're too old, young or sick to be out pursuing rewards?
And doesn't caring for others bring its own, perhaps less tangible but certainly no less real rewards, too?
I look forward to the day when we are as anxious to encourage boys andgirls to play with dolls as we are to make sure girls get to play with trucks.
LINDA JORDAN New Hamburg, N.Y.


BORLAND INTERNATIONAL (NMS)
Borland International Inc. surprised Wall Street with earnings significantly in excess of analysts' estimates.
The software maker's better-than-anticipated results, reported late on Tuesday, reflected its decision to meet the Microsoft Corporation head on with deep discounts on its leading spreadsheet and data base programs.
The company also benefited from savings because of a wide restructuring and job cuts.
"These results reflect the introduction during the quarter of Paradox for Windows and dBase IV version 2.0," Philippe Kahn, Borland's chairman, president and chief executive, said in a statement.
"Sales of Borland products for the growing Windows marketplace accounted for more than half of the company's fourth-quarter revenues."


Nickelodeon Publisher
Lynn A. Lehmkuhl, the publisher of Disney Adventures magazine, has been named publisher of Nickelodeon magazine, a children's humor magazine that will come out in June.
The magazine will be published by Nickelodeon, the cable network that is one of the largest producers of television shows for children.


Tennis Coach Begged Girl To Forgive His Obsession
In a letter three months ago, Gary Wilensky -- the tennis coach who tried to kidnap a former student and then killed himself when the attempt failed -- begged the family of his intended victim to forgive his obsession and bemoaned his "insatiable need of a family."
The contents of the letter, one of several Mr.
Wilensky had written to Jennifer Rhodes, 17, or her parents and later recorded on videotape, were disclosed yesterday at a news conference in Colonie, N.Y., a town outside of Albany where the attempted abduction took place.


Whose Kiss Is This? 43 Years Later, 3 Sue
On a perfect spring afternoon, crowds today filled a courtroom seeking to discover the truth about a kiss stolen on a crowded Paris street on another bright spring day 43 years ago.
The kiss, captured in 1950 by the photographer Robert Doisneau, has become a quintessential Parisian image -- of passion, perhaps fleeting, embraced amid an anonymous crowd in this most romantic of cities.
But its recent history has been sordid.


Classical Music in Review
Brooklyn Philharmonic  Brooklyn Academy of Music
The time passed a few decades ago when listeners could be expected to express surprise that a close relationship existed between jazz and symphonic concert music.
Early in the century, concert composers drew sustenance from the rhythmic and motivic well of jazz, and jazz composers returned the gesture by raiding Impressionistic and chromatic harmonic language.
Since the 1960's, the complexities of avant-garde jazz have paralleled those of avant-garde concert writing, and for musicians with open ears, each movement provided fuel for the other.
There were no real surprises, therefore, in the Brooklyn Philharmonic concert that Dennis Russell Davies conducted on Saturday evening: just an acknowledgement of a long-standing blurring of borders and the suggestion, if only subliminally, that compartmentalization makes no sense.


A Bicycle to Personalize Your Workout at Home
IN winter, many people prefer a stationary cycle to an outdoors bicycle.
When spring comes, the indoor athletes start riding outside.
But the day may be at hand when riders don't want to give up their housebound bicycles when the seasons change.
Stationary cycles are becoming increasingly sophisticated.
Precor Inc., an exercise equipment company in Bothell, Wash., has developed a bicycle that behaves like a personal trainer: it's called the M8.2E/L Personal Cycle Trainer.


Man Testifies to Role Of Officer in Killings
A confessed killer and drug trafficker testified yesterday that it was his New York State parole officer who leaked confidential parole agency information that led to two murders.
The man, Ernesto Piniella, told a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn that the officer, Ina McGriff, had initiated a financial and sexual relationship with him when she was supervising him while he was supposed to be participating in a work-release program from prison but in fact was serving as "security director" for a Queens drug ring.


It's Official: Brown Is Nominated for Drug Post


Wary Vermont Watches Rising Lake Champlain
In this boating community just north of Burlington, and in dozens of flooded communities along Lake Champlain, residents have been dazed by Mother Nature as they watched the lake climb to its highest level since measurements began in 1869.
The combination of record snowfalls (and then snow melt), runoff from rivers and above-average rainfall this year has driven the water to a record high of 101.8 feet, where it peaked yesterday and shows no signs of receding.
The level of the lake, which is 118 miles long and 10 miles wide at its widest point, is normally 94.5 to 98.9 feet, according to the National Weather Service.


Folk Benefit for Y
Judy Collins, Odetta and Burl Ives are among the singers scheduled to perform in "Folksongs U.S.A.," a fund-raising concert for the 92d Street Y. It is to be held at the Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, on May 17 at 8 P.M.
Also on the program are Tom Paxton, the Chad Mitchell Trio, Theodore Bikel, Paul Robeson Jr. and Oscar Brand.
Tickets are $200 to $1,000.
Information: (212) 415-5488.


Sampson Denies Deal With Asian Team
The former All-Star RALPH SAMPSON yesterday denied that he has reached an agreement to play and coach in Asia's first men's pro basketball league.
DOUGLAS MARAN, executive director of the Asian Basketball Association, had said Tuesday that the 7-foot-4-inch Sampson would play for Hong Kong when the six-team league debuts this summer.


Essay; Bosnia Speech Draft
Team A is drafting the President's speech on the need to intervene in Bosnia.
Originally prepared at State, it is being made intelligible by the national security adviser, punched up by Presidential speechwriters and smoothed down by Ambassador Talbott.
Here is the alternate draft from my own Team B.
Fellow Americans, and fellow citizens of the world:


Books of The Times; Putting In a Word for Homer, Herodotus, Plato, Etc.
The Oldest Dead White European Males  And Other Reflections on the Classics  By Bernard Knox  144 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company
The title of Bernard Knox's stimulating new book, "The Oldest Dead White European Males: And Other Reflections on the Classics," is a bit of a tease.
Since its author is a classicist and the director emeritus of Harvard's Center for Hellenic Studies in Washington, the reader expects an aggressive defense of ancient Greek culture against the multiculturalists and feminists who argue, not incorrectly, that the classical Greek polis, having been a sort of men's club supported by slavery, appears today, in Mr.
Knox's own words, an emblem of "reactionary conservatism" and of "enforced conformity."


Classical Music in Review
Musica Viva  Unitarian Church of All Souls Lexington Avenue and 80th Street
One could justifiably give Sunday's performing space equal billing alongside the singers and musicians for Musica Viva's all-Bach program.
Indeed, the tall, well-kept and barrel-vaulted church interior seemed to shape the style of music making as much as the players did.
Walter Klauss's choir is small and expert; individuals step forward for solos and then blend back in for ensemble singing.
The overall effect, musically and acoustically, was of a lovely legato haze.
Indeed, it was a tribute to the group's deft, light togetherness that the familiar motet "Lobe den Herrn," emerged with the clarity that it did.
Elsewhere, in the cantatas "Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich" and "Himmelskonig, sei willkommen," carefully sung contrapuntal lines kept drifting up toward the high ceiling and crumbling into pieces.
Pretty much the same thing happened in the solo cantata "Ich habe genug" where Kurt Owen Richard's pleasant bass became one constituent floating in an impressionistic mass of sound.


INTEL SUES ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES ON CLONES
The Intel Corporation said yesterday that it had filed a lawsuit against Advanced Micro Devices Inc., contending that Advanced Micro's versions of its 486 microprocessor, the current standard for personal computers, infringed copyrights.
Intel said that the lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in San Jose, Calif., covered chips with copies of an Intel microcode and clean-room versions that Advanced Micro was developing with its own microcode, which is software embedded in the chip.
Advanced Micro said earlier this week that it had begun shipping clones of Intel's 486, after a judge overturned a jury verdict that had blocked sales of the chips.


Real Faces Of Welfare At Meeting
EARLIER this week, a handful of welfare recipients sat down at a conference table with Tom Roach, the Ulster County Social Services Commissioner.
They told stories that were hard to follow.
He took notes and doodled a little, promising to review their cases.
Nothing much was resolved, but advocates for the homeless insisted that the meeting was extraordinary.
Clients and commissioners rarely come in contact in the stratified world of social services.
Administrators tend to be insulated from the people they serve.
For their part, too often clients know the officials only as faceless bureaucrats who can turn their lives upside down with a signature on a piece of paper.


In Next Year's Shadow, Daly Set for Cavaliers
Many in the National Basketball Association see Chuck Daly as the savior of the Nets franchise.
And why not?
When he was with the Detroit Pistons, he became only the third coach in N.B.A. history to win back-to-back titles.
He coached the 1992 Olympic team to a gold medal, and even if he walked away now, Daly would be considered one of the best coaches ever.
Which brings us back to the Nets and the potential for a very big problem.


For Smith, Long Road Leads to Experience
Asked to name a thing or two he has learned this season, Charles Smith laughed.
"A thing or two?" Smith asked. "I could write a book.


Kodak Stock Plunges As Officer Quits
Christopher J. Steffen, the Eastman Kodak chief financial officer whose hiring was met with acclaim by investors in January, has quit the company in a policy dispute.
The announcement of Mr.
Steffen's resignation was made before the stock market opened yesterday and it led to a big selloff in Kodak's shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company's stock dropped in price by 9.8 percent and lost more than $1.5 billion of its market value.


Ford First-Quarter Profit Is Better than Expected
The Ford Motor Company reported improved first-quarter earnings today, far exceeding analysts' estimates, but still short of what the auto maker said it would deem acceptable.
That was the sort of talk investors loved to hear, and Ford shares rose $1.875, to $54.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
More than three million shares traded hands.


In Trade Center Bombing Case, Two Rights Collide
Judge Kevin T. Duffy is known around the Federal courthouse in Manhattan as a judge with strong opinions.
Perhaps nothing illustrates this better than when he banned anyone connected with the World Trade Center bombing case he is hearing from saying anything to the media.
It is an order so sweeping that the United States Attorney's office won't even comment on its position about the order.


Mastercard In Electronic Bank Venture
In a move beyond plastic credit cards, Mastercard International said that today it would announce a service that would allow bank customers to pay bills and get financial information by telephone and personal computer.
The service, called Master Banking, is a joint venture with the Checkfree Corporation, an electronic funds-transfer company.
It would allow Mastercard member banks nationwide, which issue Mastercard credit cards, to offer an expanded version of the Checkfree bill-paying service.


Ex-Amex Head Gets S.E.C. Job
After long deliberations, the Clinton Administration today nominated Arthur Levitt Jr., a publisher and former head of the American Stock Exchange, as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The selection of Mr.
Levitt had been expected for weeks, but was held up by a number of factors: the required review of his finances; a politically sensitive decision to pass over an aide to Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and a backlog in reviewing candidates for a long list of other Administration financial positions that remain unfilled.


Experts Urge Emergency Care for Stroke Victims
Emergency treatment should be summoned for people with symptoms of a stroke because steps to limit brain damage are most effective within the first six hours after the symptoms begin, medical experts said yesterday.
Newer therapies, some standard and others still experimental, may limit brain damage from strokes if given early, making emergency care all the more critical in preventing death and disability, the National Stroke Association said.


Islanders Advance, but Their Top Scorer Falls
The New York Islanders, whose springtimes have largely been silent during nearly a decade of rebuilding, roared into the Patrick Division final tonight by eliminating the Washington Capitals, 5-3, before a capacity audience at Nassau Colisuem that was alternately enraptured and enraged.
Although the players, fans and management were inspired by the club's first trip to a division final in six years, they were numbed by Dale Hunter's mugging of Pierre Turgeon just after the Islanders' sole resident superstar put the team ahead, 5-1, in the final period.
Slammed into the boards by a vengeful Hunter, Turgeon left the game with a concussion and a separated right shoulder, an injury that could end his season and will undoubtedly prove injurious to the Islanders as they try to prolong theirs.


New York Seeks Curbs At Sex Clubs
The New York City Department of Health said yesterday that it will require business establishments that promote sex among customers to take actions to prevent the transmission of the AIDS virus, which would force businesses to monitor sexual behavior to prevent unsafe practices.
The officials said they have trained about a dozen Health Department workers to begin a new round of inspections to enforce compliance at such establishments, known as sex clubs.
They said failure to comply would lead to warnings, fines and, if appropriate, closure.


Washington Memo; Clinton's Plan for Economy May Hinge on His Popularity
Despite some early setbacks and the worries expressed by some of President Clinton's top advisers, his economic plan, on which the ultimate success or failure of his Presidency could ride, has not been derailed by Congress.
But the overall package, with its steep tax increases, deficit reduction and huge shifts in spending away from the military and toward social programs and public works projects, is not -- as the White House maintains day after day -- completely on track either.


Theater in Review
Via Theater Triplets  Ontological at St.
Mark's Theater Second Avenue at 10th Street East Village Through Sunday  New works by Brian Jucha, John Jesurun and Anne Bogart; lighting by Roma Flowers; costumes by Kasia Walicka-Maimone; Presented by Via Theater, Ms.
Bogart and Mr.
Jucha, co-artistic directors.
BRING ME YOUR LOVE, from the short story by Charles Bukowski; adapted and directed by Mr.
Jucha.
WITH: David Neumann, Megan Spooner, David J. Steinberg and Lisa Welti.
SOUTHERN CROSS, written, directed and designed by Mr.
Jesurun.
WITH: Sheryl Dold, Mr.
Jucha, Barney O'Hanlon, Mr.
Neumann, Tina Shepard, Ms.
Spooner and Ms.
Welti.
BEHAVIOR IN PUBLIC PLACES, based on the writings of Erving Goffman; conceived and directed by Ms.
Bogart, in collaboration with the company; music by Istvan Marta, performed by the Kronos Quartet.
WITH: Ms.
Dold, Mr.
Jucha, Tamar Kotoske, Mr.
O'Hanlon, Ms.
Shepard, Ms.
Spooner and Ms.
Welti.


Editors' Note
An article on April 14 about Bill Baird, a longtime advocate of abortion rights, described his differences with some supporters of the movement.
A reference to others, who praise his work, was deleted in editing.
The article also reported that some opponents of abortion view Mr.
Baird as the Devil incarnate and quoted him as asking, "Am I the devil?" Based on that material, the headline in some editions referred to Mr.
Baird as "The Devil of Abortion."


Gold's Modest Ascent
Gold is rallying.
Gold traders are busy.
Gold analysts are smiling and predicting higher prices -- yes, higher prices.
That is quite a change for gold, which was banished to the minor leagues in the mid-1980's after enjoying major league status in the 1970's and especially in 1980, when prices hit $850 an ounce.
Every rally has been quashed as the price moved relentlessly lower, slumping to $326.90 on March 10, its lowest level in more than eight years.


Review/Dance; Under Ruffles and Frills, Searching Out the Tango
"Tango Pasion," a revue at the Longacre Theater that banks on fond memories of "Tango Argentino," offers tackiness in place of the high style that made the earlier show a hit in 1985.
Not surprisingly, you can't go home again.
But you can go slumming and for all its lack of taste in concept and decor, "Tango Pasion" can still entice the crowds of aficionados converted to a new craze by "Tango Argentino."


VAT's Offer a Way to Conceal the Tax Burden; How Many Layers?
To the Editor:  Your editorial about the pros and cons of the value-added tax contains the erroneous assumption that the consumer is not informed about its burden; actually in all VAT countries the tax has to be shown separately on all bills and receipts.
The regressive impact of the tax is generally overstated, because the poor pay practically no tax and the difference between middle-class taxpayers and rich taxpayers is usually proportionate to their consumption of goods other than necessities such as food, rent, health care and similar items that can be kept free of tax or subject to lower rates.
As a matter of fact, the VAT may act as an incentive to savings, the lack of which is one of the reasons for our economic disorder.


Review/Dance; Performance With a Bit of Physiotherapy
The new and recent dances presented by Marijeanne Liederbach last Thursday night at Dia Center for the Arts were full of odd and provocative ideas and imagery as well as potent atmospheres that were dark but not oppressive.
The effect was enhanced by Susan Hamburger's eerie lighting.
But Ms.
Liederbach, who is also a physical therapist, shifts fluidly between dancerly runs and long, clean stretches to hobbled movement and subtle losses of coordination.
In "Lake," a new work set to music by Andy Haas, three men move slowly in and out of a near-acrobatic tangle of balances and clings in a tight-knit cluster.
"Lake" was danced by Philip Karg, Tom Mossbrucker of the Joffrey Ballet and Michael Siebert, the figure skater.
The musicians were Mr.
Haas, Dan Brown and Michael Evans.


For Girls Only: Glimpse of Workaday World
At the Metro-North Commuter Railroad nerve center on Madison Avenue, Casey O'Connor, a chief train dispatcher, needed to clear a signal yesterday, so he mobilized his one-day assistant.
"O.K., Danielle, honey, push 61, E4, execute," he said.


Wildflower Gift for Mother
A nostalgic wildflower bouquet, complete with the lavender delphinium, crimson peonies, Bishop's Flower and butter yellow snapdragons of childhood memory, is available for Mother's Day delivery.
The simple selection is a departure from the usual cut flowers -- carnations, roses and tulips -- available through the mail.


Classical Music in Review
'Aida'  Houston Grand Opera
The usually forward-looking Houston Grand Opera has waxed nostalgic in recent weeks with a restaging of the production of Verdi's "Aida" that opened its first season in the Wortham Center, in 1987.
Pier Luigi Pizzi's designs were acclaimed at the time, especially for their charming props, like the life-size elephants on wheels that achieve a certain grandeur of scale while gently mocking the literalistic grandiosity often applied to the work.
Ross A. Perry has provided new direction and choreography, and the dance scenes, in particular, were attractive on Saturday evening.
But for a visitor new to the production, the garishness of the costumes jarred with the starkness of the sets.


MOTOROLA INTRODUCES A NEW WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY
Motorola Inc., a leader in wireless technologies, announced a new technology yesterday that is intended to enhance the availability of wireless data transfer.
Such radio transmission of electronic mail, faxes and other data is still in its infancy.
General Magic, a consortium of industry giants including A.T.&amp; T. and Sony, announced earlier this year a similar procedure that would make it easier for hardware and software companies to design applications for wireless data transfer.
Such networking software is used to tie together computers and telephone lines.


Classical Music in Review
Krystian Zimerman  Pianist Carnegie Hall
Krystian Zimerman is a musical thinker rather than a virtuoso; his best interpretations unfold as a sequence of bracing illuminations.
He has also been known to contradict himself and produce a somewhat bewildering musical picture.
A case in point was the Schubert Piano Sonata in B flat, played on the second half of his program Friday night.
Mr.
Zimerman had the technique and control for Schubert's easeful spans of sound, but the argument went awry at several crucial points.
At the outset of the first movement, for example, the main theme foundered amid unnecessary spells of rubato: the bass trill in the eighth bar, which should rumble beneath an even surface, failed to play its unsettling role.
Then, later in the movement, Mr.
Zimerman undercut major events with inexpressive articulation: the forte statement of the main theme did not roll in with the right leisurely grandeur (the tempo was slightly too fast throughout), and the momentous triple-piano re-entry of this same theme in the development slid past without a shiver of epiphany.


Calendar: House Tours And Architects' Talks
Manhattan Tour
New York Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers, 200 Lexington Avenue (33d Street); (212) 685-3480.
Fifteen residences are featured in a house tour on Saturday, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Participating designers include Samuel Botero, Elyse B. Lacher, Michael Love and Bruce Bierman.
Tickets are $60.
Proceeds will benefit the chapter, the Cooper-Hewitt Museum and the Partnership for the Homeless.
School Benefit
Village Community School, 272 West 10th Street; (212) 691-5146.
An Italianate row house with a garden, a triplex apartment and a 4,500-square-foot loft built between adjoining buildings are on a tour on Sunday, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Tickets, available at the school, are $35.


Foreign Affairs; Yeltsin Duels the Old Guard
In the wake of his victory at the polls, President Boris Yeltsin seems to be doing a very smart thing.
He's giving the surly Parliament, dominated by ex-Communists, a chance to negotiate its own suicide -- before he tries to kill it outright.
"If there is a one-in-a-thousand chance that the present deputies will accept the referendum results and take this path of constitutional reform,  [ we ]  are obliged to give them this chance," was how Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Shakhrai explained step one.
Then came the twist into step two: "I'm not saying it will necessarily work."


CHRONICLE
SPIKE LEE finally got to speak at the University of California at Irvine Tuesday evening -- almost a year late.
The director got caught in traffic on his way to the campus last April 30, the second night of the rioting sparked by the acquittals of four Los Angeles police officers charged with beating Rodney King.
"I really wanted to speak that night," Mr.
Lee said to the crowd of about 1,500 in the university's Bren Center, The Associated Press reported.
"I was feeling a lot of hurt, a lot of anger, and I understood why people were acting the way they did. "


Events: Finalists' Work In Ferry Competition
Ferry Finalists
Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
An exhibition of models and drawings of the six finalists in a competition to restore the Whitehall Ferry Terminal, including the winning design by Venturi, Scott Brown &amp; Associates, starts tomorrow and runs through May 17.


Extension for Levy
The Buffalo Bills have extended Coach MARV LEVY's contract through 1996, according to published reports.
The Buffalo News said yesterday that Levy, 64, agreed to the extension during talks with the team owner, RALPH C. WILSON Jr., while team executives gathered at Rich Stadium this weekend for the draft.
"In my mind, Marv can be the coach here until he gets tired of it," Wilson said.


Mets Look Up and See the Marlins
"At least we're better than the Marlins."
A week ago, it was a macabre, anonymous clubhouse suggestion for a 1993 motto for the Mets.
Tonight, it was no longer true, much less darkly humorous.


Texas Governor Delays Execution 30 Days
Gov.
Ann W. Richards gave a convict a 30-day reprieve today, hours before he was to be executed for a 1981 murder.
In a statement late this afternoon, the Governor said of the convict, Gary Graham, "I pass no judgment on his guilt or innocence but believe that questions have been raised in this case that deserve further examination."


Navy Revamps Minesweeping for Unpredictable Age
For the past two weeks, these scenic Canadian waters have been used to mimic the most sinister seas that United States Navy warships might face in future third world trouble spots.
The Navy, ill-prepared for Iraq's extensive use of mines in the Persian Gulf war, is now trying to deal with the kind of coastal warfare that military planners fear in any post-cold-war conflicts with countries like Iran or Iraq.


NEGLIGENCE IS SEEN IN ACTOR'S DEATH
A police investigation indicates that the fatal shooting of the actor Brandon Lee on a movie set here last month was due to negligence on the part of crew members, not foul play, the District Attorney says.
District Attorney Jerry Spivey said Tuesday that the investigation was nearly complete and that he had not yet decided whether to file criminal charges.
"There's no indication that I see at all from the investigative report that anyone intentionally hurt Brandon," he said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
2.72
3.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.89
3.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
3.00
3.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.61
5.62
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.90
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.85
9.01
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.97
5.96
6.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Accord Reached on Easing Voter Registration
House and Senate negotiators agreed today on the final wording of legislation to encourage voter registration, , apparently resolving a feud between Republicans and Democrats over which party might gain an electoral advantage from the change.
The compromise bill would allow citizens to register to vote by signing a form whenever they obtain a driver's license, apply for welfare or disability benefits or enlist in the military.
It also establishes a standard form enabling citizens in any state to register by mail.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
If an orchestra takes the trouble to commission a new work, it ought to show at least a degree of concern for the finished product.
On Thursday night, the New York Philharmonic extended no such courtesy to Phillip Ramey, giving his Concerto for Horn and Strings a run-through rather than a performance.
The strings repeatedly smudged entries and produced a dull, anemic sound.
Philip Myers made his way through the solo part with much effort and little grace.
Leonard Slatkin appeared to be doing his best on the podium, but the orchestra palpably had no enthusiasm for the music.
In the Philharmonic's defense, it must be said that the Ramey concerto, a leisurely, mildly dissonant work in two movements, was not the most distinctive of this season's 150th-anniversary commissions.
The decision to expose a solo horn line without full orchestral support was risky, to begin with; Mr.
Ramey's episodic string sonorities supplied an unfocused background.
The first movement initiated an atmosphere of expectation that later events failed to answer.
The basic melodic material was not arresting.


Dolls Versus Trucks
To The Home Section:
I agree with Lawrence Kutner  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 15 ]  that it is beneficialfor all children, regardless of sex, to be able to play with any toys they want to.
I do think it's a shame that we seem to value traditional boys' pursuitsmore than traditional girls' pastimes.
Maybe it's true that children who playwith blocks and trucks master skills that get "rewarded," while those who playwith dolls get "shortchanged." But if we continue to promote "rewardable"skills over those related to nurturing, who's going to take care of us whenwe're too old, young or sick to be out pursuing rewards?
And doesn't caring for others bring its own, perhaps less tangible but certainly no less real rewards, too?
I look forward to the day when we are as anxious to encourage boys andgirls to play with dolls as we are to make sure girls get to play with trucks.
LINDA JORDAN New Hamburg, N.Y.


U.S. to Be a No-Show at the Paris Air Show
In an apparent reflection of American concerns over French industrial spying and a Pentagon change of policy, American-made military aircraft and helicopters will not be displayed at the Paris Air Show in June.
Philippe Guerin, a spokesman for the French aerospace association that organizes the show, said today, "We have no U.S. fighters or combat helicopters scheduled to appear at the show, unlike in 1991, when we had all the U.S. aircraft from the gulf war, including the Stealth bomber."


German Metalworkers In East Approve Strike
Thousands of metalworkers in eastern Germany have voted overwhelmingly to strike to press their demand for an immediate 26 percent pay increase, their union announced today.
Employers agreed to the increase in 1991 but reneged earlier this year, saying such a raise would be ruinously expensive because productivity is low in eastern Germany.


Michael Stanley, 49, Suicide Researcher And Neuroscientist
Dr.
Michael Edward Stanley, a Columbia University neuroscientist known nationally for his research on the biochemistry of suicide, died on Monday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 49.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife and fellow researcher, Dr. Barbara Stanley.


On the Loss of a Parent
To The Home Section:
In my 20 years of work with patients and families at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in New York, I have heard three themes often expressed by adult children following the loss of the last surviving parent  [ Parent &amp; Child, April 1 ] : "Now I am an orphan," "I guess I am next in line for death" and "You feel young as long as you have a living parent."


Ex-Amex Head Gets S.E.C. Job
After long deliberations, the Clinton Administration today nominated Arthur Levitt Jr., a publisher and former head of the American Stock Exchange, as chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The selection of Mr.
Levitt had been expected for weeks, but was held up by a number of factors: the required review of his finances; a politically sensitive decision to pass over an aide to Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and a backlog in reviewing candidates for a long list of other Administration financial positions that remain unfilled.


Down Time
Day Runner Inc. makes datebooks for appointments.
Its stock price has dropped from a peak of $19 in October to around $10 this month.
On Tuesday, the company reported higher earnings but declining sales to large office-products companies.
It said orders from these customers come in unpredictable spurts, and investors bid the stock down sharply yesterday.


Smits May Miss Opener
Indiana's task in its first-round playoff series against the Knicks may have become more difficult today when the Pacers learned Rik Smits may not be available for Game 1 on Friday night.
Smits, 7-foot-4-inch center, awoke with pain in his right knee on Tuesday.
He departed Market Square Arena immediately after a closed practice this afternoon and did not discuss the injury.
Results of an examination today were not available, but the condition was believed by club officials to be similar to tendinitis that led to arthroscopic surgery on his left knee last year.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Middle East peace talks referred incorrectly in some editions to the spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation.
She is Hanan Ashrawi.


U.S. Plans to Leave Troops To Back U.N. Somalia Unit
The United States plans to keep an Army "quick reaction" force in Somalia to help protect the United Nations peacekeeping forces there, Administration officials say.
The United States plans to transfer the peacekeeping mission in Somalia next week to a 28,000-member United Nations force.
But about 4,000 American Army forces will stay behind, including a 1,300-member quick reaction force.


Dorothy Roberts; Poet, 86
Dorothy Roberts, a Canadian poet, died on April 23 in State College, Pa. She was 86.
Her work was widely anthologized in Canada and the United States.
Her books include "Songs for Swift Feet," "In Star and Stalk," "Twice to Flame" and "The Self of Loss."


Costa Rica Standoff Ends; Judges Free
Ending a three-day standoff with armed captors, the authorities freed 18 Supreme Court justices and 5 others today and arrested the men who had taken them hostage.
Several Government cars pulled into the garage of the court's nine-story building here at about 3:30 P.M. and emerged minutes later with the hostages, all unharmed, Government officials said.


Fossils Prove Life Came About Faster
Fossil microorganisms discovered in Australia by an American scientist prove that life was already thriving and diversified 3.485 billion years ago, leaving a much narrower window than previously thought for life to develop.
The microorganisms, representing 11 distinct types, are more than 1.3 billion years older than any comparable fossil group ever found.
This dramatically curtails the time available for life to have evolved naturally on earth, and could focus more attention on the disputed hypothesis that life originated elsewhere in the universe and somehow reached earth from afar.


On Stage, and Off
Reaching for Audiences
It's a hectic time in the Broadway season, with several shows opening (and three, alas, closing), the Tony nominations looming and the annual summer drought on the horizon.
The general sense that shows are jockeying for position is confirmed by some recent shifts in marketing strategies.
To begin with, two new musicals are staggering after a critical pounding.
The brassy, ubiquitous ads for "Ain't Broadway Grand" apparently did not lift attendance much, and the producers have now adopted a strategy of silence.
After opening night, contrary to general practice, they would not supply weekly Variety with box-office totals for the first week, leaving the magazine to estimate receipts at a paltry $137,000.
The show's press representative, Fred Nathan, said sales were slightly better this week than last, although he would not give figures.
On Wednesday, the show ran a newspaper ad with a probably unique offer: any patrons who, by intermission, didn't like the show enough to stay until the end, could have their money back. (At Wednesday's matinee, seven people claimed the refund but were turned down because they had bought discount tickets.)


Starting to Build Their First Bridge, China and Taiwan Sign 4 Pacts
Delegates from China and Taiwan today concluded the first high-level meeting they have ever held by signing four agreements, including one providing for a regular dialogue between the two former adversaries.
As dozens of strobe lights flashed, the septuagenarians who head the two delegations slowly signed copies of the agreements, which call for increased exchanges across the Taiwan Strait and closer cooperation in areas like fighting crime.
For the first time, the two sides will have a formal channel for communication, instead of the informal method used until the end of the 1970's -- pounding the other side with artillery shells.


Diplomats, and Aristide, See an End to Haiti Impasse
Diplomats said today that military leaders in Haiti had signaled their readiness for a new push to end the country's political stalemate, and the ousted President said he was increasingly confident that he would soon return to office.
In an interview in the Georgetown apartment that has been his home for over a year, the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, also gave the first explanation of an offer of amnesty for his opponents; diplomats say the amnesty is a key to a negotiated transfer of power in Haiti.


COMPANY NEWS
DRUG EMPORIUM INC., Columbus, Ohio, said that three company directors had agreed to buy 1.6 million shares of company stock.
ELF PETROLEUM NIGERIA, a subsidiary of Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine of Paris, has signed exploration and production sharing contracts with the Nigerian National Petroleum Corp.


At the Bar; Lifting a briefcase can be a terrific strain. But a little cash can ease the pain.
James Benfer, Esq., who injured his shoulder while lifting and inspecting the underbelly of his leather office chair, will collect $107,913.75.
Robert Anderson, Esq., received $30,000 after throwing out his back stretching for a statute book on a top shelf of the law library at the Kansas Supreme Court.
Michael Harris, Esq., wrenched his shoulder reaching into the back seat of his car for his briefcase.
He will receive nearly $35,000.
A briefcase also proved the undoing of Fletcher Bell, Esq.
He hurt himself trying to lift his briefcase out of his car trunk.
The injury did not cause him to miss any work, or even to miss his golf game.
Still, a workers' compensation judge awarded him $95,000 for it.


Bosnia Rivals Set New Talks As U.S. Weighs Action Plans
The United Nations announced today that the three warring factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina will resume talks this weekend on ending the conflict, and President Clinton summoned the United States' top military commanders to the White House for a final review of options on ending Serbian aggression.
The talks, which are to begin in Athens on Saturday, would give Bosnia's Serbian nationalists a chance to make peace before the United States and its allies decide on a tougher course of action.


Taking Flight Into Spring's Glory


Making The Best Of Lean Times At the Auctions
IF the boom of the late 1980's had never happened, then the offerings wouldn't seem so slim at Sotheby's and Christie's, whose important spring sales of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art begin next week in Manhattan.
But those heady days when catalogues were as thick as telephone books and estimates hit the double-digit millions weren't so long ago.
They still haunt the art world.
By comparison, the more than $225 million worth of paintings, drawings and sculpture by artists like Monet and Matisse, Warhol and Lichtenstein that are on public view this weekend and go up for sale beginning on Monday night at Sotheby's, seem modest, to say the least.
"It's quite clear both of us have had to struggle to get pictures," said Christopher Burge, the president of Christie's in New York.
It is also clear that as the art market struggles out of a two-year slump, collectors who don't have to sell would prefer to hold off until prices go up.


Pollution Experts Consider a Gate Across the East River
Almost every summer, the oxygen levels in the waters of western Long Island Sound drop so low that fish die in huge, stinking pools.
And the water quality in both the Sound and the East River is poor, despite billions spent on sewage treatment plants.
Yesterday, about 100 engineers and government officials gathered at Columbia University to discuss an unusually bold approach to cleaning both bodies of water: a "tidal barrage," or one-way water gate, for the East River.


Bengals Try to Rope Jets' Hasty With Loophole
The Cincinnati Bengals have signed James Hasty, the Jets' star cornerback, to an offer sheet that would pay him a $1.5 million salary from the Bengals but $2.7 million should the Jets keep him.
Yesterday, the Jets were unsure what they would do.
"Cincinnati gave James an offer sheet," said General Manager Dick Steinberg of the Jets in a statement, "and we have seven days to decide what to do with it."


Review/Pop; Van Morrison and More Than Blues
Van Morrison, ever unsmiling, makes every concert a search with elusive goals.
He grumbles, invokes heroes, exorcises pain and reaches for transcendence.
He looks back to the blues and soul songs that shaped his voice; he looks inward for private epiphanies that will dissolve what he's singing into a babbling, repeated line.
And his band, awaiting his every whim and inspiration, vamps lightly and carefully, ready at any moment to drop to a whisper or answer a vocal line with a rimshot.
Mr.
Morrison had the blues on his mind when he performed at the Beacon on Wednesday night.
He was joined by two blues masters, Jimmy Witherspoon and Junior Wells; Mr.
Witherspoon, no longer in his prime, opened the show with 15 minutes of Kansas City blues, and Mr.
Wells turned up in the middle of Mr.
Morrison's set, playing cagy, insinuating harmonica solos and belting out verses of songs like "Good Morning, Little Schoolgirl."


Market Place; Morningstar is taken to court by a fund group it took to task.
THE Pilgrim Group sued the publishers of Morningstar Mutual Funds on March 18, miffed over an editorial in one of its reports that accused Pilgrim of hitting a "new low" in the techniques of misleading advertising.
So if nothing was wrong with the ads, why has Pilgrim subsequently changed them in a way that addresses several of Morningstar's criticisms?


Hunter Faces Stint in Penalty Box
The National Hockey League will suspend Dale Hunter of the Washington Capitals for seriously injuring Pierre Turgeon of the Islanders near the end of Wednesday night's playoff game, but the severity of the punishment will not be announced until late next week.
Hunter crashed Turgeon into the boards from behind at Nassau Coliseum while the star center was celebrating after having scored the fifth Islander goal in a 5-3 victory that eliminated Washington in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Defendant Is Guilty, Says Bettman
Turgeon suffered a shoulder separation that will probably will keep him out for two to three weeks, the Islanders said yesterday.
He will not play in the second round of the playoffs, which the Islanders will begin on Sunday in Pittsburgh against the two-time defending champion Penguins.


3-Point Savings Plan
DON CALHOUN, the 23-year-old office supplies salesman from Bloomington, Ill., who threw in that $1 million shot during a timeout of a Chicago Bulls' game April 14, said yesterday he has received a check of $50,000, the first installment of a promised 20 at that figure.
And what did Calhoun do with the $50,000?
"Put it in savings," said Calhoun, who plans to leave his job in the fall to become a full-time college student.


Dinkins Calls For Delaying A Police Class
Mayor David N. Dinkins wants to save nearly $20 million by delaying a Police Academy class this summer.
To persuade state lawmakers to accept his plan, he offered yesterday to accelerate the start of two other classes next year.
The Mayor's proposal is the latest attempt to resolve a long-running dispute between the Dinkins administration and the State Legislature over whether the city is meeting state-mandated deadlines for hiring new officers under the city's ambitious police expansion known as Safe Streets, Safe City.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "CANDIDA," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
George Bernard Shaw's romantic comedy, directed by Gloria Muzio and featuring Mary Steenburgen.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $42; $38 for Saturday matinee.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


Diner's Journal
Feeding on the News
In an age when celebrity chefs toil under the same glaring spotlight as sports stars and politicians, it is no wonder that the changing of the guard at a major restaurant prompts a feeding frenzy, literally and journalistically.
Such is the case with the boyish-looking Sylvain Portay, who took the tiller of Le Cirque early this year after the defection of Daniel Boulud.
Mr.
Boulud's new restaurant, Chez Daniel, is scheduled to open next month.


Topics of The Times; A Piece of the Wall
The world, according to T. S. Eliot, ends not with a bang but a whimper.
The Soviet empire, it seems, ends in New Jersey.
In Fort Lee last Sunday, the 10 last large pieces of the Berlin wall were put up for auction at a motel.
The 12-foot-high cement slabs, weighing two tons each, were still in Germany.
But they were described in a brochure, completely without irony, as being the perfect way to "decorate the entrance hall of your corporate headquarters, museum, or estate." (One can only imagine what Nikita Khrushchev might have thought of his "bulwark against capitalism" ending up as a piece of corporate sculpture for, say, a dress manufacturer in Greenwich, Conn.)


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Placed Deion Sanders, outfielder, on the disqualified list.
Recalled Tony Tarasco, outfielder, from Richmond of the International League.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Claimed Travis Buckley, pitcher, off waivers from the Colorado Rockies and optioned him to Chattanooga of the Southern League.


Restaurants
Luxe
Luxe is a very good restaurant with a very bad name.
Such an elitist label no doubt scares away a significant number of would-be patrons, leaving them deprived of some arresting cosmopolitan cooking at moderate prices.
Luxe, which opened in August on East 21st Street near Park Avenue South, is a spacious, urbane space done in gold tones with blue-green banquettes, votive candles on the tables, an expansive bar up front and soft music.
The enterprising chef is Rick Laakkonen, formerly of the River Cafe in Brooklyn and Petrossian in midtown Manhattan.
His dishes are delightfully innovative, sometimes startlingly so, yet always well thought-out.


Limit Free-Vaccine Plan to Poor Families
To the Editor:
"Free-Vaccine Plan Creates Unusual Array of Skeptics" (front page, April 22) quotes me as suggesting that if low-income families "can pay for cable TV, they can pay for their children's immunization."


Dr. King's Widow Finally Has Her Day in Court
The widow of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. is in Superior Court here this week, fighting Boston University for possession of more than 83,000 of her husband's papers, including his letters, manuscripts and correspondence from American Presidents.
The papers, which Dr.
King deposited at Boston University in 1964 and 1965, at the height of the civil rights movement, are the crown jewel of the university archives.
Dr.
King earned his doctorate in theology from the university.


Massawa Journal; In Ruins of Eritrea, Freedom's Dawn Brings Hope
Several decades ago, Massawa was known as the pearl of the Red Sea, a port where lavish Ottoman-style villas alternated with Italian cafes full of bar girls, sailors and businessmen.
Then in 1990, in the battle that marked the beginning of the end of the Marxist Government in Ethiopia, bombs and tanks almost obliterated this city in the northern region of Eritrea.


'Tango Pasion' Closing
"Tango Pasion," a revue conceived by Mel Howard and choreographed by Hector Zaraspe, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Longacre Theater, 220 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
The Sunday matinee will be the fifth regular performance of the show; it had six previews.


Review/Photography; Images Projected, Images Caught
Things are seldom what they seem in Philip-Lorca diCorcia's powerful new photographs on view at his exhibition, "Strangers," at the Museum of Modern Art.
Mr. diCorcia went to Santa Monica Boulevard in Hollywood, an area frequented by male prostitutes and other hustlers, and paid men to pose for him.
The results, which combine elements of traditional documentary photography and staged imagery of the sort found in advertising and commercial photography, raise challenging questions about the boundaries between fiction and reality.
In a typical photograph, a model-handsome young man sits in front of a glowing sign for a fast-food restaurant at night.
In another, a man bathed in blue light is seen through the screen of a motel window, a portable radio pressed to his ear.
Carefully posed and lighted, scenes of this sort take on a sense of dramatic moment and, often, of unspecified threat. (Further examples of Mr. diCorcia's work from this project, along with earlier pictures of his family and friends done in a similar style, are on view at Wooster Gardens, in SoHo.)


G.M. Makes Case Today On Safety of Its Pickups
To a motorist, no nightmare holds more terror than a flaming crash.
To General Motors, few nightmares could be worse than a public hearing, under television's glare, involving appearances by burn victims and survivors of people who died in fiery accidents.
Yet that is what the company faces if it cannot persuade engineers at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to change their minds.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Mark Morris's Choreography to American Music
Mark Morris has frequently been described as a musical choreographer, and certainly he chooses an extraordinary range of popular and classical music for his dances.
This weekend at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Mr.
Morris wears his heart on his sleeve, with a program called "Dances to American Music," performed by the Mark Morris Dance Group and members of the White Oak Dance Project, including Mikhail Baryshnikov.
Mr.
Morris has played it semi-safe with several of his composers.
"Three Preludes," a solo that was performed by Mr.
Baryshnikov at the New York City Ballet last summer, is danced to music by George Gershwin.
Mr.
Morris and Mr.
Baryshnikov will alternate in the solo.
The joyously unruly "Polka," seen here in a new, expanded version, is set to Grand Duo for Violin and Piano by Lou Harrison, a composer who is having a dance renaissance these days.





U.S. Braces for a New Test by Branch Davidians, in Court
Prosecutors building their case against the surviving members of the Branch Davidian sect face a formidable set of hurdles in proving that any of them committed any crimes, legal experts say.
The prosecutors will have to work around missing evidence, dead witnesses and contradictory stories, and they may be forced to rebut assertions of self-defense and brainwashing by the sect leader, David Koresh.
The defense is almost certain to argue that everything that went wrong was the Government's fault -- from the Feb. 28 shootout in which four agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms died, to the April 19 fire that killed as many as 86 cult members.


Oskar Diethelm, 95; Professor Was Chief Of Psychiatric Clinic
Dr.
Oskar Diethelm, professor emeritus at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, died on April 22 in Lachen, Switzerland.
He was 95.
The cause of death was pneumonia, the center reported.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  YELTSIN PUSHES A CONSTITUTION  Boris Yeltsin summoned regional leaders to Moscow to receive a new draft constitution that would strengthen the presidency and eliminate the Congress.
A1  Russia was urged to press ahead faster with market reforms.
A6


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.88
3.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.90
3.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.98
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.55
5.61
7.21
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.91
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.83
7.85
8.96
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.95
5.97
6.74
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Losses by UAL Deepen In Year's First Quarter
The UAL Corporation, parent company of United Airlines, reported a larger than expected loss yesterday, injecting a sour note into a growing chorus of optimism for a recovery in the domestic airline industry.
Nevertheless, United attributed much of its net loss before special charges -- $138 million, or $5.92 a share, compared with a similar net loss of $108 million, or $4.52 a share, a year earlier -- to its extensive trans-Atlantic and trans-Pacific operations.
On those routes, its business fell almost 10 percent in the quarter.


LAWMAKERS BLOCK INQUIRY IN ITALY
Hours after Italy's 52d postwar Government took office promising renewal, Parliament voted today to block a key judicial investigation into the affairs of the former Socialist Prime Minister, Bettino Craxi, plunging the country into crisis.
The vote, which surprised many here, seemed to set a national call for reform against a legislature clinging to the past.
For many Italians, Mr.
Craxi is a symbol of the discredited elite that ran the country for much of the postwar era


Howard I. Podell, 76, Engineer and Inventor
Howard I. Podell, an engineer, patent agent and inventor, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Boston.
He was 76 and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y., and Tucson, Ariz.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about real estate investment trusts showed incorrect figures in some editions for the trusts' total market capitalization, or value.
A corrected chart appears today on page D2.


Gay Soldiers No Problem Elsewhere, Experts Say
The armed forces of Canada and Australia, the two military establishments that most recently lifted their bans on homosexuals, have had no morale problems as a result, several experts told Senators today.
Supporters of retaining the ban on homosexuals in the United States military have warned that without the restrictions, combat readiness would erode, recruiting would plummet and the American armed services would deteriorate into a "second-rate force."


Executive Changes
AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE, New York, appointed Joseph B. Stefanelli executive vice president for new business, equities; Ralph R. Rafaniello senior vice president for floor operations, and Lois A. Schmidt senior vice president for corporate finance and analysis and corporate relations.
CANJI INC., San Diego, a developer of cancer-suppression technologies, named Dr.
Blake Ingle president and chief executive.


TESTS INDICATING IRAQ GAS WARFARE
Scientists said today that they had been able to verify that Iraq used chemical weapons against the Kurds more than four years ago through analyzing soil samples, a technique that could prove useful in enforcing a new international chemical weapons treaty.
Scientists working with human rights groups said that, using advanced chemical analysis, they had found residues of mustard and nerve gases used against a Kurdish village in northern Iraq in 1988, an action the Iraqi Government continues to deny.


College Bans on Faculty-Student Romance Demean Women; Recusal at Amherst
To the Editor:
Your Education page article misrepresents Amherst College's sexual harassment policy.
The faculty voted on March 2 for a policy of "recusal" -- that is, to require that a faculty member must "remove himself or herself from any supervisory, evaluative, advisory, or other pedagogical role involving a student with whom he or she has had or currently has a sexual relationship." Faculty who date their students are
not
required to "report their relationships to department heads" or to give a reason for recusal.
TERRY Y. ALLEN  Assoc.
Secty., Public Affairs Amherst College Amherst, Mass., April 16, 1993


Valley Low
The Peak Technologies Group is not a mountaineering outfitter, but a maker of data-collection systems that use the bar codes familiar in supermarkets.
Trading far below their December peak of more than $13 a share, Peak's shares closed sharply lower yesterday after the company reported disappointing first-quarter earnings.


Drug Buyers Seized Along With 35 Cars
In what was called Operation Chariot, 35 cars, including a limousine, were seized and 56 people arrested as suspected drug buyers.
The police were directing the operation at people who drove in from the suburbs to make purchases before heading home on the highways that lace through and around upper Manhattan.
Those arrested included an airport worker, a tile layer, an electrician and a stockbroker.


For a Very Long Year, His Days Were Full
When scandal at North Carolina State chased Jim Valvano into the arms of ESPN and ABC, he embraced TV with the same fervor he exhibited a decade earlier as he raced for hugs after his Wolfpack team became the 1983 national collegiate basketball champions.
Before cancer changed his outlook and after coaching explained who he was, TV defined Jim Valvano.
He was a naturally outsized character: quick-witted, emotional and opinionated.
He mastered studio and game analysis and rarely allowed the Jimmy Vee lounge act to interfere.
It was too early to say he transformed his portion of the craft, as John Madden has in pro football, but he entertained with his mind, his passion and his TeleStrator pencil.
He had something to say.


Brown to Seton Hall
ANDRE BROWN, a 6-foot-3-inch guard who scored more than 4,000 points in his high school career in Louisiana, signed a letter of intent yesterday to attend Seton Hall.
Brown, an all-state guard from Vandebilt Catholic High School in Houma, La., is the eighth all-time scorer in high school basketball with 4,125 points. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy grew at an unexpectedly slow annual pace of 1.8 percent in the first quarter, the Government said, as consumers retrenched from last year's unusual holiday spending binge and the military sector posted its biggest drop in 20 years.  [ Page A1. ]
The weak economic figures give President Clinton new ammunition to attack Republicans but turn up the heat on him to deliver on his promise to create jobs and prosperity.
News Analysis.  [ D6. ]


Reno Completes Most of Lineup At Justice Dept.
Attorney General Janet Reno filled out most of her top management team at the Justice Department today, announcing nominees to head key divisions, including civil rights, where the Clinton Administration has raised expectations of aggressive enforcement.
Ms.
Reno's appointments will fill a personnel void at the department, which has drifted in recent months, mainly because the delay in selecting an Attorney General left many other posts empty.


Washington State Debt Offering
The State of Washington's $611.4 million debt offering was easily the largest tax-exempt offering yesterday.
The issue, negotiated through an underwriters group led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, was initially priced with a maximum yield of 5.70 percent for a bond due in 2015.
The securities included various-purpose general-obligation bonds and motor vehicle and fuel tax bonds, which are rated double-A by Moody's Investors Service, Standard &amp; Poor's, and Fitch Investors Service.


N.F.L. Labor Decision Today
Judge David Doty, who is expected to approve the Jan. 6 labor settlement that opened the way to free agency and an eventual salary cap in the National Football League, has notified the parties that he intends to hand down his final ruling today in Federal district court in Minneapolis.
The judge, who has heard arguments from both individual owners and players dissatisfied with various aspects of the settlement, has indicated that he will either accept or reject the settlement as a whole and will not impose any changes.
If he approves the settlement, as expected, any of the objectors would be able to appeal to the Court of Appeals.


Man Suspected in Killing Linked by Police to Rapes
A man who killed a woman after he talked his way into her Washington Heights apartment in February by posing as a repairman is suspected in the rapes of two other women in the same area of upper Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
Using the same ruse in all the attacks, the suspect entered the apartments of the victims with a polite request to fix a leak that had begun in another apartment, the police said.
In two instances, on New Year's Day and last Sunday morning, he raped the women at gunpoint, then fled with jewelry and a few dollars in cash, said Lieut.
Ellen Hale, head of the Special Victims Squad.
The suspect remains at large.


Sounds Around Town
On Guitar
Bill Frisell, Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity, 157 Montague Street, at Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, (718) 858-2424.
Bill Frisell plays stealth guitar, in solos that waft into view like clouds, glide and billow, then suddenly crystallize into unlikely chords or sly, side-long melodies.
Tomorrow, he is to perform his own new scores for three silent Buster Keaton films: "The High Sign," "One Week" and the classic "Go West." Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $13 and $15.
Preacher to Singer
Solomon Burke, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
The soul music of the 1960's never strayed too far from its gospel roots, and Solomon Burke has gone back and forth repeatedly, from preacher and gospel singer to the soul hit maker who belted "Cry to Me" and "Everybody Needs Somebody to Love." His ardent tenor voice is still strong, and his concerts intersperse preaching with the earthier messages of his hits.
Tonight's double bill is to include Little Milton, the singer and guitarist who melds jazz and blues into urbane, heartfelt songs.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $20.


PHILIP MORRIS SAYS IT MAY CUT PRICES AGAIN
The Philip Morris Companies, which instigated a cigarette price war earlier this month, said yesterday that it was ready to cut prices again to defend market share for its Marlboro brand.
Fielding questions at the company's annual meeting, Philip Morris's chairman, Michael Miles, said management was "not happy" with the steep drop in the company's stock price but insisted there were no broad problems.


New Trial Set In Asbestos Liability Suit
A New Jersey court partly reversed yesterday a three-year-old judgment that holds insurance companies liable for $960 million in damage and injury claims against Owens-Illinois Inc. for asbestos-related claims.
In its decision, the appellate division of the New Jersey Superior Court held that certain facts, which were not litigated when a summary judgment was granted in Owens-Illinois's favor in 1990, should be determined at a new trial.
No date was set.
Partial Victory for Insurers
The ruling is a partial victory for the insurance industry, which has recently been winning cases involving similar liability issues.


Cy Howard, Writer and Producer Of 'My Friend Irma,' Dies at 77
Cy Howard, a comedy writer, director and producer best remembered for his 1940's radio shows "My Friend Irma" and "Life With Luigi," died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 77 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was heart failure after a long illness, said a friend, the writer Larry Gelbart.


Recovering From Waco's Ashes
If anything redeems the Texas disasters -- the killing of four Treasury agents and the fiery deaths of scores of cultists and their children -- it may be that the Government's scattered law enforcement machinery will finally be studied for competence and coherence.
Even before investigations are complete, it is clear that two Federal agencies botched their jobs badly.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco on Feb. 28 was disastrous in concept and execution; it led to several deaths and an armed standoff.
And the recent assault on the compound, led by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, triggered the very catastrophe it sought to prevent, the mass death of the cultists.


G.M. Posts Half-Billion In Profits
With revenue up and many costs down, the General Motors Corporation yesterday reported first-quarter net income of $513.2 million, in contrast to a loss a year ago.
That completed a good first quarter for the Big Three auto makers.
On Wednesday, the Ford Motor Company reported its best quarter in several years; last week, the Chrysler Corporation reported strong operating earnings.


Vying for a Place in the Sun


Is It for Students' Edification or for Their Comfort?


Women Warriors
Defense Secretary Les Aspin's order to let women fly aircraft in combat gives America's military women what they deserve: a fair chance to go as far as their talents will take them.
America, too, is getting what it deserves: armed services in which competence matters more than gender.
Before the services started integrating women into their ranks, many servicemen -- and more than a few Americans -- carried on as if knighthood were still in flower.
What, they asked, would the sight of a military woman suffering from battle fatigue do to discipline and morale?
Wouldn't the male instinct to protect females provide a fatal distraction in the heat of combat?


YELTSIN IS SEEKING NEW CONSTITUTION TO SCRAP CONGRESS
Making his first political move since his triumph in Sunday's referendum, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia summoned regional leaders to Moscow today to receive a new draft constitution that would strengthen the presidency and eliminate the Congress of People's Deputies, which had led the attacks on him.
Clearly seeking to bypass the Congress, Mr.
Yeltsin asked the 88 regional leaders to name two representatives to a constituent assembly, which would wrap up a new constitution that would be somewhat modeled on the French system.
The Congress has supreme powers under the current Constitution, which dates to the era of Leonid I. Brezhnev.


Review/Film; Sharing High Jinks And the Rent
"The Night We Never Met" describes a downtown pied-a-terre that is used on alternating days by three total strangers, who wind up washing one another's dirty dishes and trying to impose their conflicting housekeeping styles on the chaotic decor.
The film is intended as a light romantic comedy, even though it sounds more like a prescription for murder.
Working in what is at best a hip sitcom style (and more often a labored, unconvincing version of same), the writer and director Warren Leight explains this premise as best he can.
It seems that Brian McVeigh (Kevin Anderson), an obnoxious yuppie stockbroker, holds the lease to this rent-controlled hideaway and wants to use the place with his frat buddies after he marries Janet Beehan (Justine Bateman), a yuppie princess.
Brian and his pals have filled the recessed, lighted bookshelves with their collection of beer bottles, mugs, baseball caps and book ("Trump").
The sets and costumes are often funnier than the characters.


Sounds Around Town
Nina Simone
Nina Simone, the Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, (212) 307-7171.
With five of her vintage recordings featured in the soundtrack for the movie "Point of No Return" and a brilliant new album to be released this summer by Elektra Records, this 60-year-old pop-jazz singer and pianist is poised for a dramatic career resurgence.
Ms.
Simone's cool, deep voice may have lost much of its smoothness, but in place of that polish, she brings a personal involvement with her material that is often so intense that even banal material can acquire layers of brooding ambivalence.
If her concert versions of "The Folks Who Live on the Hill," "If I Should Lose You" and "Papa, Can You Hear Me?" (from the movie "Yentl") are anything like the renditions included on her forthcoming album, "A Single Woman," they should be devastating.
Show time is tomorrow night at 8 and tickets are $35.


Group of Seven Urges Yeltsin to Push His Reforms
Finance ministers from the major industrialized nations urged President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today to use his victory in the referendum last weekend to press ahead faster with reforms to create a market economy.
After the finance ministers met in Washington, several officials said Russia would be able to take maximum advantage of the $28 billion in aid that the Group of Seven promised it only if it pushed rapidly ahead with change.


There Are Rules and Then . . .
While the Knicks maintained they were not concerned about the National Basketball Association's increased penalties for fighting, they also vowed not to become more timid.
Just ask forward Charles Oakley.
"If something occurs during the game that calls for us to be physical, then whatever," Oakley said today, as the Knicks prepared for their playoff opener against Indiana Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
"The rules aren't going to affect me. If somebody goes out of their way after me, I'm coming after them, rules or no rules.


OIL-SPILL DAMAGES DISPUTED BY EXXON
Scientists for the Exxon Corporation clashed sharply with Government biologists this week as they presented their evidence that Alaska's Prince William Sound had essentially recovered from ecological damage inflicted by the Exxon Valdez oil spill four years ago.
Exxon is contending that the damage to animals like sea birds, sea otters and pink salmon was less than the Government says and that all the animal populations have essentially recovered.
The company makes its case in technical papers offered here at a four-day symposium ending today.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Dormitory Authority of New York is offering $21.3 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds for the University of Rochester with a maximum yield of 5.70 percent for an issue due in 2012 through the First Boston Corp.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds were priced to yield from 2.55 percent for bonds due in 1994 to 2006.
The issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Abroad at Home; Middle East Paradox
On the ground, it is a bitter time in relations between Israelis and Palestinians.
On Israel's side there is fear of Palestinian violence, on the Palestinians', resentment of harsh repression.
But at the Middle East peace talks in Washington, just resumed, the logic may be different.
Both the Israeli Government and the mainstream Palestinian leadership have urgent reasons to reach an agreement.
If they seize the moment -- and history makes that a big if -- they could at last take a real step toward peace.


Buckingham Palace Will Offer $12.50 Tours
Pressed for cash to help repair fire damage at her out-of-town residence at Windsor Castle, Queen Elizabeth II said today that she was throwing open the doors of Buckingham Palace in London and charging tourists the equivalent of about $12.50 apiece to tour her state apartments and picture gallery.
Beginning this summer, and continuing for at least five years, royal advisers say, the palace will open its doors for eight weeks in August and September, when the Queen and her family are usually vacationing outside London.
This year, the palace said, the tours will begin the second week in August.


Stock Mutual Fund Deposits Soar in April
Coming off their best quarter ever, stock mutual funds yesterday reported huge cash deposits in April.
International funds were especially strong, as investors tried to profit from the decline of the dollar, fund managers said.
"Business has been fantastic," said Michael Hines, a senior vice president of Fidelity Investments, the largest mutual fund company.
Gavin Quill, a spokesman for Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark, said that April was "the strongest month of the year for us, almost double March."


Holocaust Museum Is for Real, Not Metaphor
To the Editor:
In "The Misguided Holocaust Museum" (Op-Ed, April 18) Jonathan Rosen seizes upon a statement by the project's director, Michael Berenbaum, and presents a fearful vision based on his own misinterpretation.
Mr.
Berenbaum referred to the building recently completed in Washington as an "Americanization of the Holocaust." Mr.
Rosen misinterprets this aim and implants it within all of the museum's efforts, ultimately producing a mutant image far separate from the edifice now standing.


Livery Cab Kills 2-Year-Old Boy and Injures 3
A livery cab with an unlicensed driver at the wheel mounted a traffic island at a busy Brooklyn intersection yesterday and struck two small boys, their mother and a blind woman waiting for a light, the police said.
A 2-year-old boy in a stroller was killed and his 5-year-old brother was critically injured.
Witnesses told of a blur of metal and people, of tragedy on a sunny spring afternoon -- a roaring engine, a shriek of brakes, a stroller crushed, children pinned against a parked van and a mother screaming on Eastern Parkway and Nostrand Avenue in Crown Heights, a corner where residents said four people had been killed by cars in the last five years.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY THE TROUBLES WITH DISTRICT 12
Forced to resign as principal of one New York City school -- for selling junk food to her poor students at a profit -- Virginia Noville wanted a second chance.
Last month, the authorities said, she sat in a Cadillac on the Lower East Side and counted out $2,000 in cash to a member of the South Bronx school district, District 12, who had agreed to cooperate with the authorities.
As she awaits arraignment on bribery charges, and on the eve of school board elections, a special investigator has released a scathing report depicting the district as ruled by patronage.
A1.
A guide to Bronx school board elections. B2.
A STRUGGLE FOR REPRESENTATION
For the school district that includes Williamsburg, with its history of tensions between Hispanic and Hasidic residents, the election on Tuesday symbolizes the clash between the interests of Jews and Catholics concerned about the board's control over government funds allocated to parochial schools, and the growing political hopes of the Hispanic community.
B2.
WOMAN'S KILLER SUSPECTED IN TWO RAPES
A man who killed a woman after he talked his way into her Washington Heights apartment in February by posing as a repairman is suspected in the rapes of two other women in the same area of upper Manhattan, the police said.
B3.
EX-FIANCE ARRESTED IN HYATT STRANGLING
A woman whose body was found in a room at the Grand Hyatt, in midtown, was strangled by her former fiance, the police said.
B3.
POLLUTION GATE FOR EAST RIVER PROPOSED
Engineers and government officials gathered at Columbia University to discuss a bold approach to cleaning up the waters of the East River and Long Island Sound: a "tidal barrage," or one-way water gate, for the East River.
B3.
A new city-sponsored 24-hour telephone line is staffed by young people, for young people.
B3.
The police seize 35 cars from suspected drug buyers in upper Manhattan.
B3.
REGION DUAL LINE FOR G.O.P.
New Jersey's major Republican candidates for governor, Cary Edwards, Christine Todd Whitman and Jim Wallwork, are courting a specific audience: the moderates at the heart of the 20 percent of the state's voters who call themselves Republicans, who talk a conservative line but have liberal values.
B5.
DENIAL OF CABLE FRANCHISE BACKED
Connecticut will continue trying to revoke the franchise of Cablevision, which serves Fairfield County, despite the company's decision not to drop Connecticut stations from its lineup, the State Attorney General said.
B5.
YALE STUDENTS PRESS FOR A RESIGNATION
Student pressure is growing for the resignation of a longtime Yale University trustee whose company pleaded guilty last month to cooperating with Arab countries in their economic boycott of Israel.
B4.
Army Corps of Engineers awards $5.7 million contract to repair gap in Westhampton barrier island to an Illinois dredging company.
B5.
Our Towns by Iver Peterson B5
Chronicle B4


Times Appoints a Columnist
Bob Herbert, a journalist with wide experience as a reporter and columnist in New York City, will join The New York Times in June as a columnist on its Op-Ed page.
His appointment was announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times.
Mr.
Herbert's column will appear twice weekly, exploring issues including politics, urban affairs and social trends.


U.S. Expanding Its Effort to Halt Spying by Allies
Prompted by new evidence that French intelligence agents have been directed to seek American corporate secrets, the Clinton Administration is preparing an intensive effort to thwart industrial espionage by its allies.
Administration officials said today that they had concluded that a 21-page document listing United States aerospace companies as targets for industrial spying had been issued by the French Government.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Move Up
The prices of Treasury bonds and notes rose yesterday as the Commerce Department reported that the economy grew at a slower pace than expected in the first quarter of the year.
The price of the 30-year bond was up 13/32 , to 1044/32 , as the yield dropped to 6.88 percent, from 6.91 percent Wednesday.
The rally was sharper among shorter maturities.
For example, the new 3.875 percent two-year note, which was auctioned Tuesday, was up 5/32 as the yield dropped to 3.78 percent, down from 3.86 percent Wednesday and the 3.88 percent at which the note was auctioned.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Ben Schwartzwalder, the former football coach at Syracuse, misstated his age in some editions.
He was 83.


CHRONICLE
What is it about the restaurant business that draws athletes?
MICHAEL JORDAN says he always longed for a place to "hang my hat," so he decided to open a place, called, not surprisingly, Michael Jordan's the Restaurant in Chicago.
"This is going to be a great place to just come and have a good time, meet some good people and get a little food," the Chicago Bulls superstar said Wednesday evening, as he welcomed people to opening night at the three-level, $6 million venture on the North Side.
Bo Jackson, of the Chicago White Sox, the actors Mickey Rooney and George Segal, Samuel K. Skinner, a former White House chief of staff in the Bush Administration, and Mayor Richard M. Daley were among the 500 guests.


Churchill Downs Awaits Charge of the 119th Brigade
Nineteen horses were entered in the 119th Kentucky Derby today, with Storm Tower on the inside, El Bakan on the outside and Prairie Bayou in the No. 5 slot and anointed the favorite.
The free-for-all tone of the race was reflected when the 19th and last horse arrived at Barn 42 at Churchill Downs at 8:10 this morning after a 13-hour ride by van from Oklahoma, with his trainer at the wheel.


East Europe Still Waits For the Capitalist Push
Three years after the collapse of Communism, the warm welcome and private investment that most Eastern Europeans expected from the European Community countries have fallen far short of their expectations.
Fears that German companies would virtually take over the economy of central Europe have so far not been confirmed.
The foreign capital that has come in from Germany, the United States and elsewhere is billions of dollars less than the estimated need to restructure economies driven by Communism for 40 years, and efforts to take advantage of Eastern Europe's cheap labor and sell goods to Western markets have produced a protectionist backlash.


The Spoken Word
MAY DAY SYMPOSIUM, Vincent Astor Gallery, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Lincoln Center.
Presented in conjunction with the exhibition "It Can't Happen Here: Anti-Fascist Performance in New York." Speakers include Malcolm Goldstein, author of "The Political Stage," and Dan Georgakas, co-editor of the "Encyclopedia of the American Left." Tomorrow at noon.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.
"DIRECTOR'S EYE," Angelika Film Center, Houston and Mercer Streets, Greenwich Village.
A two-day film seminar presented by Benjamin Hayeem, a film professor at New York University.
Tomorrow and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Tickets: $250; $225 for students.
Information: (212) 274-1978.
FICTION READING, Teachers and Writers Collaborative, 5 Union Square West, Manhattan.
Shashi Tharoor, author of "The Great American Novel"; Michael Guinzburg, author of "Beam Me Up, Scotty," and Patricia H. Chao read from their work.
Part of the Early Voices series.
Tonight at 7.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 666-3909.
POETRY READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
Bob Brown and Lisa Walker read from their work.
Tonight at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Laura Foreman reads from her work.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC-AM (820).
A series of recorded interviews and discussions, sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC, continues with "W.P.A. Writers," featuring Lionel Abel, Livingston Biddle, David Ignatow, Jerre Mangione and Ellen Tarry.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"The 1993 Biennial Exhibition," tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Representation Is Issue In Brooklyn's District 14
Claribel Lozada was elected to her Brooklyn school board in 1989 by a group of parents determined to increase Hispanic and black power on a board where neither group had known a strong voice.
She met with limited success, forging a consensus on some issues with the Hasidic-Polish coalition that dominates the board but finding herself and her 1989 running mate, Walter Parrish, on the losing side of the vote on many more.


Don't Say Good Night Yet, Gracie: Vaudeville on Film
George Burns, wearing a fedora and a suit, and Gracie Allen, in a frilly garden-party dress and large floppy hat, stand in the center of the screen and talk, stealing glances at the camera as they do.
George: "Can I give you a ride home in my car?"


Open Admissions Was White Flight's Excuse
To the Editor:
"A Day at City College" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, April 20) is in error when it states, "Whites began to apply elsewhere when it became an open-admissions school, shrinking the value of its degrees."
The reason white students began to apply elsewhere was not because of open admissions, but because they could afford private-college tuition.


A Top Financier With a Passion for Brand Names
Fayez Sarofim is not about to abandon his investment principles when he shops for mouthwash.
His local Walgreen's drugstore in Houston asks $2.69 for its private label, $4.99 for the leading brand.
"Which one do I buy?" he said.
"Listerine. I wouldn't even think of buying the knock-off."
No problem for Mr.
Sarofim, whose net worth tops $600 million.
He built that fortune by becoming the nation's leading investor in brand-name companies: the makers of Coca-Cola, Tide, Listerine and, most of all, Marlboros.
With $26 billion under his management as well as a heavily advertised Dreyfus mutual fund, Mr.
Sarofim has become something of a brand name himself.
A Discount Buyer
From the end of 1983 through 1992, Mr.
Sarofim did better than 94 percent of all other money managers, according to a report provided by SEI Associates to one client, the Mississippi state pension fund.


Sports of The Times; One Guilty, But Trial Continues
FOR stalking, mugging and slamming Pierre Turgeon into the boards from behind after the Islanders' best player had scored, Dale Hunter of the Washington Capitals was on trial yesterday, but he wasn't the only one.
Gary Bettman, the new commissioner, and the National Hockey League itself also were on trial.
The verdict on Hunter was guilty as charged.
He received an "indefinite suspension" for now.
His specific sentence will be announced by the end of next week and will be served next season.


Time Marches On, Except in Cases When It Gallops
A year ago, Arazi and his slightly imperious French trainer Francois Boutin were the toast of Kentucky.
Then came the race.
Arazi, the wonder colt that wasn't, finished eighth in the Derby, putting a summary end to any further comparisons with Secretariat.


Art in Review
Betsy Friedman  Murunashi-Lederman 426 Broome Street SoHo Through May 8
Betsy Friedman paints with an animator's skill, an intinerate muralist's economy.
The buoyant lines, squiggles and curlicues of her lightly tinted abstractions suggest incidental details like grape leaves: bunches and tendrils from the borders of a restaurant mural marshaled onto canvas, there to imitate, parody, and also reaffirm painting.


In Shadow Of Derby, Bid to Save The Sport
Amid the dawn's sweet blend of hot coffee and horses shimmering through their workouts, Gina Smith watched from the back-side rail at Churchill Downs this morning, looking for a glimpse of her own future in thoroughbred racing as much as for a favorite in Saturday's Kentucky Derby.
"Studying the bloodlines, you see so many good horses," mused Ms.
Smith, a 22-year-old business major in one of the most unusual university programs in the country, the equine administration curriculum of the University of Louisville.
The program seeks to academically breed some fresh management blood and winning ideas into a racing industry deeply troubled by the spread of legalized casino gambling around the nation.


S.&amp; L. Funds Cut in Panel
A House subcommittee today voted to cut the Clinton Administration's request for money to complete the cleanup of failed savings and loan associations.
In a series of votes, the subcommittee cut the request, from $42 billion to $30 billion.
Members cited the stronger condition of savings and loans, and the Clinton Administration agreed to the reduced amount.


Corrections; A Correction: Real Estate Investment Trusts
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about real estate investment trusts showed incorrect figures in some editions for the trusts' total market capitalization, or value.
Here is a corrected chart.


Topics of The Times; How to Remember New York
Until the New-York Historical Society teetered on the brink of bankruptcy and dissolution, few New Yorkers were aware of the treasures it contained.
Since then there's been a lot of talk about its Hudson River paintings, its 431 original watercolors of Audubon's "Birds of America" and its remarkable collection of papers relating to hundreds of famous New Yorkers.
What's not so well known, even now, is that the Historical Society is also rich in material about the lives and times of New Yorkers whose names never made the history books.
There are, for instance, the diaries of ordinary citizens, letters from immigrants to their families back home in Ireland, and numerous images of American Indians.
There is also a large African-American collection, which includes a 1755 map of Lower Manhattan showing the location of the Negros Burial Ground; a rare portrait miniature of Pierre Toussaint, a candidate for canonization, and copies of early black newspapers like Frederick Douglass's North Star.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Wednesday's stock trading misstated the value of the television contract signed by the National Basketball Association with NBC, which is a subsidiary of the General Electric Company.
NBC agreed to pay $750 million to the N.B.A., not $812 million, in a deal that guaranteed the network a profit.


Leslie Fay Names 2 New Outside Directors
The Leslie Fay Companies, the bankrupt women's apparel manufacturer, announced yesterday that its board had elected two new outside directors, which should give its board a more independent character.
Peter W. May, president and chief operating officer of the DWG Corporation, which is the parent company of the Royal Crown Cola Company and Arby's Inc. among other businesses, has been added to the Leslie Fay board.


Forecast Remains Cloudy For the Newspaper Industry
The top executives of major newspaper publishing companies told securities analysts here that the worst days of the recession appear to be ending for newspapers.
But good times are still not here for the industry.
In a series of presentations this week on the financial picture at major newspaper companies, the publishing executives reported that some categories of advertising were beginning to show signs of health after several years of deterioration.
Classified advertising, often an early signal of increased economic activity, is returning with exceptional strength.
Activity Remains Spotty
But in general, some of the executives expressed frustration that much of their advertising business remained much more spotty than was typical during an economic recovery.


Those 'Pork-Barrel' Projects Help People; Our Yummy Beans
To the Editor:
Re "G.O.P. Senators Prevail, Sinking Clinton's Economic Stimulus Bill" (front page, April 22): Senator Robert C. Byrd complains that the defeat of the President's outdated jobs bill will have the result that "millions of Americans will open a can of beans . . ." Perhaps, but there is some consolation in that they won't find any fatty globs of pork in the can.
The Clintons, so earnestly determined to serve as our national nannies, would appreciate that healthy consequence.
BRIAN C. BRODERICK  Holliston, Mass., April 23, 1993


Kodak Seeks a Sale to Calm Shareholders
Eastman Kodak confirmed yesterday that it planned to sell at least one major asset by September as part of its pledge to cut costs and improve shareholder returns.
The confirmation came after reports yesterday that Kay R. Whitmore, the embattled photography giant's chairman, chief executive and president, discussed such a divestiture during a dinner with analysts on Wednesday night.
Analysts said that an asset sale and the timetable laid out by Mr.
Whitmore had been hinted at during a dinner they had with Christopher J. Steffen in January shortly after Kodak hired Mr.
Steffen to serve as chief financial officer.


Accounts
*
South Street Seaport, New York, to Ziff Marketing, New York, to handle its account, previously at Follis DeVito Verdi, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


PACE OF ECONOMY SLOWED MARKEDLY IN FIRST QUARTER
The economy grew at an unexpectedly slow annual pace of 1.8 percent during the first three months of the year as consumers retrenched from last year's unusual holiday spending binge and the military sector posted its biggest drop in 20 years, Commerce Department figures showed today.
Economists in and out of the Government said the figures suggested that growth would continue, but too slowly to have much effect on unemployment.


In Sluggish Growth, a 2-Edged Sword for Clinton
The surprisingly weak economic output figures for the first quarter give President Clinton powerful ammunition to attack Republicans for scuttling his economic stimulus program.
But the bad news turns up the heat on him to deliver -- and soon -- on his promise to create jobs and prosperity.


For Yanks, All's Well That Ends Over .500
The road trip began with a devastating loss in Oakland 10 days ago as the Yankees battered Dennis Eckersley in the ninth inning but fumbled the game away in the 10th.
It ended with a frustrating loss in Anaheim Wednesday night as the Yankees dented Mark Langston in the ninth and then saw their comeback disintegrate minutes later.
In between crisscrossing the West Coast and botching opportunities at the start and finish of their eight-game excursion, the Yankees managed to win five of six contests in the middle.
After losing 12 of 18 games in two visits to the West last year, the Yankees had to be pleased with their 5-3 record on a trip that once looked imposing.


TV Weekend; A Politician's Awakening To Drugs in Her Family
Joanne Woodward, who last year shared with her husband, Paul Newman, a lifetime achievment award at the Kennedy Center Honors, has steadily made the most of television.
She won Emmy Awards for her performances in "See How She Runs" (1978) and "Do You Remember Love?" (1985).
The first was about marathon running, the second Alzheimer's disease.
Earlier this year, in Alison Lurie's "Foreign Affairs," she shone as a middle-aged academic finding love where she least expected.
And now, this Sunday at 9 P.M. in "Blind Spot," she is a powerfully confident Congresswoman who has to confront drug addiction in her own family.
For Ms.
Woodward, the subject of drugs takes on obvious personal dimensions.
In 1978, Scott Newman, Mr.
Newman's 28-year-old son from a first marriage, died of an overdose of Valium and alcohol.
In the years since, Ms.
Woodward and her family have worked closely with the Scott Newman Center, which is dedicated to drug education.
In "Blind Spot," co-produced by Ms.
Woodward as a "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation, the actress extends the reach of that education.


Hartford Backs Rescinding a Cable TV Franchise
Connecticut will continue trying to revoke the franchise of the cable company that serves Fairfield County, despite the company's decision not to drop Connecticut stations from its lineup, the State Attorney General said today.
The company, Cablevision, had angered Fairfield County residents earlier this year when it announced plans to eliminate all Connecticut stations and replace them with new cable channels, including a science-fiction channel and an all-cartoon channel.


Gaffes and Gags Of a Shy Dimwit
SOMEWHERE toward the final quarter of "Safety Last" (1923), Harold Lloyd's greatest so-called "thrill comedy," Harold, identified as "the Boy" in the cast list, finds himself scaling the facade of Bolton's Department Store, where he's usually employed as a junior salesman.
The climb is a publicity stunt gone awfully wrong.
As he reaches each floor, Harold expects to be spelled by a pal, who likes to climb buildings this way.
At each floor he's disappointed.
Dread, unforeseen circumstances force Harold on.
The peril mounts as the heights become dizzier.
Someone drops birdseed on him, which attracts pigeons.
They peck eagerly around his shoulders and face, obscuring his view and interfering with his grip.
In remarkable shots that clearly are not faked, the audience watches in delicious, joyful panic as Harold continues his ascent and at last seems to be at least 25 stories above the street.
Without a net.
At one point he hangs suspended from the hands of the giant Bolton's clock, the face of which slowly pulls apart with his weight.


Trade Pact Picking Up Wide Range of Support
The North American Free Trade Agreement is winning broad political support, and prospects for its approval are brightening, members of Congress and Administration officials said today.
A majority of Republican Senators told President Clinton in a letter today that they favor the accord, which would eliminate trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States.
And environmentalists said that half a dozen large groups were preparing to announce on Monday that they may support it, too.


Bills and Lofton Part
The Buffalo Bills said yesterday that they won't renew their contract with 36-year-old JAMES LOFTON.
The wideout is the N.F.L.'s all-time leader in receiving yards.
Lofton has caught 750 passes in his career for 13,086 yards. (AP)


Review/Dance; Still Poses And Moving Pictures
Trisha Brown's choreography is undeniably complex.
Yet her works delight, rather than intimidate.
Each is based upon a few structural principles, and part of the fun of watching a piece is spotting the basic movement themes that inspire such amazing intricacies.
Ms.
Brown's compositions first tease the eye, then please the mind.
She kept her audience's minds and eyes almost as busy as the members of her Trisha Brown Dance Company on Wednesday night at City Center, when the program featured the New York premiere of "For M. G.: The Movie." The first part of that title needs explaining; the second part of it deserves pondering.


Art in Review
Cecil Beaton
James Danziger Gallery  415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Most of the pictures in this engaging show are enlarged contact sheets of rolls of film shot in the 1940's and 50's by Cecil Beaton (1904-80), the British photographer renowned for his stylish portraits and fashion photographs.
A few frames are blank and some are blurred, but otherwise each work records, over the course of a dozen frames, the interaction between Beaton and one of the many celebrities he photographed.


Dow Rises 11.62 Points, To 3,425.12
The stock market was mostly lower yesterday in dispirited trading, largely in reaction to expected, but nonetheless discouraging, news on the state of the economy.
But most major indexes closed up modestly in quiet afternoon trading.
An exception, albeit a modest one, was gold stocks.
Gold for June delivery climbed $3, to $357.40 an ounce, another recent record.
Newmont Mining was up 3/4, to 47 7/8; American Barrick was up 3/8, to 21 3/4, and Echo Bay Mines was up 1/2, to 7 3/4.
Echo Bay was the most active stock on the American Stock Exchange, with 1.36 million shares changing hands.


Islanders Should Be Ecstatic, Right? Try Irate Instead
Rarely has there been a gloomier ending to a successful playoff campaign, but unfavorable circumstance continued to force the New York Islanders to assess their four-games-to-two domination of the Washington Capitals with a mixture of resignation and revenge.
And those are unhealthy components to apply to a Stanley Cup playoff quest that involves an imminent tangle with the defending Stanley Cup champions.
"How do you beat the Pittsburgh Penguins? I don't know; nobody else has been able to," said center Ray Ferraro, who knows his playoff-leading eight goals will come under a direct challenge from Mario Lemieux when the division championships get under way Sunday afternoon in Pittsburgh.


Ditka's Roles Clarified
MIKE DITKA has had his new NBC roles clarified.
The former Chicago Bears coach will be a studio analyst on "The N.F.L. Live" pre-game show starting in September, and next winter will work seven or eight golf tournaments in which he will profile golfers and receive golf lessons.
The latter feature will be sponsored by advertisers to pay the estimated $225,000 of his $525,000 salary ascribed to his golf work.


For the Nets, At Least It Won't Get Much Worse
The first sign for the Nets that this would be a really bad night came when Rumeal Robinson picked up his third foul only 2 minutes 16 seconds into the game.
When your starting point guard sits the almost the entire first half because of foul trouble, that's a sure sign that things could begin crumbling fast.
Crumble?
It was as if a gaping hole opened in the Richfield Coliseum floor and the Nets, one by one, began to fall in.
The only one who managed to hang on to the rim was Derrick Coleman, but even his powerful arms can't hold an entire team.
And that's why the Nets fell to the Cleveland Cavaliers, 114-98, in the opener of their playoff series, which resumes here on Saturday.


Holocaust Museum Is for Real, Not Metaphor; 'What I Know I Saw'
To the Editor:
Your April 20 news article reporting the results of a survey by the Roper Organization that one in five Americans voiced doubt that the Holocaust ever happened was appalling to me; they were saying that I didn't see what I know I saw: dead bodies, some naked, most in tattered clothing, lying helter-skelter in the Ohrdruf concentration camp, near Erfurt, Germany.
Or the dead bodies piled one on top of another like cordwood, or the pit where they tried to burn the dead.
After General Eisenhower saw these scenes, he wrote, "If the American soliders don't know what they are fighting for, now they know what they are fighting against."


Dial-an-Ear: Young People Tell Young People Their Troubles
The place was a sedate gray room in downtown Brooklyn, the time was a Wednesday night and the elliptical note that Ruth Joseph, a high school senior, scribbled as she talked on the telephone said: 17, pregnant.
Father, 29.
"You say that you're 17, you're pregnant, and your mother doesn't want you to have anything to do with your boyfriend," Ms.
Joseph said calmly as she searched her computer for a Planned Parenthood.
"Right now you must be feeling scared. Are you feeling confused, too?"
Across the room, Nicole Carraturro, a freshman at Kingsborough Community College, leaned intently into her desk as she cradled her telephone.
The caller was a woman, 19 years old, H.I.V. positive and pregnant.
She said she was "very depressed" and did not know whether she should keep her baby or marry her boyfriend, who had vowed to stick by her through the days ahead.


PRO BASKETBALL: The Knicks' Private Powerhouse; Ewing Wants to Be an Enigma Wrapped in a Title Banner
The fans who cheer him, the reporters who cover him, the majority of people who meet him, will never get close to him.
That is the way Patrick Ewing wants it.
His passion for privacy will undoubtedly hurt him in the balloting for this year's National Basketball Association Most Valuable Player Award.
So be it.


Holocaust Museum Is for Real, Not Metaphor; 'Never Again' Is for All
To the Editor:
I believe that it is Jonathan Rosen who is misguided and not the Holocaust Museum (Op-Ed, April 18).
There deserves to be a monument here in the United States, and a Holocaust museum in the capital of every country that stood by and did not forcefully and promptly strike to end the murder of six million men, women and children guilty of being Jews.
"Never again" is not only for Jews to remember, but for all humankind.
BETTY COOPER WALLERSTEIN  New York, April 18, 1993


Ralph S. Gallagher; Publishing Executive, 67
Ralph S. Gallagher, a publishing executive, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 67 and lived in Chappaqua.
The cause of death was heart disease, his family said.
Mr.
Gallagher was a vice president of Enquirer/Star Group Inc., publishers of The National Enquirer and The Star.
He joined The Enquirer in 1976 as its advertising director.
Earlier, he worked for 23 years at Time-Life as a sales executive, for a time as Life magazine's marketing manager.
He also spent two years as Signature magazine's sales development director.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  McCallister Perseveres  Blaine McCallister shook off heavy rains and a long delay to shoot an eight-under-par 64 yesterday, taking a one-stroke lead as the opening round of the Houston Open was suspended because of darkness at the Woodlands, Tex.
Seventy-eight players in the field of 156 remained on the course when play was halted and were to finish their opening rounds today.
Among them was John Flannery, who made the turn at six-under 30 and was at six under through 13 holes when play was called.
Of the finishers, John Huston was second at 65, with Jeff Maggert and Ed Sneed at 66.
Five players, including Ben Crenshaw, Gil Morgan and Billy Ray Brown, were at 67. (AP) Albers in the Lead: Kristi Albers, a Ladies Professional Golf Association veteran, had an eagle as part of a six-under 66 and grabbed the opening-round lead in the richest tournament in women's golf.
Albers, looking for her first victory after more than seven seasons on tour, held a two-shot lead over Page Dunlap in the $1.2 million Sprint Classic in Tallahassee, Fla.
Albers, who started on the back nine, catapulted into the lead when she eagled the 464-yard, par-5 fifth with a 30-foot chip.
She birdied No. 7 to open a two-stroke advantage. (AP)


No Headline
"Everyone must now understand that the President, the Government and the policy of reforms now enjoy the protection of the people." -- BORIS N. YELTSIN.  [ A6:2. ]


No Headline
Arthur Roe, a chemist, educator and former official with the National Science Foundation, died on Tuesday at his home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 80.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


INSIDE
Tiny Fossils Reveal Early Diversity of Life
Fossil microorganisms found in Australia prove that life was already thriving and diversified 3.485 billion years ago.
The discovery sharply cuts the time available for life to have evolved naturally on earth.
Page A10.
Clash Over Alaska Cleanup
Exxon, disagreeing sharply with Government biologists, said Prince William Sound had essentially recovered from the 1989 oil spill.
Page A18.
Trade Pact's Support Grows
The North American Free Trade Agreement is winning broad political support and prospects for its approval are brightening.
Page D2.
Court Test for Davidians
Experts say prosecutors face many hurdles in proving that any surviving Branch Davidian members committed any crimes.
Law, page B16.


L.I. Takes Steps to Close Breach in Barrier Island
An emergency project to close a gaping breach in the Westhampton barrier island here advanced today as the Army Corps of Engineers awarded a $5.7 million contract to an Illinois dredging company that will begin work in May.
The project involves hammering two rows of steel sheet piling deep in to the sand across the half-mile breach, now named Little Pike Inlet, and filling in with sand dredged from offshore.


Wooing the G.O.P.'s Heart, Moderately
Being Republican in New Jersey in modern times, at least for those bent on winning elections, has meant following a basic script: Conservative talk followed by more liberal action.
The right wing has not counted for much when it comes to winning statewide general elections.
Despite a lack of broad appeal over the last 20 years, it has found popular support here and there -- among the more prominent members is the current Assembly Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian -- and has even managed to field a few suicidal statewide candidacies in the last 20 years.
The party has no left wing.


Sounds Around Town
A Night of Jazz
John Goldsby, Greenwich House, 27 Barrow Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-4140.
An unusual program of jazz compositions written by such celebrated jazz bassists as Paul Chambers, Ray Brown, Oscar Pettiford, Charles Mingus, Sam Jones and Red Mitchell, along with works by Duke Ellington composed for his bassist Jimmy Blanton, will be played by the contemporary bassist John Goldsby at 8 P.M. on Sunday in a free program, which was financed by the National Endowment for the Arts.
Mr.
Goldsby is to present the premiere of a work written for him by the pianist Bill Mays, who is to be a member of the group accompanying Mr.
Goldsby, along with the alto saxophonist Andy Fusco and the drummer Terry Clarke.
With Karen Akers
Karen Akers, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
A highlight of Karen Akers's debut engagement at Rainbow and Stars is a song written by Irving Berlin in 1922.
It was featured in "The Music Box Revue of 1922-23" but was never performed publicly since then until last fall, when Berlin's daughter Mary Ellin Barrett found it in a trunk filled with her father's old songs just after she had seen Miss Akers at a concert in East Hampton, L.I.
The song, "I'm Looking for a Daddy Long Legs," is about the romantic problems of an unusually tall woman.
Miss Barrett immediately thought it would be perfect for the 6-foot-tall Miss Akers.
Miss Akers added the song to her repertory in an October concert at the 92nd Street Y, before raising it to new heights at Rainbow and Stars.
Shows are at 8:30 and 10:30 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $35 cover charge but no minimum.
Happy Birthday, Bing
Bing Crosby Festival Weekend, Red Blazer Too, 349 West 46th Street, Clinton, (212) 262-3113.
The 90th birthday of Bing Crosby, born May 2, 1903, will be celebrated this weekend by the stable of jazz groups at the Red Blazer Too every night and on Sunday afternoon.
The jazz styles they play are Dixieland and swing which, appropriately, were the two kinds of jazz that Crosby favored.
The weekend opens tonight with the singer Cathy Chamberlain's Dixie Dance Band, followed tomorrow by the trumpeter Bob Cantwell's Dixieland Stompers.
Both groups are to perform from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M.
On Sunday from 1 to 5 P.M., the clarinetist Sol Yaged and his Swing Era Jazz All-Stars are to recall the lively side of Der Bingle.
The pianist Howie Wyeth's Ragtime Band winds up the festival on Sunday night from 7 to 11.
The selections cover Crosby hits from "Out of Nowhere," his first No. 1 hit, recorded in 1931, to his last hit record, "True Love," which he sang with Grace Kelly in the film "High Society" in 1956.


Josef Greindl Is Dead; A Wagnerian Bass, 80
Josef Greindl, a German bass who was best known for his performances of Wagnerian roles, died on April 16 in Vienna.
He was 80.
Austrian press reports said the cause was heart failure.


A Line-Item Veto Is Passed, But It Has Key Restrictions
The House of Representatives voted today to give the President more power to slice spending from the Federal budget, but stopped short of approving the full line-item veto that President Clinton had sought.
Despite the House action, prospects for the legislation are dubious in the Senate, and even if it passes there, it will have no effect on the automatic spending programs like Social Security that are responsible for most of the growth in Federal deficit spending.


Officials Lower Death Toll In Waco Fire to Around 72
Autopsies found gunshot wounds in more bodies of cult members taken from the ashes of the Branch Davidian compound, as the authorities today revised the death toll downward, from 86 to as low as 72.
The medical examiner's office in Fort Worth, where the bodies have been taken, reported that gunshot wounds had been found in 7 of the 28 bodies examined so far.
While the medical examiner was not able to say whether the wounds were self-inflicted, they were consistent with Federal agents' reports of bursts of gunfire inside the compound as it was consumed by flames on April 19.


Dancing Diversity In 6-Hour Marathon
Time and space will be telescoped in "Dancing Without Walls," a six-hour dance marathon to take place tomorrow, starting at noon, at the Ambrose Stage at Pier 16, on the East River at Fulton Street.
Twenty-two dance companies will perform in a miniature version of "America Dancing," a series of dance and music events taking place during the spring and summer in connection with the ambitious eight-part "Dancing" series on PBS that starts May 3.
"Dancing" has gone around the world to film its programs.
All the companies performing this weekend are based in New York, but the variety of their dancing suggests the range of cultures represented in the city's population.


Washington Memo; Health Plan a Headache for Congress
As the unveiling of President Clinton's health-care plan approaches, the anxiety level is rising on Capitol Hill.
Excitement over the prospect of truly radical reform is tempered by the recognition of the political difficulties, the perils and the stakes.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who heads the House Ways and Means Committee, summarized the matter neatly this week: "Not only has the President bet his future on this question, but he appears to be betting our futures also."


In California's Fields, a Farewell to Cesar Chavez


College Bans on Faculty-Student Romance Demean Women
To the Editor:
I find it astonishing that the very institutions that stand for freedom and diversity of thought -- our colleges and universities -- now seek to ban certain types of personal relations between adults ("Love or Harassment? Campuses Bar (and Debate) Faculty-Student Sex," Education page, April 14).
What is so special about the relationship between a graduate student or professor and an adult student?
Certainly the power of the former over the latter is trivial compared with the power that, say, a factory manager has over an assembly-line worker.
Why have our colleges and universities gone far beyond other environments in proscribing certain relationships?


Review/Film; Love in a New York Isosceles Triangle
He's a dreamboat.
She's a lovelorn nurse.
They may sound like ordinary characters in terms of movie romance, but the story of how they move in together and share a purpose in life does have a few new wrinkles.
For one thing, Joe Casella (William Baldwin) is being paid for his trouble by Connie Czapski (Kelly Lynch), who has just been ditched by the person she loves.
For another, that person is Ellen Armstrong (Sherilyn Fenn), a beautiful English teacher who might just like Joe better than she ever liked Connie.
"Three of Hearts" finds a fresh, engaging story within the dynamics of this romantic triangle, taking a droll and believable view of these characters and their uncommon problems.
Connie, first seen in biker garb being abandoned by the much primmer-looking Ellen, makes no attempt to hide her heartbreak.
She was planning to shock her relatives by declaring her love for Ellen at a large Polish wedding, and now finds herself without either a mate or a suitably bold dramatic gesture.
Then a patient suggests Connie try an escort service.
And a phone call produces Joe, who's a lot more than Connie ever bargained for.


Mets' April Has Franco Shouting Mayday
It was another abomination for the Mets today: A 10-5 defeat to the Giants, five errors made, four home runs given up.
The ramifications were no prettier: an 8-12 record (4-11 against nonexpansion clubs); five losses in a row; last place in the National League East; and a seven-and-a-half-game climb to the first-place Philadelphia Phillies.
Calamity was the state of the Mets, and the clubhouse cried out for an address.
The manager declined to do it.
Most senior players only hinted at the humiliation.
The backups and rookies chose embarrassed silence.


Art in Review
George Segal
Sidney Janis Gallery  110 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through May 15
The sculptures in this show are in George Segal's long-familiar mode.
They consist of life-size cast-plaster figures, most of them painted black and placed in three-dimensional settings that suggest the forlorn drabness of transient hotels.
In one tableau, a heavy nude woman, her back to the viewer, sits on the edge of an unmade bed facing a blank window.
In another, a woman lies sprawled in sleep, the crumpled bedclothes covering her body like a frozen wave of lava.


Review/Film; The Chicano Experience, in Its Glory and Tedium
"Bound by Honor," Taylor Hackford's ambitious melodrama about the Chicano experience in and around East Los Angeles, is like one of those huge wall murals that give bold, defiant color to an urban landscape that otherwise looks passive and drab.
The film is big and long (nearly three hours), passionate and flat.
It's full of heroic and tragic incident, but skimpy about the details of quotidian lives.
Though it's not the epic it means to be, it is not a failure.
"Bound by Honor" is the story of 12 crucial years in the formation of three young men: Paco (Benjamin Bratt), who seems to have been born angry; his half-brother, Cruz (Jesse Borrego), who has the talent and temperament of an artist, and Paco's cousin Miklo (Damian Chapa), whose father is Anglo and mother is Mexican-American, a fact that determines the direction of his life.


Yale Students Urge a Trustee to Quit After Company Is Fined
Student pressure is growing for the resignation of a longtime Yale University trustee whose company pleaded guilty last month to cooperating with Arab countries in their economic boycott of Israel.
The student government and the student newspaper have called on the trustee, Vernon Loucks, to step down.
A newly formed group, Students for Business Ethics, has collected more than 900 signatures on a petition seeking his resignation.


Finks Has Cancer
JIM FINKS, who helped build the first winning teams in New Orleans Saints history and was nearly elected N.F.L. commissioner in 1989, is being treated for cancer, the team announced yesterday.
The 65-year-old Finks, the Saints' president, had complained about respiratory problems for several weeks. (AP)


For Children
Family Workshops and Performances
Arts Connection  Murry Bergtraum High School  120 West 46th Street  Manhattan  (212) 302-7433  Recommended ages: 5 and up
Through June 19
Arts Connection provides a link between the arts and many New York City students, especially those in public schools without art or music teachers.
Last year, the nonprofit group moved into the midtown campus of Murry Bergtraum High School, the former High School of the Performing Arts, and since then, Arts Connection has lured families to free art workshops and to live performances every Saturday.
Advance registration is required.


Health Concerns on Burmese Dissident Ease
The husband of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese dissident leader who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, says his concerns about her health have been "considerably allayed" after he visited her this month in Myanmar, formerly Burma, where she has been under house arrest for more than three years.
In a statement made available today in Bangkok, her husband, Michael Aris, said he was hopeful that Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's health problems could be "corrected by proper nutrition and perhaps some medication." He said "her spirits and her convictions remain as steadfast as ever."


A No Man's Land Thrives As Everyone's Garden
TOM MURRAY, on sabbatical from Trenton State College, is just back from several months in Costa Rica, where all the food was laced with the slightly off-center taste of cilantro, parsley's more assertive cousin.
Now he's back in his South Trenton neighborhood, looking over the first shoots of green rising from the community park and vegetable garden behind his row house, and there it is again, advancing amid the santolina, lovage and sorrel:
"I guess it's the yuppie herb," he said under his breath.


U.S. Would End Cutting of Trees In Many Forests
Under orders from the White House to try again to put Federal timber sales on a sounder economic footing, the United States Forest Service has proposed changes that would end logging in more than a third of the national forests by 1998.
Environmental groups and other opponents of the timber sales have long argued that the Government charges too little and provides too many services to companies that log national forests, at a cost to taxpayers at hundreds of millions of dollars a year.


The Observer, London Paper With a Long History, Is Sold
The Observer, the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, announced today that it had agreed to be purchased by The Guardian, guaranteeing that it will continue to publish.
No details of the arrangement were released and the sale still has to be approved by The Observer's board, which meets on Tuesday.
It might also have to go before the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, which rules on major newspaper acquisitions with an eye toward preserving press competition.


HORSE RACING: Sports of The Times; Shoemaker Wants To Go the Distance
HORSE people tend to arrive at the track in powerful and flashy cars that announce their place in the world.
The trainer of Diazo arrived for the Kentucky Derby in a boxy Ford van of a rather prosaic shade of brown, with the words Department of Vocational Rehabilitation, Commonwealth of Kentucky, printed on the side panels.


President and Chief Resigns From His 2 Posts at JWP
JWP Inc., the Queens water utility that also became the nation's largest computer reseller, said yesterday that its president had resigned.
The Rye Brook, N.Y., company, which transformed itself largely through acquisitions, said Andrew T. Dwyer had resigned as president and chief executive officer.
It said he would be succeeded by Edward F. Kosnik, the executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 631 retail money market mutual funds decreased $3.36 billion, to $388.26 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.


Those 'Pork-Barrel' Projects Help People
To the Editor:
"Mr. Dole's Selfish Strut" (editorial, April 23) asserts "it's important to look behind the headlines" that congratulate Republican senators on their brilliant defeat of the President's jobs-stimulus plan.
You should have done so yourself before writing that "by including $2.5 billion of pork-barrel projects in its stimulus package, the Clinton team handed Mr. Dole a weapon."
The "weapon" is the request for $2.5 billion for the Community Development Block Grant, a 20-year-old program created by the Nixon Administration to provide decent housing, a suitable living environment and economic opportunities for low- and moderate-income Americans.


Clinton's 100th: A Good Day for Picture-Taking
It is true that President Clinton has lately been preoccupied with fighting budget wars, plotting military interventions and defending himself against a spate of criticism on the first months of his Presidency.
But on his 100th day in office, the President's schedule was sublimely typical of the peculiar way a President spends his days: a little politics, a little posturing, a bit of consulting and a lot of high-profile handshaking.


A mainstream ad agency sees its youth in an upstart New York shop and invests in it.
AS Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond evolves from an upstart agency into a mainstream agency, the onetime brat pack shop has begun emulating older, larger rivals.
It has gained national accounts and produced advertising that is more substantive -- sometimes even sedate -- than its defiantly provocative earlier work.
Now the owners of the six-year-old agency are doing something else their established competitors do all the time: making an acquisition.
Richard Kirshenbaum, a partner and executive creative director, and Jonathan Bond, a partner and president, said yesterday that they had invested a "very significant" sum in Mad Dogs &amp; Englishmen Inc., a small New York agency that opened in July 1991.


King Verdict's Answer Is Community Policing
To the Editor:
The verdict in the second Rodney King trial (news article, April 18) is certain to leave in its wake a public that is inadequately protected unless radical changes are instituted.
Many dedicated police officers, fearful of disciplinary actions resulting from charges of using excessive force, may avoid taking appropriate measures when events require them.
Police departments will no doubt mandate that officers take refresher courses to review the existing parameters relative to the lawful use of force.
But such measures may not resolve this dilemma.


On My Mind; Bill Clinton's War
When an American President enters a war, widens a war or prolongs a war, it becomes his war.
It makes no difference who started it.
Japan, North Korea and Iraq started wars that became the center of life and office for Presidents Roosevelt, Truman and Bush.
Neither Presidents Johnson nor Nixon started the war in Vietnam but it became theirs from the moment of their oaths.


Bribery and Patronage Cited At School District in Bronx
Forced to resign as principal of one New York City school -- for selling junk food to her poor students at a profit -- Virginia Noville wanted a second chance.
Last month, the authorities say, she sat in the front seat of a Cadillac parked in front of Katz's deli on the Lower East Side, and as a hidden camera caught the scene, she counted out $2,000 in cash to a man she called "my godfather," an influential member of a South Bronx school district who had agreed to cooperate with investigators.


Deadline for Cleaner Politics
Candidates thinking about running in New York City's fall elections have until midnight tonight to register their commitment to cleaner politics.
That's the deadline for candidates to notify the Campaign Finance Board if they intend to participate in the city's campaign financing system.
The voluntary program dispenses public matching funds to candidates who agree to more stringent contribution limits and more thorough disclosure than required by the flabby state election law.


Audrey Hepburn Service
A memorial service for the actress Audrey Hepburn, who died at 63 on Jan. 20, will be held on Tuesday, the anniversary of her birth, at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue and 55th Street.
The New York Metropolitan Committee for Unicef is sponsoring the service and a daylong film tribute (at the Angelika Theater) to Miss Hepburn, who traveled the world for the organization.


The First Family Shares Tea With Spain's Royal Family


CHRONICLE
What do you give the President on his 100th day in office?
Seven rabbis from the Lubavitcher movement went to the Oval Office yesterday afternoon and presented PRESIDENT CLINTON with a silver pushka, or charity box, a dollar bill and a yarmulke with his name in Hebrew and English and the White House seal embroidered on it.
It was coincidence rather than plan that the visit occurred on the 100th day, Rabbi ABRAHAM SHEMTOV, one of the guests, said yesterday.
The meeting had originally been scheduled for April 2, the 91st birthday of MENACHEM M. SCHNEERSON, the Lubavitcher Grand Rebbe, who, many of his followers believe, will prove to be the Messiah.
But the meeting was postponed because of the illness of Hillary Rodham Clinton's father, who died on April 7.


U.S. Delays Lorenzo's New Airline
Frank Lorenzo, the controversial former head of the Texas Air Corporation who was vilified by airline unions and accused of destroying Eastern Airlines, will not be operating another airline any time soon.
The Department of Transportation passed the buck today on Mr.
Lorenzo's bid to operate a company he has created, Friendship Airlines, and sent the application to an administrative law judge for a lengthy review of his career in the airline industry.


Ex-Fiance Held in Killing In Hotel Room
A 24-year-old woman whose body was found in a room at a midtown hotel near Grand Central Terminal Wednesday night was strangled by her former fiance, the police said yesterday.
The police arrested Gerald Ardito, 34, yesterday in the killing at the Grand Hyatt Hotel and charged him with second-degree murder.
Lieut.
Arthur Monahan, head of the Midtown South Detective Squad, said that Mr.
Ardito is the son of the late Frances Victoria Ardito, who was accused of having her lover killed in 1976.


Wallace Stegner Memorial
A memorial service for Wallace Stegner, the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist and short-story writer, who died on April 13 at the age of 84, will be held at 3 P.M. on Monday at the Stanford Memorial Church in Palo Alto, Calif.


Under Pressure from Banks, Nutri-System Nears a Sale
The owners of Nutri-System Inc., whose assets were frozen by seven banks on Wednesday, apparently reached an agreement last night to sell the company, although the buyer was not immediately identified.
David Skulnik, a franchise owner and member of the franchise owners' board, said that the three businessmen who own Nutri-System had agreed to the terms of a sale, ending a tumultuous and uncertain 24 hours for the corporation and the 283 diet centers it operates.
"The deal is being finalized right now," Mr.
Skulnik said.
"All that's left is for the lawyers to draw up the documents. They should be signed tomorrow."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about a consultant and former vendor to Home Shopping Network Inc. omitted a statement by an assistant United States attorney in White Plains.
She said a lawsuit by the consultant, Francis R. Santangelo, against two former business partners played a significant role in their prosecution for Federal tax fraud.


Peekskill Tries a Creative Approach to Revival; Welcoming Artists Fill Vacant Spaces in Hopes of Invigorating a Shopping District
Larry D'Amico's recent decision to relocate his life and work to a crumbling, 148-year-old former church in downtown Peekskill prompts an immediate question: What's a nice landscape painter like you doing in a place like this?
After all, the retail hub of this small city on the Hudson seemed to be near death's door as recently as two years ago.
That was before Ralph DiBart, a planner on retainer to the city, concocted a scheme to resuscitate downtown Peekskill by converting it into an artists' enclave.


Wall St. Merger Leaves Agency Out
Two large brokerage firms on the brink of merging, Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company and Shearson Lehman Brothers, said yesterday that they would consolidate their advertising at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, Smith Barney's longtime agency.
The decision was a disappointment to Ayer Inc. of New York, which won the Shearson account only six months ago.
Ogilvy has handled Smith Barney since 1979.
Shearson awarded Ayer its estimated $20 million account in October, after it had dismissed Chiat/ Day in New York after a 20-month relationship.
An Ayer campaign for Shearson carrying the theme "Is your money getting this kind of attention?" began running Jan. 31 but was abruptly ended a month later as negotiations began on the merger.


Ticks Bite, and an Employer Pays
Sam Raccioppi was always aware of the tiny ticks perched on blades of grass around the weed-choked signal crossings he tended for the Long Island Rail Road in Central Islip.
But when he awoke one morning with his left side paralyzed, he didn't suspect that the creatures were at fault until the doctor said he had Lyme disease.
Mr.
Raccioppi still doesn't know when he was bitten, but a Federal district judge this month held the railroad responsible for his illness and awarded him $160,000.
Three co-workers who contracted Lyme disease at work were given a total of $405,000 in the same lawsuit.


Lloyd's Tries to Insure Its Future
Fighting to survive the worst crisis in its 305-year history, Lloyd's of London predicted losses of $5.7 billion over the next two years and disclosed a sweeping plan today to strengthen its finances.
But it admitted that the short-term outlook was likely to leave thousands of its individual investors broke or in financial distress.
"Should membership and market not unite behind this plan then Lloyd's may have no future," the chairman, David Rowland, said in the introduction to the 70-page plan.


Review/Film; An Otherworldly Fugitive
Alex (Thierry van Werveke), the protagonist of "Dead Flowers," a supernatural mystery film from Austria, is a dour-faced exterminator who lives with his widowed grandmother (Tana Schanzara) in a Vienna suburb.
One day while driving around in his van, he picks up an attractive hitchhiker named Alice (Kate Valk), who has an intense, slightly mischievous stare and a tendency to shed her clothes at a moment's notice.
Alex takes her home with him, and it isn't long before they are a couple.
As it happens, Alice is being pursued by a sinister stranger.
At first she explains she is in danger because her father is a United Nations diplomat in the pay of the Central Intelligence Agency.
But as she later reveals, she is really a ghost who has escaped from the underworld.
The Mephistophelean hoodlum who pursues her, Willy d'Ville (Dominique Horwitz), is an agent of forces who want to capture her and bring her back.


Widened Definition of AIDS Leads to More Reports of It
new and expanded definition of AIDS has led to a predicted surge in the number of reported cases during the first quarter of this year, Federal health officials said yesterday.
More than 35,000 AIDS cases were reported in the first quarter of 1993, an increase of 204 percent over the number reported for the same period in 1992, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in a report.


Center Breaks Neck After Ramming Block
SLOBODAN JANKOVIC, fuming at a call that fouled him out of the game, rammed his head against a cement block, breaking his neck and paralyzing himself.
The 6-foot-8-inch Serb is the center for Panionios of Athens, which was playing in the semifinals of the Greek championships.


Holocaust Museum Is for Real, Not Metaphor; Making Fact Into Faith
To the Editor:
The revelation that more than one-fifth of Americans believe that the Holocaust never occurred reminds us of what comes from transforming a historical fact into an article of faith ("1 of 5 in New Survey Express Some Doubt About the Holocaust," news article, April 20).
While faith can be stronger than knowledge, it can also be more contested.
And the horrifying reality of the murder of six million Jews is the most lamentable, irrefutable fact that modern man has yet had to face.


Critic's Notebook; When History Is a Casualty
LAST week, the very week the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum opened in Washington, the Roper Organization reported that 22 percent of the adults it polled said it seemed possible that the Holocaust had never happened; an additional 12 percent said they did not know if it was possible.
These startling statistics underscore a disturbing phenomenon that has gained momentum in recent years in both America and Europe: a growing ignorance about the Holocaust on the part of ordinary citizens, and the growing visibility of "revisionist historians," who are trying to whitewash, even erase from memory, the Nazi atrocities of World War II.


Propeller Inspections Ordered After Crash
The Federal Aviation Administration today ordered the immediate detailed inspection of propeller assemblies on 80 corporate aircraft whose four-blade propellers have more than 3,000 flying hours.
The action came after the April 19 crash of a twin-engine plane that killed Gov.
George S. Mickelson of South Dakota and seven other people in Eastern Iowa.
The agency also sent telegrams to foreign governments whose citizens owned 36 other models of the plane, the Mitsubishi MU-2B-60.


Senate Primary in Texas Will Winnow a Big Field
Despite two months of expensive, tiring campaigning by 24 candidates, Saturday's United States Senate primary still boils down to the basic question posed when the race began: which Republican will get the chance to challenge Senator Bob Krueger?
While he appears to be in the lead, there seems to be no possibility that Mr.
Krueger, appointed in January to succeed Lloyd Bentsen after at least two others turned down Gov.
Ann W. Richards, can win a majority.
If no one wins a majority in one or both parties on Saturday, there will be a primary runoff in early June.


